[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 118-11]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

ON

DEFENSE IN A DIGITAL ERA:

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE,

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, AND

SECURING THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 9, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-381                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin, Chairman

MATT GAETZ, Florida                  RO KHANNA, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
PAT FALLON, Texas                    WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
NICK LaLOTA, New York                PATRICK RYAN, New York
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
Pennsylvania

Josh Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Wendell White, Professional Staff Member
Payson Ruhl, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Gallagher, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Wisconsin, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and Innovation     1
Khanna, Hon. Ro, a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and
Innovation.....................................................     2

WITNESSES

Martell, Dr. Craig, Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence
Officer, Department of Defense.................................     5
Sherman, John, Chief Information Officer, Department of Defense..     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Gallagher, Hon. Mike.........................................    35
Martell, Dr. Craig...........................................    50
Sherman, John................................................    36

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Ryan.....................................................    61

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Fallon...................................................    66
Mr. Gallagher................................................    65
Mr. Moulton..................................................    66

DEFENSE IN A DIGITAL ERA: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY, AND SECURING THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and
Innovation,
Washington, DC, Thursday, March 9, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Gallagher
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE GALLAGHER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

The Chairman. Good morning, and welcome to our CITI [Cyber,
Information Technologies, and Innovation] hearing on ``Defense
in a Digital Era: Artificial Intelligence, Information
Technology, and Securing the Department of Defense.''
Just a reminder of our three holy commandments on the CITI
Subcommittee. One is that we shall start on time. Check.
Two, 5 minutes--we will enforce the 5 minutes. I understand
that you may not have the shot clock there. So we'll give you a
little bit of grace and we'll try and--you got phones so you
can time yourself.
And please try not to use obscure acronyms and jargon. We
want to communicate in simple and direct language that normal
human beings in America can understand.
We are pleased to be joined today by the Department's
[Department of Defense] Chief Information Officer [CIO], Mr.
John Sherman, and the inaugural Chief Digital and Artificial
Intelligence Officer, Dr. Craig Martell.
I welcome both of you and especially, Dr. Martell, in your
first appearance with the House Armed Services Committee. You
both have very important jobs and our job is to ensure that you
do your jobs well.
To underscore the stakes of your job and our job, I would
like to quote a recent report from our friends at the
Australian Strategic Policy Institute--ASPI--quote, ``Research
reveals that China has built the foundations to position itself
as the world's leading science and technology superpower by
establishing a sometimes stunning lead in high-impact research
across the majority of critical and emerging technology domains
including artificial intelligence and key quantum technology
areas.
In the long term, China's leading research position means
that it has set itself up to excel not just in current
technological development in almost all sectors but in future
technologies that don't yet exist.
Unchecked, this could shift not just technological
development and control but global power and influence to an
authoritarian state where the development, testing, and
application of emerging critical and military technologies
isn't open and transparent and where it can't be scrutinized by
independent civil society and media.
In the more immediate term that lead could allow China to
gain a stranglehold on the global supply of certain critical
technologies. Such risks are exacerbated because of the
willingness of the CCP [Chinese Communist Party] to use
coercive techniques outside of the global rules-based order to
punish governments and businesses, including withholding the
supply of critical technologies,'' unquote.
Gentlemen, I am concerned that we are losing in key areas
of the strategic competition with the CCP. I would prefer that
we win. As we say in Green Bay, winning isn't everything. It's
the only thing.
So today, I look forward to hearing from you how we can
fight smarter and win this competition.
And with that, I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Khanna.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Gallagher can be found
in the Appendix on page 35.]

STATEMENT OF HON. RO KHANNA, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Chairman Gallagher, and I appreciate
your leadership on this committee and your bipartisan spirit in
which you have conducted the hearings.
I would also like to welcome Mr. John Sherman, the DOD
[Department of Defense] Chief Information Officer, and Dr.
Craig Martell, the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence
Officer. Thank you for your service and thank you for appearing
before the subcommittee.
On the heels of the 1 year anniversary of the war in
Ukraine one constant theme that we have seen is ways that the
war has been transformed and different from the past.
From the ubiquitous presence of tactical unarmed--unmanned
aerial vehicles to the use of digital platforms it's obvious
that the continued integration of advanced technologies in
combat is an essential component of modern warfare and that is
why the DOD's CIO and Chief Digital Intelligence and Artificial
Intelligence Officers' appearance is so important.
One of the things we need to focus on in the second year of
the creation of the Chief Digital and Artificial AI [Artificial
Intelligence]--Artificial Intelligence officer is the
challenges that you have encountered and ways that we can offer
assistance. Deconflicting some of the duties is important. One
of the other pretty important issues is the recruitment of
talent and the retention of talent, and how we do a good job in
recruiting the top talent.
I know we have an advantage of doing that in the private
sector in Silicon Valley. But we need our best and brightest in
technology coming into government and I want to get your
thoughts on additional steps that we can do for recruitment.
Furthermore, the growing importance of the electromagnetic
spectrum and the highly visible role of the Department's
spectrum usage is something that I hope this committee can
discuss.
Finally, I want--would like to hear your work about
securing our networks and that of the Defense Industrial Base.
That is absolutely critical in any modern warfare.
Thank you again for both of your appearance before this
committee.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN SHERMAN, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Sherman. Good morning, Chairman Gallagher, Ranking
Member Khanna, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify here today.
Now, last summer I also held the position of Acting Chief
Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer. But as you note,
sir, sitting next to me is Dr. Craig Martell, who is now the
permanent CDAO [Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence
Officer]. We are privileged to have him on the DOD team and we
work together on many key priorities that we are going to
discuss today.
All of our modernization initiatives are focused on
ensuring the joint force is prepared to win against peer and
near-peer competitors. This means identifying and leveraging
effective technologies and approaches to stay ahead of our
pacing challenge of the People's Republic of China as well as
any other nation or group that might seek to do us or our
allies harm.
Succeeding in this space is why my team and I come to work
every single day and it is our overriding mission imperative.
We also continue to take in lessons on how the digital
landscape is constantly evolving from the battlefields of
Ukraine and elsewhere, and we endeavor constantly to strengthen
our interoperability with allies and partners around the globe.
Driven by these priorities, we have made key strides in
digital modernization since I last testified before this
subcommittee last year.
In December, we announced the award of our new Joint
Warfighting Cloud Capability, or JWCC, which will provide us
with enterprise cloud computing from four world-class companies
at all three security classification levels from the
continental United States out to what we call the tactical
edge, meaning an island in the Western Pacific, key terrain in
Eastern Europe, or even a ship at sea.
JWCC, which supersedes the single vendor single award JEDI
[Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure] cloud procurement
that we cancelled in 2021, will enable the Department to
develop and deploy software in an agile, secure, and scalable
manner while providing for data and compute and storage that
will undergird efforts led by my CDAO colleague and others.
Additionally, we continue to strengthen the Department's
cybersecurity posture underscored by our Zero Trust strategy
and implementation plan. The concept of Zero Trust involves
protecting critical data and assumes that an enemy is already
on our network, and that we must verify the credentials of
everyone and everything and that there be no unrestricted
lateral movement across our enterprise.
We plan to implement Zero Trust all across the Department
by 2027 and are working with the DOD components on their plans,
ongoing actions, and investments to achieve this goal.
Meanwhile, we are pursuing multiple lines of efforts to
strengthen the cybersecurity of the Defense Industrial Base
companies through outreach, provision of services, alignment of
DOD activities, and preparation of the Cybersecurity Maturity
Model Certification program, which will provide us with a
mechanism to verify that companies are handling sensitive DOD
data and are instituting required cybersecurity measures.
We are also working with stakeholders and DOD to remediate
the, quote, ``technical debt,'' unquote, that has accrued on
many of our key weapon systems. While we didn't necessarily
have to worry about terrorists and insurgents hacking into our
jets, ships, or tanks over the last 20 years, we know that
nation states will certainly try to do so.
Ensuring our service members operate in cyber-survivable
equipment is a top priority for the Department. In the same
vein, we continue to strengthen our command, control, and
communications capabilities.
These include electromagnetic spectrum operations for which
we and CIO have taken over Department level oversight since
this last year.
Representing the nexus of electronic warfare and spectrum
operations, our forces' ability to dominate in this domain is
critical to fighting and winning on any modern battlefield.
All the while, we never forget our success comes down to
people. We are releasing a new cyber workforce strategy and a
related policy manual that will help us better identify,
recruit, develop, and retain top-notch talent.
Also, for the military and civilian members in DOD who have
had to struggle for far too long with IT [information
technology] systems that are simply difficult or slow to use,
we are doubling down on our efforts to improve user experience
all across our enterprise.
Using my office's budget certification authority, my team
and I are driving strategies and will hold organizations
accountable for continued progress.
All of these activities rely on the strong support that
this subcommittee has provided to DOD for many years.
Thank you for this backing and for the chance to testify
here today. I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sherman can be found in the
Appendix on page 36.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Martell is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. CRAIG MARTELL, CHIEF DIGITAL AND ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Martell. Chairman Gallagher, Ranking Member Khanna, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today.
This is my first appearance before Congress and I look
forward to sharing the ongoing efforts of the Chief Digital and
Artificial Intelligence Office.
It's an honor for me to serve our nation as the first DOD
CDAO. The importance of this role, the mission of the CDAO, and
our service to the warfighter are not lost on me.
From my experience as a professor of machine learning at
the Naval Postgraduate School to my time leading machine
learning teams at some of the most innovative technology
companies in the U.S., I am proud to bring best practices and
lessons learned to accelerate and scale data analytics and AI
in support of the national security mission.
The Deputy Secretary of Defense established the CDAO in
February of last year, bringing together the authorities and
resources of previously separate organizations, which included
the DOD Chief Data Officer, the Joint Artificial Intelligence
Center, the Defense Digital Service, and Advana, the Advancing
Analytics Office.
We recognize that data analytics and AI are core
capabilities in supporting the Secretary of Defense's
priorities to defend the nation, take care of our people, and
succeed through teamwork.
When I arrived in June, my team and I assessed the data
analytics and AI capabilities and gaps at all levels of the
Department. We reviewed the recommendations from the National
Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence.
We assessed existing digital technologies within the
Department, partner organizations, and the commercial sector.
From these efforts we have identified four key strategic
elements.
One, improving data quality. I am going to say that over
and over again today. Two, enabling advanced analytics and
metrics; three, providing the appropriate AI scaffolding; and
finally, cultivating the key enablers for all of us. We refer
to this as our hierarchy of needs.
At the base of this hierarchy are the enablers--talent,
culture, and leadership. These are the foundations of the work
we do in CDAO.
This includes fostering an educated workforce, leveraging
the strengths of the commercial and academic centers--sectors,
and effectively integrating both our data and activities with
our allies and partners.
In addition, as a close partner to Honorable Sherman in the
office of the CIO, they're delivering the storage, security,
and computing infrastructure that this hierarchy depends upon.
We work very tightly on this.
Above these enablers the next level is quality data. As our
number-one priority, quality data will enable decision
advantage by powering both the analytics and the AI layers of
this hierarchy.
For example, data paired with powerful analytics dashboards
will allow us to see what we own and where it is. Sounds
simple. Remarkably important.
Similarly, complex AI models will bring enhanced
capabilities both to warfighting and to running the business.
These are not doable without quality data.
Addressing these challenges via this hierarchy of needs
will drive the Department to being data-centric, to being the
data-centric organization it needs to be.
Now, note this hierarchy is a logical hierarchy. It doesn't
mean we are not going to move forward on AI and getting things
to the warfighter until data is perfect. We are going to be
doing all of these things simultaneously.
So, based on this strategy we are pursuing the following
initiatives in 2023. One, creating the JADC2 [Joint All-Domain
Command and Control] data integration layer, which will enable
combatant commands as well as partner nations to access, share,
and integrate data at all levels; two, providing the enterprise
with the appropriate AI scaffolding, which includes the
services and infrastructure most needed to accelerate AI
development and adoption across the DOD; three, conducting a
talent management pilot for establishing a defense digital
corps, a cadre of digital experts aligned to digital positions
across the DOD and managed as a unified cohort; and finally,
supporting our business performance metrics to ensure progress
on the goals laid out in the DOD Strategic Management Plan and
the National Defense Strategy implementation plan.
I look forward to working closely with this subcommittee on
these issues and others as we enable DOD's current and future
use of data analytics and AI for national security.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martell can be found in the
Appendix on page 50.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
We'll now proceed to question and answer. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Martell, you sort of talked about the, I think, or
hinted at the tension in your job, which is--was all these
things we need to do over the long term. We need to improve--
turn DOD into a data-centric organization.
But in the short term, our warfighters, our joint
warfighters, our combatant commands have needs. They have
rising threats they have to confront.
At present, Joint All-Domain Command and Control, or
JADC2--textbook example of jargon--is increasingly siloed into
individual service plans, which extends the timelines even
more.
As I understand it, the Deputy Secretary created your
position primarily to help meet this urgent need, that is, to
rapidly deliver operational data-centric and truly joint
warfighting capabilities to the COCOMs [combatant commands],
especially Indo-Pacific Command.
If this is your mission, and that's a mission I would
support strongly, can you just tell us clearly what CDAO is
doing to deliver on it? You mentioned four things. Maybe--is
that what you would say and that is--what do you mean by
scaffolding?
Dr. Martell. Yeah. Thank you for the question, Chairman
Gallagher. The--sorry.
[Technical interference.]
The Chairman. You're not in trouble.
Dr. Martell. Okay. Did I do something wrong?
I think fundamental to the problem of the JADC2 issue is
that we think about it as a product or a destination or a
particular capability. I don't think that's right at all.
That's not how we look at it.
JADC2 is simply a new way to do business. It's being able
to get the right data at the right time to the right place so
we can jointly exercise command and control across all domains
from sensor to shooter.
So you mentioned that the services are stovepiped. But I
don't necessarily see that as a stovepipe. They build systems
that work for their particular needs and that's fine. We
shouldn't want to stop that. We shouldn't want to dive deep
into what they know how to do.
But what we need to do is get the data from those systems
to a command level so that--and have it flow easily to a
command level so command decisions--strategic command decisions
can be made and tasked down to shooters.
So we see our job as developing this data integration
layer. We can dive deeper into the geeky aspects of it. But
this data integration layer, which allows all of those systems
to talk to it as a--so that it can be shared where it needs to
be when it needs to be.
The Chairman. So your office now has substantial staff and
resources. What will be the fairest way for us to measure your
success?
What are the right metrics so that the next time you come
and testify before us we can sort of fairly assess you on how
you're doing your job? Is it adoption of capabilities? Speed of
delivery?
Is it the number of experiments? Is it the number of
meetings? Dollars spent? What would be the right metrics to
judge your success?
Dr. Martell. I hope it's not the number of meetings or
dollars spent, right. I think it's very important to not have
effort-based metrics. We need outcome-based metrics.
And so we think about--and to be clear, it's still unclear
to me--that's a weird sentence--to be clear it's unclear--but
it's still unclear to me how we are going to measure these
things all the way down to the levels that we need to.
But what we are driving for is time to usability--if
someone needs a new capability and we've provided the
underlying scaffolding how quickly can that capability be
fielded.
Amount of data-driven decision making, and we think about
this sort of a number of ways, but for amount of data-driven
decision making per COCOM--per combatant command. Amount of
data-driven decision making per three-star forum.
So we can actually measure these fora and we can measure
the number of dashboards being used, which is providing data to
those four.
And, finally, time to usability. How quickly--so time to
delivery is, from a producer's perspective, we are going to get
it to you. How quickly can that then be used.
So once it's delivered if it just sits on the shelf that's
also not sufficient. It has to actually be used. So what sort
of best practices and training do we have to wrap around that
so that the warfighter can use it.
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Sherman, I may have to get to you in a second round of
questions. Quickly, though, Dr. Martell, can you just explain
again and just--for a liberal arts major--what do you mean by
the scaffolding that you're talking about?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for the question, Chairman
Gallagher.
Most people think about AI as a product that's delivered. I
think those products being delivered will be delivered best by
our commercial sector. But there are things that the DOD needs
to do around that product that's being delivered that we are
not doing.
For example, what the product should be doing--what a
particular model should be doing, say, trying to detect
something on the battlefield we are the subject matter experts
of that.
We should be saying this is A, this is B, this is A, this
is B, and getting that data labelled correctly should be our
responsibility. Currently, we give that to industry as a
responsibility but I believe we should own that because that's
our IP [intellectual property].
Simultaneously, on the other side----
The Chairman. My time has expired. I have to hold myself to
my own rules so we'll have to come back. Otherwise, I will be a
total hypocrite.
I just want to emphatically endorse what you said about
meetings. To paraphrase Drucker [Peter Drucker], meetings are a
concession to a deficient organization. One either meets or one
works. One cannot do both. So we should not use that as a
metric.
Mr. Khanna is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you. I am reminded of the Oscar Wilde
quote that the problem with socialism is too many damn
meetings.
I appreciate the----
Dr. Martell. I am not sure if I am supposed to respond to
that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate your testimony. You know, we had
Dr. Eric Schmidt at my oversight hearing and one of the points
he made in the talent of cyber and tech is that he thought the
DOD was doing a good job in recruiting, a good job at the
service academies. But the challenge was really the ability for
people and technology to rise to meaningful positions.
Obviously, you know, you don't have the multimillion-dollar
exits in Silicon Valley. But the other thing that attracts
people to these tech companies is their ability not just to be
grunt workers, not just to be mid-level folks, but to actually
be in leadership and to be central in driving things.
And as jamming and AI in so many of the theaters of modern
war may involve technology, what is the pathway to get people
up the ladder so they feel empowered?
Both Dr. Martell and then Mr. Sherman.
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question, Ranking Member
Khanna.
I agree completely that we need to build pathways for tech
folks in the Department. But I think one of the benefits we
have is that all of our workforce has been getting increasingly
technical as our technology is getting increasingly easier to
use.
So one of the things we need to depend upon as a nation we
have to continue those pushes so that we generate
practitioners. Particularly in AI it has been dominated by
experts and I would say for the last 15 years it has been
dominated by experts.
But there's a movement now where there's enough
commoditized tools where skilled practitioners can actually
deliver the value that experts used to be able to do. That's
the tactic we are taking.
How do we upskill the folks that are in the Department now
and, secondarily, how do we attract maybe not those people who
already know walking out of school from a select group of
schools that they're going to get a Silicon Valley job.
What about those folks who are not sure they're going to
get a Silicon Valley job or a high-paying job? That's still
untapped talent in the United States.
How do we create a pathway, an extended apprenticeship, so
that when they leave working for the DOD or working for the
government they're actually significantly better and more
attractive to those industrial jobs?
I don't think hire to retire is the right solution. I think
transforming them is the right solution.
Mr. Khanna. And I appreciate that, Dr. Martell.
But for Mr. Sherman I would just say, though, that you
shouldn't aim just to have the top folks go to Silicon Valley
and get the next layer.
I mean, a lot of the top folks in Silicon Valley--Vint
Cerf, who is at Google, came out of DARPA [Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency] and it was really the Department of
Defense that led so much of the innovation that came up with
the mouse, that came up with drones, that came up with the
Internet, that came up with GPS [Global Positioning System].
So, you know, the hope would be that the best and brightest
would still want to come to Defense and the inverse as opposed
to going to Silicon Valley.
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that comment, Representative
Khanna.
I think that's right. I think it'd be more attractive if we
have a robust workforce in place. So I actually see this as a
means to that.
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Sherman?
Mr. Sherman. And, Congressman, I would just add to this a
couple of points.
Using every--excuse me, every arrow in our quiver that have
been given to us by you all in Congress, things like Cyber
Excepted Service and other hiring authorities where we can pay
folks a little bit more, get them in the door more quickly, and
also think differently about how we manage folks' career and
not the traditional 30-year, come in the door, and have the
traditional step up the ladder there.
Now, folks are never going to make the same amount of money
in DOD. That's not what's going to bring them in here. It's
going to be the mission--protecting us against the PRC
[People's Republic of China], putting ISIS [Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria] back on their heels, those kind of things. I
saw this in the intelligence community as well.
But we have to think differently about the credentials that
folks need to come in, things like apprenticeships, looking--
you know, what are the degree requirements. Maybe a 4 year
degree is not required. Apprenticeships can be a way to go on
this.
And then, very importantly, recognizing that folks are
going to come in and out of the door here and we have to
partner with industry and I talk a lot publicly about this. How
are we going to do this where someone comes to DOD, then goes
to industry in Silicon Valley or Austin or North Carolina or
wherever and comes back?
How can we do this without having the security folks' head
explode where they have to go through another year and a half
or 2 years getting in the door?
We are going to have to figure this out. And to that point,
sir, we have a new Cyber Workforce Strategy. It's actually
coming out this week.
One of the key pillars is exactly this point about creative
approaches on how we get past the old think about how we manage
tech careers on this, sir.
Mr. Khanna. Well, I will look forward to working with you
and the chairman on this.
The Chairman. Mr. Gaetz is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. Dr. Martell, it seems that for us to beat China
at AI the first thing we have to do is catch up to China in AI,
right?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Gaetz.
I don't actually think we are behind China with respect to
AI. I think--but I--let me sharpen that.
With respect to technological capabilities we are as far
ahead as anyone. With respect to talent, we are as far ahead as
anyone although I think there's a danger there.
I think the fundamental difference is they are working--
they are doubling down on high-quality data and high-quality
compute. So we have high-quality compute but we need to double
down on getting the data right.
Mr. Gaetz. I think you need to start my clock, Mr.
Chairman. Thanks. Thanks for that extra time.
The Chairman. Oh, darn it.
Mr. Gaetz. So I rescind everything I just said. We can
start again. No. Yeah, this is all off the record.
The Chairman. It's still on the record.
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah.
The Chairman. But Mr. Gaetz gets----
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah. No, I got you. I got you, Mr. Chairman.
So most of the analysis I've seen indicates that they're
way ahead. So your testimony is interesting because it seems--
you do appreciate and understand that it runs cross current, a
lot of what we hear about China's current supremacy in AI,
right?
Dr. Martell. I do, Congressman Gaetz. Thank you.
I think we could have a more interesting conversation in
the closed session. I am happy to do that.
Mr. Gaetz. Okay. So you talked about the data sets and I am
really interested in the ways that China builds those data sets
where they get information. Does China have the capability to
collect intelligence from the offshore oil rigs that they
operate and own?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Gaetz.
I would rather talk about it in a closed session.
Mr. Gaetz. Well, I don't know. Sometimes I worry that we
over-classify these things. Like, shouldn't the American people
know if there's oil rigs offshore that are, like, using Chinese
data to collect information?
Dr. Martell. So I think probably a more correct answer is
my expertise doesn't extend to China to that degree. I think we
are going to win any fight by providing quality data, create
the right scaffolding to establish their talent.
Mr. Gaetz. Well, yeah. Let me ask another place--let me ask
another place where they may collect data.
So does China collect data from the cranes that they sell
to U.S. ports?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question. I am not an
expert on China's----
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah, but I am kind of concerned that an
assessment of their AI capabilities is going to lash pretty
closely to where they're getting these exquisite data sets,
right.
And so if they're able to utilize AI to aggregate this
massive amount of data that they get from the cranes that they
sell our ports, from the DJI [Da Jiang Innvoations] drones that
our law enforcement fly around, from the oil rigs that our U.S.
oil companies sell to them, that really is an important plug
into AI, don't you think?
Dr. Martell. Congressman Gaetz, I actually do and I think
it's a very important point and I am not trying to dismiss it.
When I said I don't think they're further ahead with
respect to AI, I don't think they're further ahead with respect
to the algorithm capabilities or the talent capabilities.
In fact, most algorithms are commoditized and anybody has
access to them at this point. If, in fact, they are gathering
data from more places that will, in fact, produce robust AI and
if we need to--we can have a really robust conversation about
what data we should be gathering.
I am very open to that. But I am in agreement with you that
getting the data right and getting the right data is what
drives robust AI.
Mr. Gaetz. I've spent all my time with you talking about
how China gets their data because I don't view our AI scenario
as in a bubble. I think we are in direct competition with
China. We win or they win.
Dr. Martell. I agree.
Mr. Gaetz. And if we don't know who's ahead, I do worry
about getting to those deliverables in a way that we can
measure them and fund them and advance them.
So, hopefully, we'll be able to have more fruitful
discussion about how they collect data, how we can integrate
that into our broader cyber strategy and our AI strategy.
Dr. Martell. I look forward to that. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Gaetz.
Before I recognize Mr. Ryan, I want to recognize the Stump
family from Green Bay, Wisconsin. They've travelled all the way
from America's district, the Eighth District of Wisconsin, to
listen to our witnesses and engage in this discussion about AI
and technology. So it's very important. Thank you.
Mr. Ryan is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to our guests
from Wisconsin, and thank you to you, both gentlemen, for being
here today, for your service, especially Dr. Martell.
Stepping into a new role and position in any organization
is always a challenge and in the biggest bureaucracy in the
world. I am sure ----
Dr. Martell. It's been a joy.
Mr. Ryan. ----it's been not boring. So thank you for
stepping up and both of your public service.
I wanted to actually build on what Chairman Gallagher was
getting towards with you, Dr. Martell. You were starting to
talk about kind of the roles and--not authorities but the roles
and responsibilities when it comes to within JADC2 specifically
kind of who builds what.
You were talking about scaffolding and you were beginning
to say what you thought the role of commercial partners is.
Could you expand on that and----
Dr. Martell. Absolutely.
Mr. Ryan. ----to be specific and sort of where my--what I
would like to hear from you is how do we--not a new problem but
how do we work better with and enable particularly smaller and
less known but, I think, often most talented companies to plug
in to the scaffolding that we are building?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question, Congressman Ryan.
One of the things that's surprising--was surprising to me
when I got here is how acquisitions work. You set out a bunch
of requirements and then 5 years later a product is delivered
and the world has changed drastically in those 5 years.
That's the sort of thing we are trying to tackle. We are
trying to be able to be efficient, flexible, iterative, and
experimental.
So our goal is to get a data layer which allows for data to
flow from any point to any other point and then apps can sit on
top of that data layer.
So a particular combatant command or a particular commander
might want an app from one vendor and another combatant
commander might want an app from another vendor, and we need to
see that data layer as the underpinning of the marketplace that
allows any vendor to show up and say, I have a solution for
this particular problem.
I think that's a much more iterative way and experimental
way to get at--to get out this as opposed to saying, every
commander, you get the same thing, when the commander out on
the ground might need something very different than something
in the maritime domain.
And we need to allow for that marketplace both for the big
players who produce real value, and particularly in the AI
space. Three guys in a garage might actually change the game
and we need to allow that to be available to them as well.
Mr. Ryan. I agree. My concern is time and urgency. I mean,
we've heard many different timelines for potential major
conflict, particularly China, and building a data integration
layer against a bureaucracy that's not used to doing that.
I mean, how do--how quickly do you think we can build that?
What can we do as, you know, in our role as Members of Congress
to enable that to accelerate that, or what authorities do you
need? What resources do you need?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that--for that offer,
Congressman Ryan.
I will take it as a question for the record for probably
the end of the year to get back with you with more specifics.
Right now we are undergoing the GIDE experimentation series,
which is Global Information Dominance, where we are actually
testing these things.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 61.]
We just did--we just finished one. We are doing another one
next month, I believe, with a key partner being INDOPACOM [U.S.
Indo-Pacific Command], and understanding how what we've
learned, for example, at EUCOM--at European Command--might be
applicable in a maritime domain like in INDOPACOM.
So we'll have--the point of that experimentation is to come
up with a capabilities gap analysis so we can actually answer
those sorts of questions for you.
Mr. Ryan. Great. Thank you. I am running short on time.
Mr. Sherman, on cyber talent management could you just
continue to expand on that? Are there additional authorities?
You talked about the Cyber Excepted Service. Are there
additional authorities or tools that would be helpful to
advance that mission?
Mr. Sherman. Congressman, I think we have the tools at our
disposal like Cyber Excepted Service and targeted local
management supplement, which is additional funding we can--or
pay we can provide to folks in certain areas.
I think we just need to continue to use these authorities
and continue, sir, to work with industry, you all in Congress
and elsewhere, as we generate ideas about how to think
creatively about a 21st century workforce, some of whom may
come in for a long career but others very likely are going to
come in and out and matter of fact, we are going to want them
to do that for career areas like data scientists and others to
not stay in government their whole time but go to industry and
come back and figure out how we can do this in an agile way to
stay ahead of the PRC and others.
Mr. Ryan. I appreciate that. I would encourage you think
creatively if there are additional tools and authorities I
think you're hearing from us we want to give them. So please
come back, and I yield back my 1 second.
The Chairman. Great use of time.
Next up a son of Notre Dame, Mr. Fallon.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, when we talk
about securing our networks against our adversaries, our
enemies, it's absolutely--you know, I think it's critical that
we understand exactly what we are up against and where our
vulnerabilities may exist.
It doesn't do us much good to invest billions of dollars in
security if there are entire swaths of our network that remain
open and vulnerable, of course, to hostile actors.
And as we talk to folks in the industry I've come to learn
that this was, in fact, our reality in the DOD Information
Network in the not so distant past.
Thankfully, we've had--you know, we've taken the steps
necessary to remedy the situation and I believe it's essential
that we continue to invest in technology and secures our
networks by leveraging new advances in technology with our
network through the eyes--we have to see our network through
the eyes of the enemy and where they would perceive
vulnerabilities.
So, Mr. Sherman, how are you leveraging AI-backed
technologies to discover and remediate vulnerabilities before
adversaries can exploit them?
Mr. Sherman. So in terms of AI-backed technologies the main
place we are going to apply that is what we call the big data
platform where we bring data together to assess what is going
on on our networks.
But, sir, if I could say, AI is just part of this. It
really is, to your point and your question about what we know
the other side is doing, is the partnership I have with General
Nakasone at U.S. Cyber Command and the National Security Agency
to get threat-informed intelligence about what the other side--
China, Russia, et cetera--are doing against our networks.
And also, again, AI undergirds some of this but it really
is that Zero Trust approach I noted in my opening statement
where we assume an enemy is already on our network. The burglar
is already in the house, and how do you prevent them from
moving laterally throughout the house and using what's called
Identity, Credential, and Access Management where it has to be
verified--someone's identity--along the way to make sure that
they can't move to get to your most critical data.
Sir, it's a new way of thinking about cybersecurity, not
just at the perimeter or not even a defense in depth but a
whole new way of thinking about you don't trust anything or
anyone and that's what we are really doing to lock down our
networks, sir.
Mr. Fallon. Kind of assuming that maybe the submarine is
below the destroyer already, right, and you can't see him but
he might be there.
Mr. Sherman. Right.
Mr. Fallon. Dr. Martell, how do you see AI developing as a
component of the DOD's cyber mission? And also, how can we
remove barriers to entry for companies developing and deploying
AI?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for those questions, Congressman
Fallon.
I echo what Mr.--Honorable Sherman said that it's mostly
about data and it's mostly about Zero Trust, and let me--let me
say that Zero Trust underlies it--it's a--it's a binary
relationship that goes both ways, right.
So we can't build what we build without the Zero Trust
underpinnings that Mr. Sherman provides. But I also think AI
can provide some help to security, particularly in anomaly
detection.
So once we know the flows and we can track the flows of
people through the zero trust architecture, we can build
systems that will help us detect whether it's an anomalous
flow, something we might want to look at. We might want to just
sort of dive a little deeper there.
Mr. Fallon. And, Mr. Sherman, as far as recruiting talent,
you know, we have people come into our office, and it doesn't
matter what industry they're in. They have a labor shortage.
They have a labor need, and now we are not even meeting our
recruiting goals.
I was listening on the Armed Services--I am sorry, we
learned that last year in Armed Services that the Navy, the Air
Force, the Army, weren't hitting their recruiting goals. So
where are you all with labor? And you just mentioned about
attracting that so how do you attract the talent and--because
it is competitive and they can make so much more on the
outside?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, that is exactly what we've been getting
after as well with this new Cyber Workforce Strategy. We have
something called a Defense Cyber Workforce Framework.
It sounds bureaucratic, but it's where we've taken all of
the 70-plus work roles in cyber and digital and with a fine
toothed comb much more granularity than you would see from the
Office of Personnel and Management on exactly the sort of work
roles where we are going low or we are right where we need to
be and we might need to apply some new incentives, kind of with
the rear stat of adjusting where we are getting low on maybe
cyber defenders or software coders or whatever, and this has
been a key tool we've implemented.
We've added AI in data work roles and this has been
enlightening for me as a CIO about the levels of specificity we
have to have to make sure when you start to see a kind of a
warning light, hey, we are getting low on this type of work
role, we need to apply some Cyber Excepted Service or other
types of market supplement we can put against this.
It's been a lot of pick and shovel work, sir. But now we
have a foundation to really look across the dashboard to see
where we are particularly with our civilian but also working
with our military workforce.
So I would say we are making a good start on this. We've
got the tools we need and applying the authorities you all have
given us to address shortfalls.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you both.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Golden, a great Marine, is recognized.
Mr. Golden. Semper Fi, man.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Golden. Sounds like a bad thing.
Dr. Martell, in your prepared remarks you talked about the
Cyber Workforce Framework and you referred to a pilot for a
defense digital corps program.
I want to--obviously, the goal is to foster digital talent
and everyone's--we've had several rounds of questioning there.
So the National Security Commission on AI previously advised
that perhaps there should be a Digital Reserve Corps, which I
think would be a nice complement to what you're talking about
with having a digital corps.
So is that something that you have thought about? Here in
the House, the For Country Caucus has been pushing for that. We
are a caucus of all vets. Tony Gonzales has been the lead on
that. We've gotten it through the House and previous NDAAs
[National Defense Authorization Acts]. It's always kind of
suffered in the Senate.
But could either one of you or both of you comment on
whether or not that might be a way to have your cake and eat
it, too? I mean, we just had a conversation about talent is
going to the tech industry and the private sector.
Why not try and get some of those folks to serve while
they're also out there in the private sector?
Dr. Martell. Thanks for the question, Congressman Golden.
Hallelujah. I think that would be amazing, particularly
because the Defense Digital Corps' goal is to see--to figure
out what talent is needed across the Department and to be able
to bring that talent in and seed it but also manage it as a
cohort because they're going to be onesies, twosies, and alone,
and no one wants that job, right.
And then--and but if they're a cohort and they can share--
and they can share problems, they can share issues, we can much
better manage and grow them, right, and give them real careers.
If we can do that seeding by folks coming in for--depending
on how this works, we can talk about this afterwards. I would
love to.
But even if it's, you know, 2 weeks a year and a weekend a
month but then periodically for a year at a time that would--
that would lend itself very nicely to the way we are thinking
about it.
Mr. Sherman. Ditto on all he said and I would add, too, I
think we need to push ourselves to think creatively about how
we do this.
I mentioned security clearances, but not everyone needs a
secret or top secret, and particularly with the explosion of
remote work that--how do we tap into talent where they don't
have to all come move here to the Beltway. They can stay in
Texas or Massachusetts or Washington State or wherever they are
and tap into that talent.
I definitely think that's something we ought to look at.
And again, on that broader cyber strategy, our third goal on
there as--it's worded more finely than this but think
creatively and come up with creative solutions.
I think this would definitely fit on that that we would
need to explore further.
Mr. Golden. Well, I suspected that you both would think
that was a good idea. So, of course, my audience is the
committee itself and the Senate committee. So I think that's
something that we should push once again and, hopefully, get
through in the next NDAA.
With the time remaining I wanted to ask either one of you
to field this question, which is pretty simple and I think Pat
here was onto something talking about the urgency and how quick
can you move.
What are you learning just looking at the battlefield in
Ukraine right now about how you can adapt on the fly to start
to use data, to start to use apps, and maybe even blend, you
know, those emerging technologies with the things that we
already have in place right now?
Dr. Martell. Thanks for that follow-up, Congressman Golden.
We have lots of technology that we can bring to bear on
solutions on problems and we have lots of people willing to
tackle those.
The things that I've seen that have worked well is when we
get that technology in the hands of a large group of people
well trained and they're able to stand up quickly and deliver
real value. I am happy to go into it deeper in a closed
session.
Mr. Sherman. We better be secure, we better be agile, and
we better move in a digital environment. They're fighting World
War II tactics but on a 21st century battlefield and we better
adapt, and we are taking lessons learned on this and
particularly how we would look at a China scenario.
But I think those pillars, whether it's satellite
communications, cybersecurity, or, as the ranking member noted,
electromagnetic spectrum operations, how we fight through
spectrum and maneuver and survive there, all these lessons are
going to be relevant and speed matters. So that's what I am
taking away from this.
Mr. Golden. Thank you. I will yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. McCormick?
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The committee has been closely following the prospective
sharing of the 3.1 to 3.4 gigahertz spectrum and, obviously,
with the amount of technology and communication that we are
doing that's just parabolically expanding we have real concerns
about giving that up to the commercial industry, which would
just gobble it up instantly, and once you give it away you
can't bring it back.
Who ultimately makes the decision on whether that's
divested from or not?
Mr. Sherman. As it stands right now, per a 2000 NDAA it
would be the Secretary of Defense, basically, making that
decision.
On proposed legislation that the administration currently
backs it would be the President and his or her role as
Commander in Chief, but based on direct advice from the
Secretary of Defense on that matter.
Dr. McCormick. Would there be any reason for the Secretary
of Defense to ever consider giving up any bandwidth?
Mr. Sherman. Not giving it up, Congressman, but figuring
out how we could share it, sharing in terms of time, in terms
of geography, or in terms of radio frequency so we could
conduct our military training operations here in the U.S. in
homeland defense but also giving our economy an ability to stay
ahead of the Chinese in areas like 5G.
Dr. McCormick. With the amount of technology that continues
to expand and the amount of people that keep on burdening the
gigahertz spectrum, if we start sharing, though, how--I don't
understand how we ever grab it back and my concern is once we
start sharing it's a bottomless pit.
In other words, they will never be satisfied with what they
get and they'll never want to give it back up, and the fact
that we--in the military we get more and more advanced needs
why would we--once again, why would we go there when there's--
there's got to be another way.
Mr. Sherman. Well, absolutely, Congressman. We wouldn't
want to vacate where we are shoved out and never to return
again. Sharing would mean kind of joint ownership of this where
if we are conducting military operations near an installation,
conducting homeland or border security, that we would have the
military radars on and be able to operate and that the telecom
providers would potentially have to switch to another area, and
we've got some examples we've done in past administrations
where we can walk and chew gum.
But the bands you noted, sir, this 3.1 to 3.45, is
beachfront property both for long-range radars as well as
telecom needs here. And to the chairman's point about
competition and dominating against China, I have the CIO
equities for DOD.
I want our radars to work, be able to protect this
homeland, keep our citizens safe. But I also know economic
dominance matters, too.
So I am committed. We have a study we are undertaking right
now per the Infrastructure and Investment in Jobs Act that
Congress--you all tasked us to do that culminates on 30
September. No decisions would be recommended to be made until
we can do our due diligence and figure out if sharing is even
possible, sir.
Dr. McCormick. Okay, great. I am from Camp Pendleton so I
am used to that, people trying to gobble up prime real estate
there.
When it comes to the battlefield and some of the
technologies, I am a firm believer that we have the best staff
NCOs [noncommissioned officers] in the whole world and that's
why we are working better under conditions where we don't have
comms [communications].
Obviously, top-heavy organizations like Russia and China
don't have that luxury nor do they have the same experiences,
which brings to bear that our technologies and disrupting their
communications become paramount, as well as securing our own
because it's always--as an ANGLICO [Air Naval Gunfire Liaison
Company] guy I've always had problems with disruption of
frequencies.
The Chairman. Sorry. I was just excited. That was me.
Dr. McCormick. He loves the ANGLICO. He loves ANGLICO.
[Laughter.]
Dr. McCormick. I guess my question is do you feel like, and
this--I am not asking any secret questions--do you feel like we
are putting enough investment into that counter-comm and in the
comm abilities in the military.
Mr. Sherman. So what you're talking about, sir, are
electromagnetic spectrum operations. What we've done--we did in
Vietnam, we had to do in Desert Storm, Bosnia, and elsewhere,
but to different degrees in Afghanistan and Iraq. But as we get
ready for China we better be able to fight and dominate in this
space.
So, to your point, sir, I think investments from what I've
seen are sufficient now but this is something I am going to
bird dog very carefully from my office here, particularly as we
see the services starting to kind of regenerate electronic
warfare and other capabilities both to put the enemy back on
their heels and ensure our NCOs and our trigger pullers can
stay in touch with one another.
As we've seen on the Ukrainian battlefield, all the
dynamics with EMSO [electromagnetic spectrum operations] of how
the Russians are trying to use it and the Ukrainians are using
it that we cannot be cut off on this to be able to make sure we
can conduct combat operations.
Dr. McCormick. So your feeling is right now we are doing
adequate but we need a big investment for the future to
continue with this?
Mr. Sherman. I think we need to keep a close eye on it here
and monitor as we regenerate this capability that we had in the
Cold War, that we had to kind of maybe somewhat turn away from
a bit during the War on Terror.
As we regenerate it I want to assure this committee I am
going to keep a close, close sight on this as we move forward.
Dr. McCormick. I yield.
The Chairman. Well, I apologize for that. I got carried
away with the gavel. Like the Ring of Power it ultimately
corrupts.
So I recognize Mr. Luttrell.
Mr. Luttrell. Keep it handy.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here in front of us today.
You talk about data quality as one of your pillars and I
absolutely understand the importance of data quality. But as we
move forward here, aggregating the data is, obviously, what's
most important because you talk about sensor to shooter.
My question is are we utilizing retrospective data or
prospective data only, either one? Because as dirty as data is
and we have to filter it, and as Mr. Golden said, we are trying
to keep pace with China.
But if we don't have the infrastructure in place how are we
going to clean that data to give that information back to the
shooter, as you say?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Luttrell.
That's a can of worms in a number of ways, right.
So do we wait till the data is clean before we act? No. So
we are going to have to act on dirty data until we--until we
get it right.
One way we'll tackle this is to say no new bad, so we know
that we have to deal with the past stuff, the systems and the
data that have been built--that have been built in ways that
are not up to snuff but we need to make sure that things going
forward are doing things right.
So part of the way we think about this is as we built up
this infra [infrastructure] new things that we bring on board
are doing data right.
But we absolutely do have to go back and recontract as
contracts come up as we have to reacquire things. We have to--
part of what we are going to deliver are the contracting
vehicles that allow folks to specify this is what good data
looks like and this is what getting data looks like, getting it
right.
And the other thing I just want to add is distributed
governance and building CDO [Chief Data Officer] structures
down through the components is extremely important to this.
Mr. Luttrell. It just seems----
Dr. Martell. It has to be aligned with incentives.
Mr. Luttrell. It seems like such a slow process considering
the silos that we all work in, especially in government.
Dr. Martell. It's absolutely a slow process, sir. But so we
have to be able to do that slow process and get it right while
simultaneously still allowing for new folks to deliver value.
That's a balance that we are going to have to strike.
There's not going to be a way to snap our fingers and just have
it get it right fast.
Mr. Luttrell. Sure. This is going to be a follow-up, but
we--you and I are going to have to meet because this is--
sitting on a panel with a bunch of shooters right here, who's
setting the inclusion criteria for the data that's inbound and
do we have that infrastructure?
We are talking about exascale computing here. I mean,
forget about petaFLOPS [floating point operations per second].
If we are doing real-time maneuverability it's got to be quick.
It has to be that lightning fast, and given just the footprint
of the American arsenal itself does DOD have that
infrastructure?
I know DOE [Department of Energy], as far as I know, has
the fastest computer in the world, Summit, and I don't know if
DOD is even anywhere close to that.
Mr. Sherman. Well, not for high--yes, we have high-
performance computers. But to your point, this is why that
Joint Warfighting Cloud Capability we had to stick the landing
on this and we got it now with four companies in no particular
order--Oracle, Google, Amazon, and Microsoft--all bringing
their cloud computing capabilities--and, sir, I know you're
familiar with this--out to that tactical edge and that's what
we are pressing, whether it's out on an island--inside the
First Island Chain or somewhere in Eastern Europe or Sub-
Saharan Africa to be able to have our special operators or
wherever cloud computing capabilities, OCONUS [Outside the
Continental United States] as well. State of the art.
And this is why JWCC and as we move past that JEDI cloud
procurement that had all the issues that we have this now, and
we are going to have it at all three security classifications
up to top secret, which is going to be a game changer on this
and that's why this has been so important, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Is there a beta test in process--progress
right now or a scalable program that's in place that you can--
that we can see, so in real time?
Mr. Sherman. Well, we could show you. We have cloud
capabilities already underway in the Department and----
Mr. Luttrell. I am talking all the way from where I can
reach out to--I can reach out to an operator on the ground say
this is what I--I am receiving this.
Mr. Sherman. I think we could show you that. And the other
thing, sir, I will tell you we are building off what the
Intelligence Community has pioneered and I know you have likely
seen some of this yourself, sir. So we are--we are not
reinventing any wheels on this. We are riffing off what my IC
[Intelligence Community] counterparts have done.
So, sir, we'll take that for the record and we'd be happy
to try to set up a demo or something on that for you, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. That'd be great. Thank you. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Mrs. Kiggans.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
panellists for being here today.
As a liberal arts major also I've done some reading about
spectrum and the backbone of our communications network and
using abundantly by the public and private sectors alike.
So the latest battleground over spectrum allocation
involves the mid-band, which is crucial not only for 5G and
cellular data but also for DOD, missile defense, air
navigation, space asset tracking, and several other critical
uses.
Private spectrum for telecommunications use is vital for
economic growth and global connectivity. While the importance
of federal spectrum allocated to DOD for national security
purposes cannot be overstated.
So given the competing interests between public and private
sector spectrum needs, what proposed solutions does your office
think are viable for band sharing, going forward? And are there
other lower spectrum bands being explored for DOD use?
Mr. Sherman. Ma'am, we're--to the study we are conducting
here on that 3.1 to 3.45 gigahertz that's beachfront property
set for the radars as well as the telecoms [telecommunications
companies].
We have a study underway, culminates on 30 September, that
we've been leading since last year sharing--not vacating, not
where we get kicked out of it, and where DOD has to go find
some other spectrum, which will be very difficult, but how do
we walk and chew gum and figure out, again, from geography,
time and radio frequency use how do we make all this orchestra
work together with the telecoms in this highly congested but
highly desirable space?
We are examining this right now and we would note that this
is one of the most difficult parts of band analysis we've ever
done just because it is so desirable both for long-range radars
to acquire missiles and so on but also for 5G propagation.
So we are studying this. But what I just talked about,
those three principles of time, geography, and radio frequency,
are what we are thinking.
If we are going to find a potential solution to this,
that's how it's going to be done with the telecoms and that's
why I am working so closely with Commerce [Department of
Commerce] and NTIA [National Telecommunications and Information
Administration] and our interagency partners to make sure we
look at the angles on this. But protecting this country is
paramount consideration on this.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you. And then I have a couple bases in
my district. I represent Virginia's Second District, so Master
Jet Base Oceana.
Just listening to users over there, and I don't know if
this is the right venue to ask, but I just want to communicate
some complaints of those guys.
When--they got a lot going on, right. They're training to
fly. They're flying jets over there. But they complain about
the computers and when you ask them what frustrates you about
your job, what can we do better, it's the computers and it's
the time to log on and I don't know--it's the security portals
that they have to go through. It's the wifi capabilities. It's
the age of the equipment.
So it's--for me, it's the little things. We talk about
quality of life and recruitment and retention for our armed
forces, and that's what they communicate. I mean, number one,
it's--infrastructure is a big one. But, I mean, computers is
the second thing that they tell me.
So I am assuming this is your department. I mean, are those
things that--those little day-to-day things for those end users
that they just show up and they want to go home to their
families at night too and they get frustrated?
And I want to do better for them so how can you help me do
that?
Mr. Sherman. So we are going to lean in and the term we use
is called user experience. But, really, it's the fix our
computers piece what you're getting at.
And I got to tell you from my--however much longer I am in
this job this is a top priority here and we already have some
wind in our sails on this as the budget comes out here shortly,
some investments we are making.
It's a multifaceted problem. It is, yes, some new hardware.
It is, yes, having cybersecurity scans that don't conflict with
one another. It's having fiber on base down in Norfolk or where
else.
It's not having dated hardware like routers and switches
and stuff that have been allowed to atrophy. It's a
multifaceted problem.
And just yesterday, ma'am, I was talking to the Air Force's
Chief Experience Officer about how we do things like measure
and not just go anecdotes, because I hear a lot, too, from the
sailors and airmen and guardians and everybody else.
But what can we do to really monitor the network to know
when the spinny wheel is happening for the sergeant at Fort
Eustis and she's trying to get her maintenance report in.
We are going to get after this because we are not going to
fight with one hand tied behind our back, and it is a quality
of life issue, ma'am, and I am dedicated to getting after this.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you so much. Please make that a
priority, and I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Deluzio.
Mr. Deluzio. Mr. Chairman, good afternoon. Good morning.
Lost track of the time of day.
Good morning, Mr. Sherman, Dr. Martell. Thanks for being
here. Thanks for your work and your team's work to protect our
information technology, cybersecurity, our networks. I think
folks often don't understand what goes into that good work. So
thank you.
In our full committee hearing yesterday with NORTHCOM [U.S.
Northern Command], SOUTHCOM [U.S. Southern Command], Assistant
Secretary for Homeland Defense and Hemispheric Affairs, one of
the issues we touched on that I asked some questions about was
defense of our critical infrastructure, which I think is a
place that, obviously, touches defense but, certainly, homeland
security and other parts of our vital defenses here.
And we talked about not just malicious actors in China and
otherwise but one of the--some of the challenges coming from
the fact that much of our critical infrastructure is privately
owned. It's not just under public control.
So, Mr. Sherman, I will start with you if you could talk
about what those challenges are, what we can do better, what,
you know, this subcommittee and our committee should be
thinking about.
Mr. Sherman. So the biggest thing is just what you said. We
are going to take this seriously here. We need to work across
the interagency as we work with Homeland Security, CISA
[Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency], my friend,
Jen Easterly over there--I've worked with her for years--on how
we work across all the industrial sectors.
Now, for us at DOD, the Defense Industrial Base piece, the
defense critical infrastructure, is where my line of sight is,
but this is going to take a whole of government, whole of
industry, and folks taking it seriously, and this is where we
could continue to use your assistance here on the subcommittee
and the broader HASC [House Armed Services Committee] is making
sure COs [commanding officers] and others don't see this as a
nice to have--we saw Colonial Pipeline 2 years ago and other
places--that this isn't just a blinky lights something that you
can invest in if you want to.
This is critical. An adverse actor can take down your
entire--whether it's a pipeline, network. We've seen technical
debt in things like with air traffic control and things that
have happened recently. We've got to take this very seriously.
So at Department of Defense we are focused on the
Department of Defense Information Network but also our critical
infrastructure.
And one thing I have is budget certification authority
where I can hold services' and others' feet to the fire to make
sure they're having appropriate investments, and we need to do
better on this, on areas like defense critical infrastructure
to make sure we are protecting that piece of our enterprise as
well, sir.
Mr. Deluzio. Well, as a follow-up, you know, how would
you--and for folks who aren't as dialed into what it is we are
discussing--the work that goes into defense of critical
infrastructure--how do you compare where our Defense Industrial
Base is relative to other components of our critical
infrastructure in this country?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, I think that would be hard from my seat
as the DOD CIO to do a holistic looking across energy,
automotive, and everything.
I will know that--say that in the defense side we know
that's where the Chinese, Russians, and others are trying to
expropriate plans, blueprints, and everything else, and really
trying to help work with that industry to lock that down.
I would just add, working with our interagency partners on
all the different areas, raising awareness of this--we have a
new National Cyber Strategy. There's been other executive
orders and so forth. Working with you all here in Congress to
raise awareness about this.
And we've had some notable incidents, I think, that have
been in the news that are raising companies' awareness. So we
have to keep up the press and not stop on that.
Mr. Deluzio. I will ask maybe just one more follow-up.
Pieces of the way that we ensure cybersecurity in the
Defense Industrial Base do you think have application to other
components of our critical infrastructure in other sectors?
Mr. Sherman. I think it absolutely does as we have
standards that I know some may see as onerous and we are
working with industry to not make it onerous.
But to make sure there's something we can all hold
ourselves to account, and implementing basic cybersecurity. The
National Institutes of Standards and Technology, which I know
sounds bureaucratic, has standards to be able to apply on basic
things, on principles like two-factor authentication, end-to-
end encryption, and things that all companies ought to be able
to looking at to do.
And I grew up in South Texas in an area where we had a very
small family company. I know how it is to have federal
regulations land on somebody in Victoria, Texas or elsewhere.
But we've got to be thoughtful about, whether it's a small
company or a big one, that everybody should take responsibility
on this.
Mr. Deluzio. Okay. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back, and I think I did use two
acronyms, NORTHCOM and SOUTHCOM. I apologize.
The Chairman. It's going into your social credit score.
Mr. Deluzio. Fair enough.
The Chairman. Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, appreciate you being here and your leadership,
your dedication, sharing your experiences with us.
I represent a suburban district east of New York City,
750,000 people in Suffolk County. We, Mr. Chairman, are
America's district and appreciate the dialogue we have here
today.
Last September the government of Suffolk County suffered a
cyberattack that shut down many of the government services that
my constituents rely upon. Emergency dispatchers had to take
down 911 calls by hand. We had no access to the geolocating
function that's typically normal there.
Police were forced to use finicky radio transmissions in
call incidents and had no access to email reporting from the
field. Contractors were paid in paper checks. That created a
huge backlog of services in the county.
At the county's traffic agency people were unable to pay
pending tickets, which created extra fees and became a huge
hassle in Suffolk County.
In addition to the major shutdown of government services,
the hackers who claimed responsibility for the attack
threatened to slowly leak sensitive information that the
government had at hand and, unfortunately, the situations like
this aren't unique to Suffolk County.
We are constantly hearing about cyberattacks, data
spillage, and ransomware and phishing throughout the country
almost on a daily basis. If hackers can have such an effect on
my county I fear that there can be a larger government entity,
state, or, God forbid, our federal government be subject to a
similar attack.
The Office of the CIO, as I understand it, was responsible
for the DOD IT enterprise cybersecurity. I, too, am a liberal
arts major so I am leaning a little bit into this as well. And
I do understand that you have protection over our unclassified
and classified networks.
So my question is this to both of you, please, gentlemen.
What is your office doing to gather lessons learned from these
state and local attacks to ensure that their prevalence, their
impact, is reduced prospectively?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, we work closely across the interagency--I
mentioned DHS and CISA, for example, Department of Homeland
Security--to learn about the very unfortunate attack against
your district there, sir, and elsewhere, where we hear about
attacks against schools, industries, and elsewhere, and what we
call the targets or, excuse me, tactics, techniques, and
procedures--TTPs is the government acronym on that--on how the
adversary is using these mechanisms to employ ransomware or to
hack into systems.
I work very closely with the U.S. Cyber Command and the
National Security Agency, which is both under General Paul
Nakasone, and from them I not only get the cyber aspects but
also the threat-based intelligence of what state and nonstate
actors are doing and how they're operating and evolving.
This is something I do every week and multiple days a week
working with them to understand how we ought to be defending
differently. I mentioned earlier about a concept called Zero
Trust where we assume an enemy is already on our network.
This is the state of the art on--we've talked about it for
a while but we are getting after it at the Department of
Defense on not just the old perimeter defend at the castle and
moat, and not even what we call defense in depth but really
preventing an adversary's ability to move across a network and
hold data at risk as what happened in the attack you described,
sir.
So we must be a learning organization and stay very up with
the threat-based intelligence on how an adversary is going to
operate.
Mr. LaLota. Can you describe what your interactions are or
will be with state and local governments to that end? I
understand that you properly explained the big picture on what
the issue is and how it should be attacked.
But I fear that information, that guidance, isn't getting
to the local officials where the rubber meets the road.
Mr. Sherman. Sir, my interaction would not be direct. It
would be through the Department of Homeland Security who would
interact with the state and locals there and also, maybe
obliquely, where we have, of course, U.S. military
installations and garrisons that are relying on defense
critical infrastructure, power, and so on, coming on to those
garrisons and bases and so on.
But primarily through DHS is where that interaction and
where I am going to be hearing about what's happening in your
district and also where if we are seeing something from a
national security perspective U.S. Cyber Command working with
them could share that from a national security perspective.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you.
Switching gears for a moment, Congress required the
Department of Defense to establish a comprehensive framework
for the cybersecurity of the Defense Industrial Base in section
1648 of the 2020 NDAA.
Their support was a full 2 years late and yet didn't seem
to address a host of problems that still seem apparent about
how the DOD manages the Defense Industrial Base cybersecurity.
Did section 1648 force any lasting change to how the
department manages its support to the Defense Industrial Base?
Mr. Sherman. It absolutely motivated it and we've got to
keep doing better on this front. As we conduct outreach to the
Defense Industrial Base, as we organize ourselves internally,
there's over a dozen DOD entities, large offices that are
touching this sector here to make sure we are organizing
properly and not double communicating or sending conflicting
messages and also offering services as--to the Defense
Industrial Base.
For example, the National Security Agency's Cybersecurity
Collaboration Center works--has service----
The Chairman. Your time has expired. However, I was going
to ask that question in the second round. So why don't we plant
a flag there and we'll come back to it? Sorry.
Mr. Sherman. Roger. I will be right at audible, sir.
The Chairman. I am a rule follower, a Catholic Marine. So I
am sorry.
Mr. Keating is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just had one strain of questioning. Thank you both for
being here.
I noticed, Dr. Martell, your background on the private
side. I noticed the experience, you know, as head of machine
learning for Lyft and head of machine intelligence for Dropbox
as well as leading several IE teams' initiatives at LinkedIn,
and I also know the challenges we have with workforce and
getting trained educated people throughout our workforce.
So I was wondering, given that background that you had,
what plans you might have to leverage from those experiences
and expand knowledge and skill sets in AI across the Department
of Defense as a whole.
Can we do those kind of things internally as well and can
we expand what we have?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Keating.
I was born in Massachusetts, by the way.
Mr. Keating. Well, we won't hold that against you.
Dr. Martell. Thank you. It's a tough year for the Red Sox
this year. So I think perhaps but----
Mr. Keating. Go Bo Sox.
Dr. Martell. So I think we have to get at two things here.
If you look at what a--what talent used to be needed for AI it
was Ph.D. level expertise.
As the tools become commoditized and as just education,
even JPME [joint professional military education], for
example--professional military education--sorry, sir--
professional military education is starting to add more data,
more AI, more IT literacy, that the need for that expertise is
going down.
So I think there's two ways we can tackle this. One is we
need to upskill folks we already have. We've already built out
10 new work roles that are specific to AI--with Honorable
Sherman's org [organization] that are specific to AI and data,
and my team has--is beginning to do analyses across the
Department about which components need which work roles.
Secondarily, I think we can--we need to work with the
services and the civilian orgs to be able to give actual
careers to folks who want to do those sorts of work roles.
Currently, it's the case that you--if you're in the service
you might do a data work role for one tour and then you move on
to something else and you're doing something completely
different.
And, in addition, your promotion is not based upon being
successful in the data aspects. Your promotion is based upon,
for example, if you're an unrestricted line officer on your
leadership.
So we need to actually think hard about how we can have the
careers and the motivations in those careers drive expertise in
data, AI, et cetera.
Simultaneously, I think we really need to tackle some
untapped aspects of our workforce in the U.S. If you went to a
select school you're going to have people pounding down your
door to give you a very expensive job offer. I think that's
great, and if we can motivate those folks to come into the
service, to come into government, that's wonderful.
But there's a number of folks who might be just below that
level or just a little bit below that where we can serve as an
apprenticeship that transforms their capabilities.
And so we might take a hit on the front side where we are
having to do extra work to bring them up to speed. But at the
end, we have folks who are highly capable, and my view is we
actually want to encourage those highly capable folks to go out
to industry because that motivates people to come in the other
side of the pipeline.
Now, they might stay forever. That would be awesome. But if
we are seen as the ones that take you from not being able to
get that amazing job, come work with us, and then you get that
amazing job, I am very happy with that.
Mr. Keating. I am really glad to hear that. It really
echoes and what I learned way back in my MBA [Master of
Business Administration] days in a Massachusetts college BC
[Boston College]. So I really am pleased that you're going in
that direction.
Thank you so much, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Onto a second round, I want to pick up where
we left off with Mr. LaLota's question. He mentioned that the
Section 1648 report was 2 years late. Additionally, DIB
[Defense Industrial Base] cybersecurity is your responsibility,
correct?
I am tracking, however, at least six separate offices
within OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] who have
asserted leadership--some sort of leadership role in protecting
the Defense--I did an acronym--Defense Industrial Base. Not
DIB. Defense Industrial Base. To outside organizations and
entities.
So two questions. One is Mr. LaLota's question--did the
report force change, and then, two, what are you doing in your
role to bring coherence to an effort that, from my vantage
point, looks somewhat scattershot at present?
Mr. Sherman. So to riff off that earlier question, yes, it
has driven change, Congressman. Absolutely it has.
Onto the how are we organizing ourselves for victory here,
so when I got this last year, looking--polling around DOD how
many organizations are touching a Defense Industrial Base
company, whether it's a small or medium or one of the big
primes, and it's more. It's 12 to 13, depending upon how we
count it.
And I first held a meeting and brought all them in a room--
Defense Contract Management Agency, Defense Counterintelligence
and Security Agency, DOD Policy [Office of the Secretary of
Defense for Policy]. I can go down a list.
But putting myself in the shoes and talking to a lot of
companies, how does this feel when you have got different
entities either providing helpfully or trying to be helpful
providing information or coming to you with a requirement?
So what we've done, my acting deputy, who's also the chief
information security officer, has stood up a monthly cadence
with these organizations to get ourselves aligned on the DIB
Management Council here. I think we call it something a little
bit different.
But bringing these organizations, who's sharing what, who's
talking to whom. Let's get aligned here and, again, put
ourselves in the shoes of the affected companies.
So maybe it could be helpful. It could be threat-based
intelligence that maybe national security agencies providing
through that collaboration center I mentioned or another
entity, and they need to be cross talking so if they hand
something to one company and they say also, we got this from
another DOD organization.
So that's what we are doing, sir. We are trying to align
this and make it a little more sensible and less bureaucratic.
The Chairman. But you consider yourself the leader of that
council?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Of the six different offices that----
Mr. Sherman. Actually 12. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Well, okay.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Twelve different offices.
Okay. Mr.--Dr. Martell, excuse me--before JADC2 we had the
Joint Information Environment. Before the Joint Information
Environment we had the Global Information Grid.
Have you reviewed those past efforts to understand why they
failed and what you might do differently so that JADC2 does not
suffer the same fate?
Dr. Martell. Thank you for that question, Chairman
Gallagher.
When I--I have been in the office now eight months and I've
tried very hard to ignore history, and the reason I have is as
I started going down that rabbit hole I felt myself being
inculcated with the old ways of doing things.
So I've asked myself what's the right solution, and we are
now just turning to making sure that this right solution maps
correctly to our goals.
So, look, I think the right solution is building out a
marketplace that allows multiple vendors to bring apps to bear
where these older solutions were--and I am going to defer a lot
to Honorable Sherman because I believe these were under his
purview--but they were older--these older solutions had rigid
requirements that were established a long time before delivery
and by the time the delivery came the world has changed.
We need to create a marketplace and infrastructure that
allows for that dynamic change and that's how we are tackling
JADC2.
The Chairman. Mr. Sherman, in what little time I have left,
I am pleased to hear that we are moving out on a multi-cloud
expeditiously. However, it seems we just lost the last 2 and a
half years.
What lessons should we derive from that?
Mr. Sherman. Sir, do you mean in terms of the acquisition
or what did we learn in the 2 years?
The Chairman. Well, both. What did we learn----
Mr. Sherman. So this was one area here that--yes, as the
U.S. government it shouldn't take us this many years to get
enterprise class for the Department of Defense and we mention
about the CCP and if Xi on that side said something--he needs
something that quickly he'll have it very quickly.
We have to do better as a whole of government here in being
able to procure and acquire services for the Department of
Defense. This is an area we did get through. There was no
protest. It's ready to go.
But this is something that, frankly, sir, we should have
been able to do more quickly and without all the bureaucratic
and other issues that came up.
Now, on the functional piece the upshot here we have what
we've learned on the intelligence side with our multi-cloud
multi-vendor approach, and then also within the military
services their own cloud efforts.
You hear terms like Cloud One and others. That's the Air
Force effort. We have a lot of lessons learned we are
integrating into this enterprise cloud effort. So we are not at
a standstill. We have a running start from what we did there,
sir.
The Chairman. My time is about to expire.
Does either Mr. Khanna, Mr. Keating, Mr. Luttrell--any more
questions?
You guys got off easy today.
Well, with that, I just would emphasize a couple points as
we close.
One, I think you saw a lot of interest in sort of general
talent management and whether we are adequately using the
authorities that Congress has given you, particularly Cyber
Excepted Service authorities. I know we talked about that
earlier this week, Mr. Sherman.
So I would like to develop some sort of routine process
whereby you can come and tell us, here's how these authorities
are being used, here's what we are learning, and here's, you
know, where we may need--we could expand it or maybe we can't
expand it.
So I just would hope you would commit to that, going
forward.
And then, Dr. Martell, we had a little bit of a discussion
about metrics. I just would encourage you to think through and
would welcome a follow-up discussion on what is achievable.
I recognize that, you know, the Pentagon is a massive
aircraft carrier. It doesn't turn on a dime. But what is
achievable in the next 2 years? What can we really deliver to
our warfighters within the next 2 years?
And so I would be eager to work with you on what are fair
metrics in both of those areas, going forward.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
Oh, we are going to move into a closed session--closed
briefing.
And now the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:48 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. RYAN

Dr. Martell. The initial prototype (version 1.0) for the data
integration layer, that CDAO is building in the classified cloud for
experimentation, will be available by the end of May 2023 for usage in
GIDE 6 (June and July). This sustained experiment will allow for CDAO
to assess the performance of the data layer and measure the impact of
its services to warfighter workflows. Subsequent revisions of the data
layer will be deployed quarterly to align with the ongoing series of
experiments.   [See page 13.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER

Mr. Gallagher. Between the war in Ukraine, persistent
counter-terrorism operations, and recent brazen actions by the
CCP, the need for advanced data, algorithmic and AI
capabilities is more urgent than ever. Some Combatant
Commanders are really leaning in here. For example, GEN
Kurrilla's team is discussing leveraging data-driven technology
at CENTCOM to create new warfighting concepts and GEN Van
Herck's team is discussing something similar at NORAD/NORTHCOM.
I understand much of this work is on the back of significant
congressional investment in Project Maven and continued through
the CDAO. What is your plan to expand the capabilities the DoD
has employed there across the Combatant Commands? Are there any
funding issues that will prevent accelerating the expansion?
Dr. Martell. In FY23, CDAO received $36.8M for the tactical
integration of AI in combatant commands. This resource
supported a limited rollout of Maven Smart System to each of
the geographic combatant commands on certain networks through
the end of Q1 FY24 as an R&D activity. CDAO put heavy emphasis
on INDOPACOM, EUCOM, CENTCOM, and NORTHCOM to match NDS
priorities and meet ongoing user demand. In aggregate, the FY23
$36.8M appropriation will not meet CCMD demand for integrated
software solutions that enable decision advantage within the
combatant commands, as the user demand for advanced digital
solutions continues to skyrocket.
Therefore, for FY24, CDAO has requested $225.5M for its
JADC2 Project Management team. A notional breakdown of funding
follows: (actual costs will depend on negotiated contract
rates)

LCCMD mission applications ( $127.5M)--
Establishing an enterprise business model for procuring
existing mission command applications to improve the
acquisition approach (e.g.,safeguarding government data
rights), ensuring efficient allocation of development and
sustainment licenses, and standardizing best practices within
mission applications across Combatant Commands. This will
include, as appropriate, the Maven Smart System or alternative
capabilities as determined in partnership with the Combatant
Commands, warfighters, and appropriate contracting and
acquisition officials.

LData Integration Layer for JADC2 ( $54M)--
Developing data mesh services and enabling capabilities to
integrate data across CCMDs, the Joint Staff, and the Services
to ensure accurate, timely, and secure data flow across DoD
organizations.

LGIDE Experimentation ( $44M)--Using user-centered
experiments to test the effectiveness of workflow support
applications and the data integration layer in achieving
decision advantage. CDAO believes this approach to evolving
data and applications in tandem with user-centered concepts,
and measuring effectiveness, is the best way to evolve JADC2
capabilities across organizations and domains, while also
building a robust commercial marketplace for software providers
to DoD. Building on our efforts in FY24, future efforts would
expand to additional CCMDs in accordance with the priorities
set out in the National Defense Strategy and would require
additional funding.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOULTON

Mr. Moulton. With the looming vulnerability of our nation's
cryptographic enterprise due to advances in quantum computing,
can you tell us the full scope of effort required to prepare
for the continued protection of national security information?
Mr. Sherman. Ultimately, the full scope of effort will
require the migration of our vulnerable national security
systems to a quantum resistant capability. DoD components will
accomplish this incrementally as technology and solutions
become available for procurement and integration. Success also
hinges on industry's timely commitment to adopt stronger
algorithms. Our crypto modernization efforts must ensure the
protection of information from the moment of transmission to
the end of the intelligence life of the information from 25-50
years, depending on the classification of the information.
Mr. Moulton. When will we know how much it will cost to get
to continuous modernization of encryption, to include post-
quantum, and how do you assess the `critical path' to get
there?
Mr. Sherman. Crypto Modernization (CM) is an enduring
effort that includes recurring procurement, integration, and
sustainment costs. These efforts are driven by Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff guidance for CM planning and the
retirement dates for cryptographic algorithms also referred to
as the last year of use date. DoD components are beginning to
specify their CM requirements for the FY25 Program Objective
Memorandum (POM). We anticipate DoD organizations will have
improved cost projections in their FY26 POM projections as the
next generation of Quantum Resistant (QR) cryptographic
capabilities become available for procurement.
Also, as NSA publishes the formal cryptographic
modernization requirements for the CM2 initiative later this
year, DoD organizations will also begin to program funding to
modernize and replace their currently fielded systems. Although
NSA has released its full list of high-assurance quantum
resistant algorithms specifications for use in NSS, the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) will not
release their list of medium assurance public QR algorithms
until mid-2024. This timing gap will impact many NSS programs'
ability to POM for future encryption devices as many of these
cryptographic devices rely on the NSA high grade algorithms to
protect data transmitted or stored, and require the public
medium assurance algorithms for software, firmware, and user
authentication.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON

Mr. Fallon. Mr. Sherman, the reality of today's workforce
requires personnel to use their own devices to conduct business
for the Department of Defense. This is especially true for
members of the National Guard and Reserves. 13 other federal
agencies have developed programs to secure personal devices and
allow them access to their networks, but not the DoD. What
steps are you taking to develop a ``bring your own device''
policy that would allow for necessary flexibility while
maintaining security? Have you contemplated moving to a device
or application-centric security model that would allow for
necessary access and isolate threats to a single application
instead of the entire DODIN?
Mr. Sherman. On August 10, 2022, the DoD CIO released
policy guidance to DoD components that allows them to develop
and tailor their Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) solution(s). The
DoD policy allows users to voluntarily participate in the BYOD
initiative. DoD components are responsible for following and
integrating all applicable Security Technical Implementation
Guides (STIG) and the DoD CIO's guidance for use of non-
government mobile devices, excluding laptops. The DoD CIO's
office is currently refining a mobile applications policy to
ensure the protection of information on mobile devices.

[all]
