- [H.A.S.C. No. 118-35] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-35]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 28, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-392          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Eighteenth Congress

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ADAM SMITH, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Vice    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
Chair                            RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  JASON CROW, Colorado
DON BACON, Nebraska                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana              SARA JACOBS, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 PATRICK RYAN, New York
PAT FALLON, Texas                    JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota                  Pennsylvania
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN, Virginia
NICK LaLOTA, New York                TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                JIMMY PANETTA, California
CORY MILLS, Florida
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia

Chris Vieson, Staff Director
Ian Bennitt, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Owen McGeary, Research Assistant
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2

WITNESSES

Berger, Gen David H., USM, Commandant............................     8
Del Toro, Carlos, Secretary of the Navy..........................     4
Gilday, ADM Michael, USN, Chief of Naval Operations..............     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Berger, Gen David H., USM, Commandant............................   120
Del Toro, Carlos, Secretary of the Navy..........................    63
Gilday, ADM Michael, USN, Chief of Naval Operations..............    97

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Davis' WRAL News Article on Camp Lejune Toxic Water Court Date...   160

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Davis....................................................   168
Mr. Fallon...................................................   167
Mr. Gaetz....................................................   167
Mr. Gallagher................................................   167
Mr. Veasey...................................................   171
Mr. Wilson...................................................   167

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bergman..................................................   225
Mr. Fallon...................................................   235
Mr. Finstad..................................................   249
Mr. Gaetz....................................................   210
Mr. Jackson..................................................   231
Mr. Kim......................................................   209
Mr. LaLota...................................................   249
Mr. Lamborn..................................................   176
Ms. Mace.....................................................   246
Mrs. McClain.................................................   229
Dr. McCormick................................................   250
Mr. Rogers...................................................   175
Mr. Scott....................................................   177
Ms. Sherrill.................................................   211
Mr. Waltz....................................................   227
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Friday, April 28, 2023.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:03 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. The meeting will come to order.
Today we complete our fiscal year 2024 budget and posture
hearings with the Department of Navy.
I want to thank the ranking member and all members for
their cooperation, hard work, and dedication as we worked
through 27 hearings in 13 legislative days.
These hearings have helped provide the information we need
to mark up the fiscal year 2024 NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] next month.
I also want to thank our witnesses for being here and for
their service to our Nation.
The President is requesting a 5 percent increase for the
Navy and a 3 percent increase for the Marine Corps.
Unfortunately, with today's record level of inflation, these
increases don't go very far.
We are seeing that very clearly in the request for
shipbuilding. The President is seeking to build a paltry nine
battle force ships in fiscal year 2024. At the same time, he
wants to retire 11. Several of these ships have years of
service life remaining. The retirements represent a loss of
capability, especially for the Marine Corps.
The President plans to slash the number of amphibs
[amphibious combat vehicles] by 10 percent, leaving the fleet
below the statutory minimum of 31. We put 31 into law because
that is what the Marine Corps told us was the bare minimum they
needed to successfully carry out their mission. Going below
that number invites a tremendous amount of risk.
That is clearly why General Berger included a new amphib in
his number of the unfunded priority list this year. I think you
will find support for that request from this committee.
But even if we fund the amphib, the Navy still plans to
reduce the number of battle force ships by 11 over the next 5
years. Forget about the 500-ship Navy many say we need to
counter China. At no point over the next 18 years does the size
of the fleet even reach the statutory goal of 355.
While this administration dithers, the CCP [Chinese
Communist Party] is rapidly growing and modernizing its Navy.
It already controls the largest Navy in the world. Our fleet of
296 ships was eclipsed years ago by a Chinese fleet of over
350.
In 2 short years, the DOD [U.S. Department of Defense]
predicts the CCP will control over 400 battle force ships. I
don't understand how this administration can conclude reducing
the size of our fleet will somehow deter China.
Making matters worse is confusion surrounding the Navy's
shipbuilding plan. It is not one plan, it is four plans, each
of them with different force structures and total numbers of
ships.
Our shipyards can't plan, make investments, and properly
operate with this uncertainty. It is the absolute worst signal
to send to our adversaries, especially the CCP.
Finally, I am also concerned about the strike fighter gap.
It is not forecasted to close until 2031. But that assumes
Congress grants the Navy relief from the statutory requirement
to field an air wing for each deployed aircraft carrier. I
would inform the Navy that it is highly unlikely we will grant
that relief.
The Navy should focus on mitigating the fighter gap in the
short term by accelerating planned upgrades to existing
fighters, especially the F-35s. They should also expedite the
fielding of unmanned collaborative drones and pair them with
our existing fleet to enhance capabilities.
The point is, we should be modernizing and expanding our
Naval capabilities. We absolutely should not be cutting them.
Finally, I want to commend the Commandant on the progress
he is making with the Force 2030 design. Preparing our marines
to be successful in a conflict with the CCP is critically
important. Force 2030 will do just that.
I look forward to further updates on the progress he is
making to transform the Marine Corps into a 21st century
fighting force.
Finally, this will likely be the last time Admiral Gilday
and General Berger will testify before us in their current
capacity.
I want to thank both of you for your decades of service to
our Nation and for your dedicated leadership to the Navy and
the Marine Corps.
With that, I yield to my friend, the ranking member, for
any comments he may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start by echoing your last comment and thanking
General Berger and Admiral Gilday for their leadership in these
current positions.
It has not been an easy time to be in the positions that
you are in. You have both done an outstanding job. We have
always appreciated working with you.
And I also want to echo the chairman's comments at the
start about the posture hearings that we have gone through. It
is always an interesting and challenging time. But I think it
really helps inform this committee about the decisions that we
have to make as we put together the NDAA for this year and as
we work on the budget going forward.
And I think the chairman has done a really good job of
pulling those hearings together. We have learned a lot, had a
lot of good solid debates, and I think it will put us in a good
position to do a good bill again this year. I lose track. I
think it is the 63rd consecutive year. It could be the 62nd,
somewhere in there. It is over 60, let's put it that way.
And it has only happened because of strong bipartisan
support. And I appreciate the chairman's leadership in getting
us started on doing that again this year.
And I think he correctly points out the problem. We have
this logical challenge here in terms of, here is what we would
like to do, here is how much money we have. And you gentlemen
have to somehow deal with what I referred to yesterday as our
cognitive dissonance here in Congress.
At the same time that we are beating you up for not
spending enough money, the House majority is passing a bill to
cut the overall amount of money that we spend on the
discretionary budget, and you are just supposed to somehow
figure that out.
I used to have this analogy about 10 pounds of manure in a
5-pound bag, but I have discovered that most people don't like
that analogy. But I nonetheless think it is apt. And that is
what you are trying to do and it is not easy.
And one of the things that we could do here in Congress is
just pick the number. We spend all of our time complaining
about how we are not spending enough money, and then we spend
all of our time complaining about how much we spend too much
money. You have kind of got to pick a lane on that one or you
are going to put people like the Department of Defense, like
all of these fine gentlemen in front of us, in an absolutely
impossible position.
So you can't both vote to cut the discretionary budget and
then complain at the DOD for not spending enough money. Well,
that is not true. Actually, you can, but it is just not very
consistent and certainly not very helpful when it comes to
setting policy.
I do believe that the challenge beyond that, even if we
were clear on the money, is, as has been mentioned many times,
you have to both modernize--because rapidly changing
technology, whether you are talking about hypersonic missiles,
different vulnerabilities, space, JADC2 [Joint All-Domain
Command and Control] that we are working on.
Modernization, I believe, is the most critical thing that
we need to do to make sure that we have the Joint All-Domain
Command and Control, that we have systems that can get us the
information we need and be protected, so that every aspect of
our warfighting machine is working and is able to deliver what
it is supposed to deliver.
But in modernizing, you also have to make sure that we have
a force, right now, today, that can meet our national security
needs. And that is where you get into the difficult balance of
decommissioning ships now so that you could have the money to
build that modernizing force.
I won't get into an extended debate on that except to say
that part of the challenge here, and I think the cruisers are a
good example, is, yes, you have a ship, all right, but that
ship spends the overwhelming majority of its time in dry dock,
first of all. So you don't have a useful ship. And second of
all, you have to spend an enormous amount of money just to keep
that ship in dry dock.
Yes, you have a ship. If you were to look at your little
chart, you would say, well, we got one more. Is that actually
helping us if it can't be in the fight and if you are having to
spend a lot of money even while it can't be in the fight?
Those are the decisions that we have to try to make, and I
think the gentlemen before us have done a pretty good job of
doing that.
General Berger, I know several years ago you launched the
effort to modernize the Marine Corps. I am sure you are aware
not everybody liked that and you get a fair amount of criticism
for it.
But I think you made the right decisions. You showed
leadership, and you put the Marine Corps where it needed to be
to be an effective fighting force today for the world that we
face. And I greatly appreciate your leadership on that.
When it comes to the Navy, we are battling with the expense
of building ships, but I also think that in the last couple of
years we have started to make the right decisions about what
the future of that Navy should look like.
So I appreciate the leadership. I appreciate the difficult
position that you all are put in. And look forward to working
with you this year to get a good budget, to get the NDAA done.
And I want to put one final point. We also need to pass
appropriations bills. I have heard a lot of my colleagues
talking about how we are just going to do a CR [Continuing
Resolution] this year. That would be a complete and total
disaster for the United States military, for the ability of
this country to defend itself.
I would also like to point out that the other 45 percent of
the discretionary budget, it would also be a disaster for all
of that as well.
But sitting here on the Armed Services Committee, let's not
kid ourselves about the impact that would have on what is
supposed to be our paramount duty to defend this country if we
passed a continuing resolution. It would be devastating.
And, with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the ranking member.
I would now like to introduce our witnesses, the Honorable
Carlos Del Toro, Secretary of the Navy; Admiral Michael Gilday,
Chief of Naval Operations, and General David Berger is the
Commandant of the Marine Corps.
Welcome to the witnesses.
Secretary Del Toro, we will start with you. You are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE CARLOS DEL TORO, SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY

Secretary Del Toro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Smith, distinguished
members of this committee, it is an honor to appear before you
today alongside General Berger and Admiral Gilday to discuss
the posture of the Department of The Navy.
Today, our Nation faces challenges in every region and
domain we operate in, from the seabed to the stars. We do
recognize the People's Republic of China as our pacing threat,
executing a strategy that is aimed at upending international
order.
To preserve our way of life, the National Defense Strategy
calls upon the Joint Force to deter aggression while being
prepared to prevail in conflict. A strong Navy and a strong
Marine Corps are the foundation upon which the successes of the
Joint Force rests.
The President's 2024 budget sends a strong signal to the
American people of the value that President Biden and Secretary
Austin place in maintaining a robust Navy and a Marine Corps
team to confront the threats that we face today.
This year's budget request supports our three enduring
priorities. Those are strengthening our maritime dominance,
building a culture of warfighting excellence, and enhancing our
strategic partnerships around the globe.
With your support over the past year, we have made major
strides in modernizing our fleet and our force. And I know that
we often talk about the negatives, but allow me to focus on the
positive differences that we have made over the course of the
last 2 years.
2022 saw the first deployment to the aircraft carrier USS
[United States Ship] Gerald R. Ford, providing the Navy with
lessons learned that will benefit future Ford-class carriers.
Construction of high-end surface combatants continues,
including the first Constellation-class frigate, the USS
Constellation, and the first of our Arleigh Burke-class Flight
Three destroyers, the USS Jack Lucas, which brings significant
advantage to sea.
We continue progress on our first Columbia-class ballistic
missile submarine, the USS District of Columbia, while
preconstruction activities on the second Columbia SSBN
[ballistic missile submarine], the USS Wisconsin, have also
begun.
On the innovation front, Task Force 59 in Bahrain continues
to test a wide range of unmanned surface vessels, and we are
looking forward to expanding this effort now to the Fourth
Fleet as well.
When we consider the composition of our fleet, we seek to
strike a balance between readiness, modernization, and
capacity, with an immediate emphasis on readiness to be able to
fight today and tomorrow.
This year, our divestment request includes three amphibious
ships and at least two cruisers that are in tremendously poor
material condition that offer very limited warfighting
capability, regardless of how much more investments we put into
those ships.
Our decisions to divest or extend a ship's life are based
on a hull-by-hull evaluation. For example, we recently
announced the modernization of the destroyer Arleigh Burke DDG-
51 to keep it sailing through 2031, 5 years beyond its
estimated service life. We hope to be able to continue that
trend with other ships when possible.
The USS Alexandria just came out of dry dock in San Diego
as well too, with a 3-year extension. We hope to continue this
trend on other Arleigh Burke destroyers and even on
Ticonderoga-class cruisers, where we actually have the ability
to extend them for perhaps one or two more deployments.
We owe it to the American people to be responsible stewards
of taxpayer dollars. Investing in platforms that have limited
capability conflicts with that responsibility.
Our Naval forces are more than just platforms and systems,
however. Our sailors and our marines are our greatest strength.
This year's budget request contains multiple investments to
support them and their families with services, benefits,
housing, and education, all that are critical to combat
readiness.
In addition to our commitments to our people, we are
reinforcing our international relationships significantly,
including those with our Ukrainian partners as they defend
their sovereignty in response to Russia's illegal and
unprovoked invasion.
In the Indo-Pacific, we continue to play a leading role in
the AUKUS [Australia-United Kingdom-United States] Security
Partnership. Our Navy will be critical to this initiative's
success as we support Australia's acquisition of conventionally
armed, nuclear-powered, fast-attack submarines.
We continue to hone our skills with allies and partners in
the Arctic as well, ensuring we are prepared to operate in this
challenging and very unforgiving critical environment for the
future of our Nation's economy.
Along with our partnerships abroad, we are committed to
strengthening our relationships here at home. We value your
support and recommit our leadership toward defueling and
remediating the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility spills.
We are committed to doing what it takes to address the
concerns of servicemembers, their families, the people of
Hawaii, and all other communities throughout the U.S. As I have
said before, we build trust one day at a time, one action at a
time.
Finally, I am grateful for the trust that you have placed
in me personally to lead this Department. I look forward to
discussing how best to support our sailors, our marines, and
their families in defense of our Nation, and I thank you.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Del Toro can be found
in the Appendix on page 63.]
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Admiral Gilday, you are up next.

STATEMENT OF ADMIRAL MICHAEL GILDAY, USN, CHIEF OF NAVAL
OPERATIONS

Admiral Gilday. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Smith,
distinguished members of the committee, good morning and thank
you for the opportunity to appear today alongside Secretary Del
Toro and General Berger.
I would also like to thank my wife Linda, who is also here
with me this morning.
[Applause.]
Admiral Gilday. Thank you.
For more than three-quarters of a century, the United
States Navy has been an anchor of world stability, deterring
war, upholding international law, and assuring access to the
seas.
Today, our Navy's role has never been more expansive or
more consequential. At this moment, we have about a hundred
ships at sea, reassuring America's allies and partners that we
stand watch alongside them and reminding the world that we seek
to preserve peace, but we are prepared for any fight.
We are America's away team, constantly present, in contact
with allies, with partners, and potential adversaries every
single day.
Operating forward, defending the rules-based international
order, our United States Navy flies and operates and we sail
wherever international law allows so that others can too.
Our fiscal year 2024 budget request remains consistent with
our Navy's enduring priorities. We are prioritizing readiness
first, with an emphasis on sailors who empower everything that
we do.
Next, we are modernizing our current fleet, 70 percent of
which we will have a decade from now.
And third, we are continuing to build capacity, ensuring we
have lethal platforms to achieve warfighting advantage.
It fully funds the Columbia-class submarine, ensuring the
on-time delivery of the most survivable leg of our Nation's
strategic deterrent. It keeps our fleet ready to fight tonight,
dedicating the resources required to train and educate
resilient sailors that can outthink, that can out-decide, and
that can outfight any potential adversary.
It funds private and public ship maintenance to 100
percent, increasing capacity and retaining highly skilled
labor, to get our ships back to sea faster, with full magazines
and spare parts in their storerooms, to be prepared for any
contingency.
It invests in modernizing our fleet, procuring weapons with
range and speed, along with integrated systems to improve fleet
survivability, and a resilient cybersecure network
infrastructure.
It invests in capable capacity, building towards a larger
distributed fleet, fielding a ready fleet today while
modernizing for the future.
Meanwhile, our competitors are also investing heavily in
warfighting capabilities of their own. And the oceans we
operate in are growing more lethal and more contested every
day.
This means that we can no longer afford to maintain ships
designed for a bygone era, especially at the expense of
readiness and modernization or at the expense of buying new
ships that are relevant to tomorrow's fight.
America cannot afford to field a hollow force. We have been
there before and we have seen the tragic results. It is a
mistake that we must never repeat.
Ships, submarines, and aircraft are no doubt expensive
instruments of national power, as are the cost of maintaining
them. But history shows that without a powerful Navy, the price
tag could be much higher.
As we enter this critical decade, passing the budget on
time is absolutely essential. We have no time to waste.
Certainly, our adversaries are not slowing down.
For the first time in history, the threat of a year-long
continuing resolution seems like a real possibility.
Let me be clear: A yearlong CR would be devastating for
your Navy and for America's national security. It would set
back delivery of Columbia-class submarines. It would delay
construction of our attack submarines and our surface
combatants. It would postpone the modernization of our most
crucial weapon systems. It would adversely impact our sailors
and their families, who we are trying so hard to retain. And it
would be disastrous for our industrial base, America's arsenal,
which depends upon steady, predictable funding to deliver the
Naval forces that America needs.
I urge Congress to pass a budget on time. Failing to do so
would damage our maritime superiority at a time when command of
the seas will determine the balance of power for the rest of
this century.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify this morning.
Thank you for your enduring support for the United States Navy
and the United States Marine Corps. And I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Gilday can be found in
the Appendix on page 97.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Admiral.
And, General Berger, you are up.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL DAVID H. BERGER, USM, COMMANDANT

General Berger. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Smith, my
wife, Donna, is also with me, and she has been beside me for
more than 40 years, and she sent two of our sons into the
Marine Corps. So it is sort of family business for us.
[Applause.]
General Berger. I am a little nervous, because she is
sitting behind me where I can't see her right now.
The Chairman. As you should be.
General Berger. Three years ago, I appeared before you and
described how change--rapid change--was required in order for
the Marine Corps to meet our statutory requirements and the
mandates of the National Defense Strategy.
With the bipartisan help of this committee and the support
of my civilian leadership in the Pentagon, I am here to tell
you that, as the ranking and chair mentioned, force design for
the Marine Corps is no longer a future endpoint, it is a
reality today.
A couple of examples.
In INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command], under Admiral
Aquilino, Task Force 76.3, designed to put together advanced
information webs, and they support maritime domain awareness
that he, the COCOM [U.S. combatant commands], so desperately
needs. And they took what they learned during experimentation
and they put it right into application in an exercise in the
Philippines, in Japan, right in China's backyard, which is
where we ought to be.
In Europe right now, as they were last year, Task Force 61.
Using new technology and reorganized in a different way, they
have created both air and maritime domain awareness for Sixth
Fleet, working for the fleet commander, primarily focused on
Russian air and naval capabilities. They are in Estonia right
now, marines are in Estonia, doing the same thing. They will be
there for the next 3 months.
And in Central Command, under General Kurilla, Marine Corps
MQ-9s, they are providing the ISR [intelligence surveillance
reconnaissance] that he needs, the awareness over the key
maritime terrain. And that is exactly what we should be doing.
This week, there is a major exercise in the Philippines,
Exercise Balikatan. Our new Marine Littoral Regiment out of
Hawaii is in the Philippines and they are applying the new
equipment and the new techniques that they have developed with
the Philippine military and several other militaries right
alongside our counterparts. I think that is what you expect.
A couple of months ago, Japan announced when they came
here, their senior leaders came to the U.S., that they would
host the next Marine Littoral Regiment forward in the First
Island Chain, and that is where they belong.
In short, in other words, your marines are forward where it
matters, and that is where you would expect them to be.
3 years ago, I described how the Marine Corps would not
just modernize quickly, but we would self-fund the changes we
had to make. We had to get leaner, we had to get lighter, and
we had to get more naval. And 3 years later, your marines are
doing just that.
The results are in the field now, because we are not
waiting for 2030 or 2027 or even 2025. We have to be ready
today.
The major divestments that the Marine Corps made, they are
the right ones and we are done. We are at our fighting weight
right now.
Now we have to sustain the modernization efforts while
focusing on the quality of life issues that are most important
to marines and sailors and their families.
People, just as the Secretary and the CNO [Chief Naval
Officer] mentioned, people, they are the real source of our
competitive advantage as a Nation and as a Corps. And I ask for
your help now to invest in their quality of life. We have to
invest in where they live, where they work, where they eat,
where they work out, all of that. They have earned it. We have
to deliver.
Restoring and modernizing our infrastructure is directly
tied to recruiting, directly tied to retention. That is how we
support families. That is readiness.
So on behalf of all marines, I ask for your support now as
we bring our facilities up to par with the marines and sailors
who work from those platforms.
I also ask for your support for the amphibious fleet. That
is how this Nation projects power.
The CNO and I agree on three key principles here.
There is no difference between the two services. The
absolute minimum operational requirement is 31 L-class ships.
Second, block buys. They do two things. One, they save the
taxpayer money. And second, they give the industry what the CNO
calls headlights in front of them.
And third, I think divesting without replacing, I think
that is a dangerous approach, as several of you all have
mentioned.
Amphibious ships is how we respond to crisis. They are
critical. That is how we evacuated citizens out of Lebanon.
That is how we went into Afghanistan in 2001. And today, we are
asking them to do all that plus deter, plus contribute to
campaigning.
Here is my concern. The first time this Nation can't
respond to a crisis and one of our adversaries can, probably
the last time we get asked.
And I will just finish up by saying, in my last year as
commandant, thank you. Thank you sincerely. Thank you for the
support of your marines and your Marine Corps. And I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Berger can be found in
the Appendix on page 120.]
The Chairman. I thank all of our witnesses.
And I wanted to advise the members, we are going to be
called for a vote, a single vote, at about 10. So I am going to
urge members just to roll through, go over there and vote and
come back, and we will continue the hearing throughout that
process.
I recognize myself for questions.
Admiral Gilday, you did a stellar job of explaining why a
``Chinese resolution'' is not a good idea for Congress to pass
by not getting their business done.
General Berger, can you give me one shining example of what
a continuing resolution, AKA a ``China resolution'', would mean
to the Marine Corps?
General Berger. A month ago, Chairman, the Chinese
announced that they would increase their budget to 7.2 percent,
7.3 percent from the year before. Last year, it was 7.1. So
from my perspective, China is the strategic pacing challenge,
but I am a military guy, so they are the threat.
So over 2 years, they have increased their budget by 14.5
percent. We would go to zero. We cannot keep pace. It is almost
like right now, the NFL [National Football League] draft that
is on the news, it is almost like we would pull ourselves out
of the draft on purpose and everybody else would pick better
players and have a better roster next year.
We can't modernize, we can't take care of our people, just
like the CNO said, unless we get a budget on time. We are tying
our own hands.
The Chairman. And I appreciate the fact all of you
recognize that we have a real challenge in quality of life, and
we are going to all get after it together.
Secretary, give me an example of what you think a CR would
mean to your operations as a whole.
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, Chairman. First and foremost, I
will give one example on the capability of the Marine Corps. It
would have a huge impact on all our personnel, on the training.
My second enduring priority is about strengthening our
warfighting excellence across the board. There are numerous
examples where we would actually have to hold back on training
of our pilots, of our surface warfare officers, our submarines,
because we didn't have the necessary funds to move forward with
their training, and the investments that we also want to make
in the programs of their training to advance those technologies
as well too.
And then finally on the shipbuilding side, it would have a
negative effect on Columbia. It would have a negative effect on
just about every major platform that we have in the Department
of the Navy.
The Chairman. And I want everybody to know that if we get
into a conflict in INDOPACOM, these folks in front of us are
the tip of the spear. We cannot let them go without funding in
a timely manner.
General Berger, if we drop below the statutorily required
31 amphibious ships, what does that do to your ability to meet
operational requirements and project strength?
General Berger. A couple of things.
First, we would have gaps during the year when we would not
have an at-sea capability for the combatant commander when
something happened. We would not be deterring. We would not be
in a position to respond.
Here, places like Turkey or the last couple weeks in Sudan,
I feel like I let down the combatant commander because General
Langley needs options. He didn't have a sea-based option. That
is how we reinforce embassies. That is how we evacuate them.
That is how we deter.
So, one, the crisis part. Two, the deterrence part.
It opens up risks for the combatant commander. We have to
have 31 at a minimum, nothing less.
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary, how long is your strategic
pause for amphibs planning to be?
Secretary Del Toro. I hope it will be as short as it can
possibly be. There is unquestionably a need for heavy lift when
it comes to fulfilling the Marine Corps' responsibilities in
INDOPACOM and in crisis situations around the world. I support
the 31 amphibious requirement.
The question we have is that we have some LSD platforms,
for example, that cannot be made operationally available to
fulfill the requirements that we need in the ARG/MEU
combination. Therefore, we need to retire some of those LSDs
[landing ship docks] so we can use those moneys more wisely in
the investments of future LPDs [landing platform docks] in the
future.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, one of things that comes up frequently is
the survivability of Navy platforms. And I am interested in
actually all of your answers on this. But as we are building
aircraft carriers, destroyers, and all of that, there is a lot
that goes into survivability.
But can you reassure the committee that even in a China
fight, even in a fight against a peer competitor with
sophisticated missile technology, sophisticated jamming
technology, that we are moving towards a modernization plan
here that will enable our Navy to be survivable in that type of
fight and how that plays out?
And I guess the second piece of that: What is most
important for us to invest in to make sure that that is the
case?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, first let me state that we
obviously in the construction of our Naval ships and all our
platforms, for that matter, try to make them as survivable as
possible in every way.
I think if you look at the Ford aircraft carrier, for
example, and the testing that was done on Ford with the
explosions to test out its material ordnance proved that out,
that the investments that we made, technologically speaking, in
its hull, to strengthen its hull and all of the weapon systems
on the aircraft carrier itself, truly paid off. And the CNO can
talk about that more in detail. But that is a worthwhile
investment.
But we should also consider the fact that today, given the
long ranges of weapon systems of our adversaries, we are going
to operate in the high-threat area, in the weapons engagement
zone. That extends out to the West Coast of the United States
right now, for example.
And so we have to continue to develop weapon systems that
are going to be effective in masking themselves within that
weapon engagement zone so that their ISR capabilities can't
detect them.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Admiral Gilday.
Admiral Gilday. Sir, thanks for the question. I think it is
an important one.
I think maneuvers are really important. And the question
is, how do you enable that? I think you have to leverage all
domains, particularly--we can't talk about it in detail--but
cyber and space.
And so what the operational commander wants to do is to
blind the adversary so that we can put ourselves in a position
to maneuver in a position of advantage to deliver effects.
You spoke to modernization. I will talk about a few
investments that we are making that I think are worth doubling
down on: High-powered microwave and directed energy. We already
have lasers on board seven of our ships. We are slowly
increasing that and need to pick up the pace.
Electronic warfare systems. Advanced systems, in fact, in
my unfunded list, I have added on there for both destroyers and
for the carriers, because we know that that has an effect with
respect to deception of the adversary.
The extra power capacity that we are putting into frigates,
that we put into the Ford carrier, allows us to back-fit with
these modernized systems that will make us more survivable.
And the last thing I would add is that the potential here
with unmanned, particularly a medium unmanned vessel that you
put a power source on and then you can outfit it with a high-
power microwave or directed energy, that is the way of the
future for probably broader area survivability.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Just following up on the amphib question. So there are sort
of two possibilities here. Because the basic reason you are not
going to hit the 31 is you are--mothballing is the wrong word.
You are shutting down a couple of them before you build the new
ones.
Is it the case that you are doing that because you just
don't have enough money to keep them going and fund the things
going forward, or is it the case that those ships are no longer
worth the cost of keeping them going?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, let me give you a personal
example. I visited the Germantown, which is in San Diego, and
walked her decks. She has a crane. Her main crane on the
Germantown has not operated in 6 years. We have even had the
OEM [original equipment manufacturer] over to try to fix the
crane, and we can't get it to work properly.
She is the ship with the oldest, actually, wood deck, which
is also deteriorating. It would cost approximately half a
billion dollars to replace that deck, replace that crane. And
the best that you could do is actually, perhaps if you are
lucky, get one additional deployment out of her.
I would much rather use those funds on a brand new LPD that
could have capabilities that last out 20-plus years and be far
more effective and provide a greater return on investment for
the Congress and the American taxpayer.
Mr. Smith. That certainly makes sense. And then what we
have to do is to make sure that we provide you the funds to do
that and make sure that we can build that new one and that we
can deliver it on time, because that is where we really get
into trouble here on all this, is as programs move to the
right, as they say, and then it makes us fall further behind.
So thank you very much.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Wilson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you very much, Chairman Mike Rogers
and Ranking Member Adam Smith. It is great to see the
bipartisan support for our extraordinary persons who are here
testifying today.
And I appreciate so much your service to the country.
I was grateful to have 31 years of Army service. Three of
my sons joined the Army, and then one went astray and joined
the Navy. And I am just really grateful that he is currently an
orthopedic surgeon at Beaufort Naval Hospital gluing marines
back together. And so we really appreciate his service.
And then, of course, we appreciate Parris Island, which, of
course, is an extraordinary location just north of Hilton Head.
And so everybody needs to visit.
And with that, General Berger, we appreciate 17,000 marines
annually come through the Marine Corps Depot at Parris Island.
It has been so inspiring to me to see young people talking to
their family members, explaining at graduation I am the slug
and human debris you sent here. They don't recognize them. So
it is a positive transformation.
Additionally, I am really grateful for the activation of
Camp Blaz at Guam, the incredibly strategic territory of our
country. It indicates, of course, the forward posture we have
in the Indo-Pacific. And, again, the patriotic people of Guam
are so supportive as they work for peace through strength.
With that in mind, General, the Marine Corps has shifted
their focus toward forward persistent presence throughout the
Pacific to deter strategic attacks against America and our
allies.
And, of course, yesterday was extraordinary. We had the
opportunity to have an address to Congress by His Excellency,
Yoon Suk Yeol, the President of Korea. He cited the miracle of
the Han River, where his devastated nation had an income after
the Korean War of $67, and now it is over $30,000 per capita.
And so how incredible, due to free market democracy and working
with the United States.
With that in mind, how are we, General, being prepared in
the Indo-Pacific?
General Berger. I think, as you would expect, the role of
the Marine Corps and the Navy, as an expeditionary force
forward, creates the depth that Admiral Aquilino needs.
So, essentially, you want your marines forward persistently
24/7 every day of the week. To do that, you have to have the
amphibious ships and the training and the people and all to
make that possible. And they are integrated into a whole
combined force.
Guam is the forward-most hub, as you said, critical to
project power forward from. I think for the next 10 or 15 years
you are going to see that grow in strategic importance to the
U.S. and the importance to, as Admiral Aquilino says, to defend
it.
I would say for us, we have to work hard on the ability to
distribute, which the CNO talks about all the time, and then
the ability to sustain that force logistically, because we have
protected lines for decades. Now it is going to be contested.
So we have work to do, but I think the role of your Marine
Corps--I know the role of your Marine Corps is forward all the
time persistently.
Mr. Wilson. Well, again, I appreciate so much. You are
really giving opportunity to young people to serve. And I was
grateful my late father-in-law was one of you. My late brother-
in-law was one of you. So we appreciate Marines.
And, Mr. Secretary, the ability of the United States to
maintain U.S. shipbuilding and repair is critical. And
geopolitical issues have demonstrated how important it is.
What are your industry concerns about ensuring the rapid
production and replenishment of the U.S. Navy?
Secretary Del Toro. There are multiple concerns,
Congressman. It starts with the labor force. We need a really
strong blue collar labor force in this country to actually
support our shipbuilding interests across shipyards around the
country.
We obviously don't have enough of them. We have shut down
too many in past years. But we got to rebuild those.
So another concern I have is working with smaller
shipyards, for example, so that they can actually come on board
and do Department of Defense work and work as subcontractors to
the larger shipyards so that we can increase productivity. So
labor force across all shipyards, getting smaller shipyards to
work with larger shipyards.
The case in Austal, for example, that is now building steel
to support our Columbia-class program at Electric Boat is a
perfect example of that. I believe Austal is looking at hiring
close to a thousand more people over the course of the next
year.
So we need more labor and we need more legal immigration.
We need more work visa programs that can bring the types of
folks to this country that allow us to work in the shipyards.
That is my primary concern. Of course, I meet constantly
with the CEOs [chief executive officers] of all the shipyards
to understand how well they are moving with regards to their
production rates. I believe on the destroyer side, we are
getting a lot better now, to the point where we can build 1.8--
--
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 167.]
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Connecticut,
Mr. Courtney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to join my colleagues again in congratulating
Admiral Gilday and General Berger for your amazing service.
I think it is worth noting that during your tenure you had
to deal with a global pandemic, but the mission of your
departments didn't come to an end or pause, and you were able
to balance all the operational challenges and public health
challenges so successfully. And I think that certainly should
go down in the annals as sort of bonus points in terms of your
service.
You also served at a time in the last administration where
there were five Secretaries of the Navy or Acting Secretaries
of the Navy, which is a record, which hopefully this country
will never experience again in terms of the instability of
civilian control. And, again, I want to thank both of you for
really being pillars of stability during that time period.
Secretary Del Toro and Admiral Gilday, again, we had the
honor of being at Navy Base Point Loma back in March when the
AUKUS announcement was rolled out, the Optimal Pathway, three
heads of government, three Navies together, with the USS
Missouri in the backdrop, really announcing what I think David
Ignatius called the most significant security agreement in
decades, which is, again, to give our great ally Australia the
undersea capability to again be part of an effort to deter in
the Indo-Pacific region.
Admiral Gilday, right after that announcement, the Minister
for Defence Industry for Australia, Pat Conroy, announced that
Australia will be investing $3 billion directly into the U.S.
industrial base. I mean, this is Australia investment into the
industrial base of the United States, which is, again,
unprecedented and certainly shows the level of commitment of
that nation to this undertaking.
You and I were at the shipyard about a week and a half ago
talking about the fact that integrating the industrial bases,
which is key to successful execution of AUKUS, is going to
require some work by Congress in terms of making sure that the
restrictions in terms of foreign nationals being able to be
even in the shipyards or also have access to different points.
And we have to fix that in Congress.
So I wonder if you can just sort of talk about, again, how
that is really so instrumental and required for this alliance
to work.
Admiral Gilday. Sir, I think when I look across the three
nations involved in AUKUS, particularly Australia and the
United States, I think about manpower as the biggest challenge
that we all have.
And I think with respect to getting the Australian experts
into our shipyards, into our submarines without any
restrictions, this is a fellow Five Eye nation that we trust
with our most sensitive intelligence, and they trust us with
theirs.
I think that we need to look at where the constraints are
and I think bring those to the right level. That might be the
Congress. It might be the White House. But to break those down
so that we can truly make this Optimal Path a reality.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you.
And another sort of issue that causes I guess some
heartburn--with good intention--is that some people, in terms
of the acquisition of three Virginias and possibly up to five,
it may seem like a detraction or a diminishment in a zero-sum
game in terms of our own undersea fleet.
Can you talk about, again, the value of that type of
transfer, which would be paid for, in terms of, again, our own
undersea fleet and our own sort of strategic position?
Admiral Gilday. The first thing, based on our--well,
informed by our visit just a week ago up to Groton and Electric
Boat, I have a high degree of confidence that industry is
responding. They understand that they need to hit the
accelerator with respect to their production rates.
And whether it is Newport News Shipbuilding down in
Virginia or up in Electric Boat in Connecticut, I think they
both have that clear message.
I do think that the forward deployment of submarines as a
first step in Australia is a game-changer. And so the chairman
in his opening comments mentioned deterrence, and deterrence is
all about capability and intent. You bring it up to an
exponential level when you leverage allies and partners in
PRC's [People's Republic of China] backyard with the best
capability in the world operating it in and around China.
So I think there is so much there with respect to
potential, not just for the United States but for all the
nations that intend to sail and use the maritime commons around
the PRC.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Wittman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you so much for joining us.
General Berger, Admiral Gilday, thank you also. And thank
you both for your service to our Nation. What an incredible
impact you have had.
This will probably be the last time that you testify before
us in your current positions, but we look forward to continued
dialogue in the years to come. And, again, thank you.
Secretary Del Toro, I want to begin with the scenario that
we have before us, the request from the administration on
building nine ships, retiring 11 ships; from last year's
request, building eight ships, retiring 24 ships. The 30-year
shipbuilding plan that gives a choice, where the Code says 355
ships.
All of these things to me are very frustrating. And, Mr.
Secretary, I am not a mathematician, but I do not know any laws
of math that allow you to do addition by subtraction.
Here we are today, we are taking five cruisers out of the
weapons inventory. And I say weapons inventory because each of
them have 120 VLS [vertical launching system] tubes. So we are
talking 600 VLS tubes. There is no replacement between now and
2027, or, for that matter, even in the near term beyond.
We see we have a 31-ship floor now in the Code for amphibs.
Now we are going to retire three LSDs--early, by the way.
With the Navy shrinking and shipbuilding capacity, as you
spoke about, in a crisis mode, we see ourselves at a tipping
point in the history of this Nation's Navy-Marine Corps team.
And I appreciate the conversations that we have had. I look
forward to working with you. I do think there are things that
we can do together that help us get on the plus side of where
our Navy needs to be. And we can talk about our ship
capabilities, but capacity is, by itself, critically important.
Quantity has a quality all its own.
I would love for you to share with us what your plans are
going forward, to make sure we get both sides of the equation
right, to make sure we hit the gas pedal on the build side, but
also make sure we do everything we can to make sure that the
ships we have get to their expected service lives. We cannot
afford anything less.
And the maintenance side is also critical. And, Admiral
Gilday, I appreciate you meeting with me at some of the
maintenance yards. And I take your commitment too in the
maintenance side being an all-hands-on-deck call. Thank you for
doing that.
Mr. Secretary, I would love to get your perspective on
that.
Secretary Del Toro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
your leadership on this position. And I do very much look
forward to continuing to work with you very collaboratively on
solutions that are going to get us to a better place.
At any given time, the three of us are always concerned
about readiness, modernization, and capacity, without question.
We don't want a hollow force. We have put an enormous amount of
investments in readiness.
Over the course of the last 10 years, this Congress,
previous Congresses, and previous administrations have all been
focused on modernizing our Navy, because we have essentially
inherited John Lehman's Navy.
And the fact is that ships get old. And once they reach a
certain point, even if they are below their ESLs [expected
service lives] but they are not in the correct material
condition to be able to continue to operate those ships, we
cannot deploy those VLS cells, for example, if they are stuck
in a maintenance pier and they can't be fired from ashore.
So the real key to success is trying to get them
operationally available to the fleet to fulfill the missions
that they have to fulfill.
So out of those five cruisers, for example, there is
nothing more that I would love to do is to invest resources
into three of those to actually extend them by one or two
deployments. And I think that is achievable, as you and I have
spoken about in the past.
In the case of both the Vicksburg and the Cowpens, those
ships will never see another deployment regardless of how much
money we put into them.
So I think it is a far better strategy to allocate the
moneys that are dedicated to those ships and apply them to,
say, the LSDs, for example, so that we can get the Tortuga out
of its maintenance availability and operational again to
support the Commandant.
And I think those are the types of solutions that we could
work together on in the future in this year's budget and next
year's budget to get to a better place.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you.
General Berger, thank you so much for your vision, for
looking in the future, for taking some bold moves to make sure
the Marine Corps is in the right place. Force Design 2030
pushes those issues, asks our Marine Corps to experiment to
look at what the path is forward.
Can you tell us, from your perspective, tell us the lessons
learned, both the things you have learned that didn't work or
the things that you are finding do work, and especially as we
relate to these challenges in the Indo-Pacific?
General Berger. First of all, I think if I had to do it all
over again, I probably would have spoken more earlier on about
the things in the Marine Corps that would not change, which is
most of the Marine Corps.
This is an evolution, and we have modernized the Marine
Corps several times in our history when we sensed if we don't
we will fall behind.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Garamendi, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My good fortune was my tenure as chairman of the Readiness
Committee coincided with the leadership that General Berger and
Admiral Gilday had. I was very fortunate. We dealt with
shipyards. We dealt with ship maintenance, training, housing,
safety, depots, and on and on.
I thank you, gentlemen, for being there all the time on all
of these issues. There is much to be said. I have had the good
fortune of working with you.
I have also had the good fortune of working with Ms.
Sherrill, who I will now yield the balance of my time to.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi.
Gentlemen--and with this Department, it is always
gentlemen--I have spent most of my life dreaming of being a
Naval aviator, training to be a Naval aviator, flying in the
Navy, or proud of my service as a Naval aviator. And this year
marks the 50th anniversary of women in Naval aviation. And
today is the 30th anniversary of Secretary Aspin's order that
allowed women into combat aviation.
So imagine how thrilled I was when I was a second-class
midshipman or a junior at the Naval Academy to hear that order
to know that in really the horrible aftermath of Tailhook and
with the lifting of combat restrictions I would be headed to
Pensacola to earn my wings in a new, more fair era.
Sadly, we know that that hope has not become a reality. In
fact, the stories I am now hearing out of Pensacola could just
as easily have been stories coming out of the Tailhook
Conference in Vegas in 1992. Women's flight suit zippers being
pulled down. Calls of ``are you headed to your gynecologist
appointment'' in the halls. Rides home being offered by flight
instructors, only to have those women taken to that
instructor's house and forcibly kissed before she escapes.
But you know the worst part about it and the part that
makes me see red and the part that truly speaks of the dearth
of leadership in the Department of Navy and in our Marine Corps
is when that woman, those women step forward to report these
things they are shut down. Punitive measures are being taken
against the women that report it, and their careers are ended;
are being put in jeopardy.
So is this the price that women are expected to pay to
serve our Nation in our Marine Corps? Is the message after a
shoddy command investigation that failed to even interview
witnesses that the price of entering into aviation is hazing,
harassment, and sexual assault?
It should really come as no surprise today that we have a
recruitment and retention disaster when it comes to women in
Naval aviation. There is a significant gap between the number
of women aviators and the number you would expect to see after
three decades.
And the problem is particularly acute in the Marine Corps.
2021 statistics show that women made up just 9 percent of our
United States Marine Corps, by far the lowest among the
services.
And I think it is safe to say that the USMC [United States
Marine Corps] has a problem recruiting and retaining women. I
think it is also safe to say that, with a 480-person tactical
pilot shortfall, the USMC has a problem recruiting and
retaining pilots.
And the statistics just get worse. Zero four-star female
general officers in the history of the Corps. Less than 15
female general officers in the Corps ever.
And I am sure you are aware there are significant problems
with sexual harassment, sexual assault retaliation, and a toxic
workplace climate in flight school in Pensacola, the training
environment that sets the norms of conduct for all the rest of
our Navy and Marine Corps fleet squadrons.
It was recently brought to my attention that three Active
Duty currently serving female USMC aviators in training have
been retaliated against for reporting their military sexual
trauma, all three in the last 2 years, and all three instigated
or condoned by Navy and Marine Corps instructors. All three
initially faced administrative separation not just from
aviation, but from the Marine Corps.
Now, after an overturned investigation, one has to restart
an entire flight syllabus after two years in limbo.
This should really come as no surprise because it is, in
fact, well understood at NAS [Naval Air Station] Pensacola,
where 81 percent of respondents strongly agreed or agreed with
the statement, quote, ``In my unit, military members/employees
who file a sexual harassment complaint would be blamed for
causing problems.'' Eighty-one percent know that to be the
case.
So after almost 2 years of pain with investigations dogged
with inconsistent testimony and a shoddy investigation, these
young women are now facing separation for standing up to their
sexual harassers. And this is just three women who have been
brave enough to share their stories. I am sure there are many
more who have been silenced or unable to come forward.
So, gentlemen, my time is about to expire. I am sure we
will continue to discuss this. I sincerely hope we have a
better command investigation coming. And I look forward to
hearing your responses to the questions I will submit for the
record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Gallagher, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallagher. Last week in this room, the Indo-Pacific
commander, Admiral Aquilino, told me that he was not concerned
about the number of Long-Range Precision Fires prepositioned in
the region.
Just for the sake of congressional clarity, Secretary Del
Toro, do you think we have sufficient stockpiles of Long-Range
Precision Fires west of the International Date Line?
Secretary Del Toro. No, we do not. We need more. And I am
concerned about the fixed Long-Range Precision Fires that PRC
has and is continuing to build in the region. And I am
confident that Admiral Aquilino is as well too.
Mr. Gallagher. I think we have a huge opportunity to fix
this and start to rebuild our stockpiles. I hear you are less
than 2 years away from having P-8s ready for LRASM [long range
anti-ship missile], for example.
But where are we with the missiles? What is the planned buy
rate? What has been our average over the last 5 years? And how
do we get the unit cost, not just for LRASM but for SM-6 and
Maritime Strike Tomahawk, down.
Secretary Del Toro. So just in last year's--in this year's
Presidential budget, 2024, we have increased the amount of
funding by 50 percent, putting in $250 million for 103 antiship
missiles, Naval strike missiles themselves, which are needed
across both the Marine Corps and the Navy.
We are putting in $1.6 billion for the Standard Missile 6,
125 of them; the Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile, $1.2
billion for 131 missiles; in the case of the LRASM, $1 billion
for 118.
Mr. Gallagher. What does that buy us, though? What is our
target per year?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, what it buys us actually is it
sends a very strong signal to industry as well too that they
have to get their production rates up so that we can actually
build these missiles faster.
Mr. Gallagher. I think, at least for me, I think we need
like a target. I think we have averaged about 40 a year over
the last 5 years. There are claims that we can get that above
200. I think we should test those claims.
But as for getting there and getting the unit cost down, to
me the solution is obvious. We have multiyear authority. We
need multiyear appropriation.
Admiral Gilday, it looked like you are chomping at the bit.
Admiral Gilday. So, as the Secretary is mentioning, we have
four multiyear contracts in this--proposed in this budget:
Naval Standard Missile with the Marine Corps; SM-6 with the
Marine Corps; LRASM and AMRAAM [advanced medium range air-to-
air missile] with the Air Force.
Sir, I will get back to you on precise numbers, but what we
are trying to do is absolutely maximize the production output
of those factories, and we did it last year.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 167.]
And in last year, the UPL that I submitted essentially was
for extra weapons to maximize their production rate this year.
That is what we were trying to do.
In terms of savings for those four categories I talked
about, 15 percent savings doing a bundle buy.
Mr. Gallagher. Well, if we can't get the appropriation that
we need, a multiyear appropriation, I just would suggest--I
know we got a little bit, but it is well below the authorized
number.
I would suggest we put the relevant Members of Congress on
your airplane, take them down to Troy, Alabama, take them to
Huntsville, take them wherever they need to go to see. I mean,
these companies should not be coming to us saying, ``Hey, we
can do more.'' We should be testing the limits of what is
possible.
And if we can't do it now, in light of what is happening in
Ukraine, we are never going to do it. You have to assume you
are fighting with what is already in theater, just given the
geography of the Indo-Pacific. And so now is the time. It is
almost as if we need a war footing now when it comes to
critical munitions in order to avoid the war. And that is what
we want to partner with you all on.
In the time that remains, when can we expect to see a
Maritime Strike Tomahawk on surface ships? And what is your
planned buy rate for that? I don't know if that is Admiral
Gilday.
Admiral Gilday. Sir, I don't have the planned buy rate at
my fingertips. I don't want to give you the exact date. I would
say very soon Maritime Strike Tomahawk in terms of integrating
that capability.
Mr. Gallagher. Will we have unmanned surface vessels with
launch tubes ready this decade?
Admiral Gilday. Yes, we will.
Mr. Gallagher. And then how do we--you can elaborate.
Admiral Gilday. So right now, we will begin procuring our
first large unmanned vessels in 2025. We have five, we are
looking at five in the FYDP [Future Years Defense Program]. The
intent is to outfit those with missile tubes. It will
essentially give you a missile arsenal with missiles with range
and speed.
Mr. Gallagher. And then my colleagues mentioned our
inability to even go in the right direction towards the goal of
a 355-ship Navy. In order to do that, you got to build more
frigates. I know I am a homer on this one. But, Admiral Gilday,
give me your assessment of----
Admiral Gilday. So right now, sir, we only have seven
shipyards. And so just a touch of context. For 20 years, the
Navy hasn't been a priority, for obvious reasons, for the
ground wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. We have turned the tide
now. Fifty-seven ships in construction, another 77 on contract.
Again, we are trying to maximize the output of those
facilities.
I do think we are on a path with frigates of two a year up
in Wisconsin and to open a second yard with hopefully two a
year.
Mr. Gallagher. So eventually four a year.
Admiral Gilday. Four a year.
Mr. Gallagher. And my time has expired.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
I would inform members that we have been called to the
floor to vote. We have only one vote, so I would urge you to
move over. We are going to keep the hearing rolling. If you
have a question, you need to get up there and vote and get
back.
With that, I recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Norcross, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. Appreciate it.
And to the witnesses for being here, particularly Admiral
Gilday and General Berger, for your service. I have really
appreciated working with you over the years.
General Berger, I want to talk about the Humvees. We have
seen the reports on the news of the turnovers and the loss of
life. And the Army is very much getting at using the new
technology to avoid those rollovers. I think the Marines have
somewhere around 17,000 Humvees.
Two-part question: How many of those would be eligible for
the upgrade? And why haven't we started to upgrade those to
avoid what we have seen, the reality of young men and women
being killed?
General Berger. Thanks, Congressman.
About 2,000 of our Humvees would be the ones you are
speaking of that we could upgrade. Though, in weighing the
benefit of should we put the money into the Humvees to upgrade
them, as old as they are, or should we buy new JLTVs [Joint
Light Tactical Vehicles], it was an easy decision for us. So we
are putting the money, instead of investing into the old
Humvees--we are going to retire them and buy new, field new
JLTVs. They are built from the ground up safer.
Mr. Norcross. No question about it, and I agree with you.
So does that mean those 2,000 will not be used until the new
ones come on?
General Berger. They will be fielded--they are still in the
field right now, but they will be retired as we bring on the
JLTVs.
Mr. Norcross. So, I understand that. They will cross at a
point that we can do it on some of those--because it will be
years. And if they are actively being used for the small--and
it is relatively small--investment, we believe it is absolutely
worth it, or take them out. Because we have seen those young
men and women being killed. And I urge you to look at that a
little bit deeper.
Admiral Gilday, we have heard the challenges we have in our
industrial base. And that goes across the spectrum, from
materials, critical materials, especially in munitions, but
there are many parts that go into that. But we talk also about
making sure that we have the required number of ships,
submarines.
We have heard the Secretary talk about labor being the
number-one issue in supply chain. And I agree with that,
because, quite frankly, it takes the longest to build. What is
the Navy's plan to address that labor shortage, those blue-
collars that the Secretary talked about?
Admiral Gilday. Sir, in this decade, we have increased the
manning at our public shipyards by 10,000 people, most of that
in the trades.
Industry is working to do the same thing. Representative
Courtney and I, as you mentioned, we were just up in
Connecticut, where they are looking to hire 4,000 this year
based on the workload that they have. I was just up in Bath,
Maine. They are looking at hiring--I was in Bath earlier this
week--another 1,000 at Bath Iron Works.
The money that the United States Government is putting into
the industrial base in terms of workforce development, I think,
is absolutely critical, and I would urge the Congress to
continue to make those investments. Mr. Courtney talked about
the fact that the Australians are helping us invest in that
very thing.
Mr. Norcross. Mr. Weber and I were down in Australia last
year talking about the upcoming agreements, and their number-
one issue is labor also.
It is imperative--when I say ``us,'' the parents of
America--to make sure that we explain to our children that
going to work with your hands and your head is just as
important as getting a Ph.D. in physics. We need all of them.
And the dignity of having a job and working for your country is
paramount.
So, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. [Presiding.] The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Admiral Gilday, the 30-year shipbuilding plan provided
Congress with three options. Although all three of these have
the same profile in the next 5 years, each is slightly
different starting in 2029 and out.
I don't believe that having three options in a report to
Congress is helpful to either Congress or to the industry. What
is your best military advice to this Congress on which of these
options are required to allow you to meet the missions being
placed on the Navy now and in the future?
Because, to me, this is just like answering a question with
a question or repeating back to me what I have already told
you. We need more finality in that.
And before you answer, I just want to recognize both the
outstanding military spouses that are here in support of you.
It is a family business, and we cannot do it--they serve just
as much as those in uniform.
And thank you all for your service.
Admiral Gilday. Yes, sir. Thanks for those comments.
My best military advice would be alternative number three:
Alternative number three is not limited by funding; it is only
limited by the capacity of the defense industrial base, which I
think, over time, only increases with respect to efficiencies
and their ability to produce more ships.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Admiral.
Mr. Secretary, the CNO and the Commandant of the Marine
Corps both agree that the amphibious ship requirement is 31
ships, as codified into law. I think we can all agree on the
importance of having these strategic platforms in the
inventory.
Although the 30-year shipbuilding plan does not outline any
procurement of LPDs, you have previously testified that you
will revisit this in the 2025 budget submission. Can you tell
me what the impact will be to the industrial base if we do not
fund the LPD either this year or next year in the strategic
policy that we are talking about that I don't think will
happen?
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, Mr. Chairman. It is hard to
completely hypothetically predict what the impact will be, but,
at a minimum, you could expect losses of jobs in the realm of
1,500 to 2,000, for example, in one particular shipyard.
So it is a negative impact, but, more importantly, I think
it is important to provide consistency of messaging in terms of
being able to do these multi-ship procurements.
It is the unique way for the American taxpayer to save
money as well, too. So, if we can get to a place where we are
doing a multi-ship, multiyear procurement for three to five
additional ships, it does save money, and it is a proven way to
save money. We have seen it on Constellation-class frigates, we
have seen it on destroyers, we have seen it on numerous other
platforms.
Mr. Kelly. Absolutely.
And I just want to point out, it is not just the loss of
jobs; it is the loss of that workforce that we are saying we
don't have, and then we are doing away with the workforce,
making their skills atrophy, and then coming back a year later
to build this same thing and losing that skill, which costs us
more and takes longer.
Admiral Gilday, with the planned ship decommissioning this
year, is the Navy able to maintain appropriate amphibious
readiness to meet the Title 10 requirement of 31 operational
amphibious warships?
And when you are considering readiness, how do you define
an amphibious warship as ready? And after you have answered,
General Berger, I want your definition on readiness as well.
Admiral Gilday. Sir, we have different stages of readiness,
all the way from 1 to 4.
And so readiness levels 1 and 2 are our highest, and those
are the ships that are considered ready to deploy. So they are
manned, they are trained, they are equipped. They are certified
for combat operations. We do that with our teammates in the
Marine Corps, together, in terms of the certification exercise.
And then we push them out the door.
You know, with respect to numbers, no, I am not satisfied
with where we are with respect to maintenance and readiness of
the force. It does need to improve. That is why readiness
remains our top priority, and maintenance--the proposed funding
is at 100 percent.
Mr. Kelly. And, General Berger, I am going to add a little
to your--so, Commandant, you recently stated there has been a
20-percent decline in Marines serving aboard ships since 2018,
which you attribute to a lack of amphibious ships availability.
Has amphibious ship readiness impacted the Marine Corps'
ability to contribute forces across the world? As well as your
definition, with the remainder of my time.
General Berger. Sir, it has. Concisely, yes, it has
affected--the readiness and availability has affected our
availability to be on the water to respond, absolutely, yes.
As far as the definition, we share the same definition
because we are a naval force. A ready vessel is one that is
manned, trained, equipped, material conditions ready to go, and
the Marines are trained aboard that ship, because it operates
as a system. That is an available ship.
Mr. Kelly. And in my final comment in my last 20 seconds, I
just want to say, when we talk about decommissioning ships,
sometimes we get the product that we try to do. If we say
something is going to be broke the entire time and make sure
that it is broke, it is going to be just as broke. But we have
to get the ships--when they are told to be seaworthy, we have
to get them to sea, regardless of our personal view on whether
it should or not.
And I yield back.
I now recognize my friend, Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Berger, you have outlined an ambitious plan in
Force Design 2030. However, new threats are emerging each day
that won't wait until 2030. We need to modernize and
potentially deter adversaries.
As we have seen in Russia's continued war of aggression
against Ukraine and increasingly provocative behavior from the
Chinese Communist Party toward Taiwan, how do you balance
immediate needs and long-term planning? And how are you
ensuring that we have a modern and lethal force to meet the
immense challenges of today?
General Berger. I thank the Congressman.
First, I take probably a little bit different view on an
either/or decision--in other words, you can either modernize or
you can have a ready force. We are, both of us--all three of us
are responsible to do both, as you accurately point out.
We have to be ready today. The Marine Corps is America's
crisis response force by statute. So that is not--that is not
an option. That is not something I can not do. We are ready,
very ready.
But if we stay stagnant, if we don't change, if we don't
stay in front of the threat, then 4 or 5, 6 years from now, if
China, if Russia continues on the trajectory they are on, they
will have advantages we can't tolerate.
So we have to do both. And I am very comfortable that we
are there, because the forces that are deploying right now,
Congressman, aboard ship and Unit Deployment Program, they are
very ready with what they have right now. But they are also
leaning into the future, testing new concepts, testing new
systems. They sense that if they don't move now we will be
behind, and that is not acceptable.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, General.
Admiral Gilday, your testimony highlights the incredible
speed with which the CCP has increased its Navy, tripling in
size in only two decades. This dynamic makes it all the more
important that we maintain the technological and intellectual
edge.
How is the Navy ensuring that we maintain this advantage?
And are there any particular gaps where we need to focus more
intention? And how is the Navy prioritizing those areas?
Admiral Gilday. Sir, thanks for the question.
Just briefly, in this budget proposal in front of Congress,
in the undersea, we are investing in an upgrade to our
Virginia-class submarines, the Block V's, 28 additional missile
tubes. We are increasing the capability of our torpedoes,
including our heavy-weight torpedoes. We are deploying unmanned
vessels, unmanned robotics, out of torpedo tubes of our
submarines. We are investing in advanced electronic warfare
systems on our surface ships. We are investing in Standard
Missile Six. We are putting hypersonics on the Zumwalt-class
destroyers. And we are investing in Maritime Strike Tomahawk.
For aviation, F-35s with a fifth-generation capability. Our
fourth-generation F-18 Super Hornets, we are right now taking
them through midlife modernization and bringing them from 6,000
to 10,000 hours with an advanced combat system. We are
investing in weapons with range and speed like LRASM. We are
putting that weapon on P-8s. We are investing in MQ-25, the
drone that will be able to do refueling and more.
And so those are the modernization efforts that we have
ongoing, not to keep pace with China but to stay in front of
China, with a fleet 70 percent of which you will have in the
water a decade from now.
Mr. Gallego. And, Admiral, the goal is obviously
deterrence, and that is obviously what we are always trying to
do here. But is there a level of technology that is below what
we have right now that is also--that we could create denial?
You know, for example, are there things currently in our armory
that we could be using or retrofitting right now to help, you
know, deny China's invasion of Taiwan?
And this could also go to Secretary Del Toro.
Because, at the end of the day, if we stop China from
invading Taiwan, it is over. And that doesn't necessarily mean
we need the most sophisticated weaponry to do that; we just
need the weaponry that can do the job.
Is there something that we have in our armory right now
that we should stock up on more that would actually do that?
Admiral Gilday. So one of our requests is for additional
mines.
But, also, our first large undersea vessel is in the water
right now off the coast of California in testing. That testing
is going fairly well. There will be five more additional UUVs
that follow that one.
That platform has a clandestine mine-laying capability, and
that will be a game-changer for us, to your point----
Mr. Gallego. Yeah.
Admiral Gilday. --about making an investment in something
that will change the----
Mr. Gallego. Secretary Del Toro.
Secretary Del Toro. Just adding very quickly, Congressman,
I think the investment that we make in counter-5 ISR as well,
too, Operation Overmatch, which we can't talk about publicly,
but that has significant impact on their ability to do what
they wish to do on day one.
Mr. Gallego. Excellent. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
We thank all three of you for being here. I just had to run
and vote and come back, so I will catch my breath here real
fast. But we thank you for your leadership.
My first question is to Admiral Gilday.
I work on a quality-of-life panel here. We are going to
start up. It is a subcommittee that is going to start in June.
We are focused on a lot of different areas to try and improve
the quality of life.
One of the things I hear about the Navy is that a
significant number of our junior sailors who are not married
have to stay on the ships when they are in port. And that is
even in the midst of, like, maintenance and the loud noises
that are going on just to repair a ship to get it ready to go
back out to fleet. And the quality of life for those sailors
are not good.
First of all, what is your take on that? Am I hearing this
correct? Two, do we need to be investing in more barracks at
our ports?
Admiral Gilday. To your last question, we are, with respect
to barracks, significantly across the FYDP.
If I could give the example of San Diego right now, we have
three carriers in port. And so E-1 to E-3s, by law, are not
allowed to have Basic Allowance for Housing if they are on sea
duty. So they have to stay on the ship unless that ship is in
maintenance.
What we have done with those three ships is, to the maximum
extent possible, we have put those sailors in the barracks. To
ease the strain, we have taken E-4s that have less than 4 years
of service and we have the ability to waive the requirement--
or, to waive the restriction for BAH [basic housing allowance]
and to actually allow them to get a housing allowance to get
them off the ship.
So, based on the constraints that we have in the law and
the available housing, we are trying to do the best we can to
get people ashore.
We have cut a deal with landlords in San Diego, as an
example--and we are working this in other places--where they
are giving our sailors below-market-price deals on their
properties. We guarantee a steady throughput, so they won't be
vacant. And they also waive the security deposit.
So we are trying to get at that very piece, with respect to
quality of life.
Mr. Bacon. Just to follow up, I hear, like, in our
facilities in Japan that it is some of the worst conditions for
a lot of our sailors. Are you hearing the same thing?
Admiral Gilday. Sir, I would say that--and the Commandant
spoke about this in his opening comments--it is an area that we
have not put sufficient focus on for the last several years.
And that is why you see significant increases in both our
MILCON [military construction] and our restoration and
modernization budgets, and it is reflected in our unfunded list
as well. It is among the top priorities of the Secretary.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Admiral.
Secretary Del Toro, you know, we have had a requirement for
355 ships for a while, but we are under 300, and that number is
going down, the way I understand it.
Do we have the right number, at 355? Should we be
rethinking our strategy? It seems to me the strategy is right,
but we are not funding or building towards that goal.
Secretary Del Toro. So, Congressman, I do believe 355 is
the right number. As you know, there is a battle force
strategic assessment and requirements review going on right now
that will be completed by June. I don't want to presume what
the outcome of that will be, but I suspect it won't probably
change much from the 355-ship number. And also, again, 150
unmanned ships as well, too, which is really important for the
future.
The question is, modernizing the fleet now, getting rid of
those ships that don't have the greatest capability for us to
be able to deter against China and other adversaries around the
world, so we can use those resources more intelligently and
more valuably in the future to get even more ships for the
future.
Mr. Bacon. The image I am getting--and not just for the
Navy; I see it in all of our services right now--we know we
have to grow for the future, but we are all shrinking. And yet
we know this vulnerability with China is imminent.
And so it is--I just feel like, as the Armed Services
Committee, I just think we need to sit back and just make sure
we are funding you appropriately so we are not falling
backwards.
But, General Berger, I just have just 1 minute. If I could
ask you, what is your number-one quality-of-life issue that we
can help you out with in the Marines?
General Berger. Overseas, I would say you are probably
hearing the same thing as me: medical care. After that, family
housing. After that, child development centers.
Here in CONUS [the continental United States], more family
housing and medical care and child development centers.
All three of those are a pretty common refrain here in the
U.S. and overseas, both. But medical care, huge right now.
Mr. Bacon. Well, we appreciate those inputs.
Thank you to all three. I look forward to tackling all
these issues on the panel. Thank you.
I yield.
Mr. Kelly. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the Representative from Hawaii, Ms. Tokuda.
Ms. Tokuda. Tokuda. Thank you, sir.
All right, Mr. Secretary, I definitely appreciate your
affirmation and further commitment to Red Hill. I think we both
agree this is something that will be a continuing earning in
process--earning back trust every single day.
On that note, there has been some concern among community
members in Hawaii that the Navy's consideration of reuse
options of Red Hill could pave the way for future fuel-related
uses, even after the Joint Task Force Red Hill completes its
defueling efforts.
Recently, Assistant Secretary Berger stated that the Navy
will not pursue any beneficial reuse options that would contain
potential contaminants.
Can we confirm and commit to this committee and the people
of Hawaii that there is no future after defueling in which Red
Hill will ever again be used for fuel-related options?
Secretary Del Toro. For as long as I am Secretary, for as
long as this administration is in power, Madam Congresswoman, I
can tell you that there is absolutely zero intent to put fuels
back into Red Hill.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you. I definitely appreciate that,
Secretary.
Red Hill was designed for fuel storage, though. We know it
was definitely an engineering marvel and feat back in the
1940s. So it retains all those properties necessary for fuel-
related operations, you know. And while we have your
affirmation that would never take place on your watch, there
still is a lot of anxiety that, even after defueling closure,
and, yes, for the time being, no potential fuel-related
operations, it is still basically one degree away from
potential fuel storage over our aquifer going ahead into the
future.
And I know right now outreach efforts are underway to
engage community and other individuals in the future of this
facility and looking at different options, but has the Navy
considered physical modifications to Red Hill that it could
take as part of the closure process to completely eliminate the
possibility that it could be used for fuel-related uses going
forward?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, the intent is not to continue to
maintain Red Hill in the future, once the fuel is out of there,
in a manner which actually would still allow it to hold fuel in
the tanks themselves. So, over the course of time, those tanks
would deteriorate and you wouldn't be able to put fuel into
them in any effective manner.
And so, again, I overemphasize the fact that, on the part
of the Department of the Navy and Department of Defense, there
is absolutely zero intent to put fuel back into Red Hill.
Ms. Tokuda. Okay. And then I definitely would just reaffirm
that part of that earning trust back, one action, one day,
every day, is to continue to reinforce that message and show
through actions that we will never again have fuel hanging over
our aquifers and impairing the drinking water of the people of
Hawaii and our military servicemen and -women.
Switching subjects a little bit, Joint Base Pearl Harbor-
Hickam Wastewater Treatment Plant has, as we both know,
continued to spill and discharge untreated or partially treated
wastewater for many, many years now. Most recently, on March 7,
approximately 14,000 gallons of partially treated wastewater
was released into our State waters.
There is a long trail of problems with the wastewater
treatment plant at Pearl. And after the State imposed a fine on
the Navy last year, it sounds like these problems are being
taken seriously through corrective actions, although details
are hard to come by.
You know, again, Mr. Secretary, looking at that earning of
trust and looking at the actions being taken, what is the Navy
doing to address the unacceptable state of Pearl Harbor's
wastewater treatment plants and the impact that it has had on
our State waters?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, Congresswoman, thank you for your
support of this incredibly important issue, because it does
have a negative impact on the health and welfare of the people
of Hawaii, our servicemembers, and all other tourists that come
to Hawaii, obviously. So it is very important to us.
When I came in as Secretary of the Navy, probably less than
1 percent of the budget was dedicated to infrastructure. Since
I have been Secretary, those numbers have gone up
significantly, actually. And I am committed, actually, to a 30-
year infrastructure plan that takes a look at the worst across
the entire Department of the Navy, both in the Marine Corps and
the Navy, to figure out exactly where it is that we need to
start making greater investments in infrastructure today.
We have begun that process, actually, by taking a look at
the utilities in Hawaii--the electricity, the wastewater, the
freshwater--across the basins in Hawaii, actually, to see where
we can make greater investments to take care of them, because
it is old infrastructure that hasn't been maintained properly
over the course of years, and we need to have those investments
now so that we can prevent these things from ever occurring
again.
Ms. Tokuda. Absolutely. Thank you very much. And I
absolutely share your commitment and dedication to
infrastructure repairs. We are in the middle of an ocean.
Things tend to deteriorate a lot faster. The useful life is a
lot shorter. But, as you know, we have tended to act well
beyond those useful lives for many of our utilities and
infrastructure facilities.
I know I am about to run out of time, but we will put forth
some questions. Obviously, my side of the island, Kaneohe
Marine Corps Base, we do have some water reclamation facility
compliance projects that I am very interested in, and
appreciate all of your support for that from the Corps.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. [Presiding.] I thank the gentlelady.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Gaetz, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. Mr. Secretary, you know that Pensacola is a Navy
town, and I want to thank you for coming and spending time at
our Naval museum.
In so many of these hearings, I focus on the things that I
am concerned about as downward pressure on our recruiting, but
in my time with you, I would like to focus on something that is
a really positive thing that can drive recruiting.
So many of these Naval aviators I meet in my district, they
were inspired by ``Top Gun'' or they went to a Blue Angels air
show and they got that spark in them that got them to take that
extra engineering class or physics class or aviation
opportunity.
And this museum that you have been to is a gem. We have
recovered aircraft out of the depths of Lake Michigan. We put
on displays about the greatest moments of heroism in our
military.
And my challenge right now is, I have, I think, the best
Naval museum in the world, and I am having a hard time getting
people to it, because the way my base is configured--our base
is configured, folks are not able to have ingress and egress.
And I know it sounds like a real small problem from a real
small part of the country, but what I think is, if we could
have leadership and focus from your office and others and we
could get hundreds of thousands of people back onto the base,
back into that museum, it is not going to solve all of our
recruiting challenges, but it is one more spark that we can
have out there, getting folks excited in a positive, productive
way.
Will you work with me on that so I can get better access to
this great gem?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, I have been working with
you and your staff and local politicians and the leadership of
that museum, actually, to try to get the throughput for that
museum open as quickly as possible.
We have come up with some near-term solutions, but we are
also focused on finding the long-term solutions that actually
bring it back to maximum throughput for that museum, for all
the reasons that you just stated, because it is an
extraordinary museum.
Mr. Gaetz. So you view--where I at times struggle with
folks is seeing the museum not just as a morale and welfare
tool but as a recruiting tool. Do you see it as a recruiting
tool?
Secretary Del Toro. I absolutely see it as a recruiting
tool. I saw it from the first day that I stepped in it.
And we have actually been very energized, and we have come
up with some near-term solutions to increase the throughput
that already paid off dividends, but we are also looking at the
long-term solutions that are a little bit more costly to be
able to provide a direct access to the outside world without
having to have folks come in through the base itself.
Mr. Gaetz. Well, thank you for casting it in that lens.
Because if it is a matter of dollars and cents and I have to
ask my colleagues to support such an endeavor in the NDAA, I
will certainly cite your testimony that this isn't just a
museum for the sake of recreation but it is a way to engage
people in Naval aviation in a place that is the home of the
Blue Angels, the cradle of Naval aviation.
Secretary Del Toro. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Gaetz. So, Admiral Gilday, I had another question.
Hopefully this is easy. We can disclaim it. There is this
entity called the Uniformed Services University, and they come
up with a lot of ways to engage in medical treatment throughout
the force. They do some stuff at Walter Reed.
And a group of these physicians got together and they wrote
a very strange and concerning report, entitled ``Caring for
Military-Affiliated Transgender and Gender-Diverse Youths: A
Call for Protections.''
And, in this report, we got folks that are working at this
university talking about gender-affirming care for 7-year-olds.
And, in the report, it cites that 7-year-olds ought to be able
to participate in the decisions about whether or not they get
puberty blockers or any of this other kind of treatment.
I don't expect to have the Navy own the report of a few
people that wrote it of their own volition, but I am just
hoping, with our time together, you can say that the Navy has
no plans to adopt the recommendations in this report or to see
things in this way.
Admiral Gilday. Sir, we have to follow the law. I am not
familiar with that training, but I share your concern. I will
commit to looking in----
Mr. Gaetz. It is not training. Just so we are clear, it is
not training. It is a report a group of DOD folks got together
and wrote about what they would like to see. And they have
made--I wouldn't be asking you about it but for the fact that
they have made specific policy recommendations about gender-
affirming care for 7-year-olds.
So I appreciate your answer, you have to follow the law.
You don't believe there is any part of the law that requires
you to have military physicians involved in giving puberty
blockers to children, do you?
Admiral Gilday. Sir, I would be surprised if there were. I
just--I don't know the law in that area well. I am not trying
to be evasive.
Actually, that university is actually run by DHA [Defense
Health Agency]. I will get back to you with DHA with a firm
answer.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 167.]
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah. And it just sort of goes one of two ways.
If you guys can say to us in these hearings that you are not
going to do this stuff, you are not going to move people
because of this, you are not going to administer this care,
that probably is sufficient for most of us. If it is something
that is unclear, we will probably put in the NDAA prohibitions
so that these recommendations are never adopted.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Moulton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moulton. General Berger, you proposed an ambitious,
politically risky modernization plan that created a fair bit of
concern. It included a lot of investments, a number of
divestments in particular.
As a Member of Congress on the House Armed Services
Committee, I sat down with the critics, the chief critics, of
this plan, and I listened to every one of their concerns. And I
brought every one of those concerns to you and to the Marine
Corps, and you and your officers answered every single one.
Eight Members of Congress, after that, signed an op-ed in The
Wall Street Journal fully supporting your modernization plan.
Past commandants have talked about this; other services are
starting to work on it themselves. But you and the Marine Corps
continue to lead the way. And my advice to you, sitting here
this morning--to borrow a Navy phrase, is, ``Damn the
torpedoes. Damn the critics. Full speed ahead.''
But it is worth also noting the one concern that all eight
of us shared in that piece in The Wall Street Journal, and that
is, to quote, ``The Marine Corps may not be moving fast
enough.'' You are moving faster than all the services. You are
leading the way for America. And yet we are not confident that
you are moving as quickly as our adversaries. So I would
encourage you to consider not just full speed but flank speed
ahead as you continue this modernization.
Mr. Secretary, will you continue to support the Commandant
in Force Design 2030 and whatever comes next to modernize the
Marine Corps to meet this Nation's chief adversaries?
Secretary Del Toro. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Moulton. And, Admiral Gilday, will you continue to
support Commandant Berger in what he needs to do to continue
leading the way?
Admiral Gilday. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moulton. General Berger, one area where I think the
Marine Corps might be able to focus even more is on artificial
intelligence.
By some estimates, China is, as a percentage of their
overall defense budget, spending 3-to-10 times as much on AI
[artificial intelligence] as we are.
Repeated reports to the Department of Defense have
encouraged the Department to move faster in adopting AI,
including the Future Defense Task Force, a bipartisan report
from this committee a few years ago, but the services are
lagging behind.
I think this is a great opportunity for the Marine Corps to
continue to lead. Would you be willing to get us a report by
this September for what the Marine Corps is doing today to
integrate AI and what you can do to accelerate that, to give
that advantage to our Marines and warfighters in the near
future?
General Berger. Congressman, I can have that to you long
before September. Absolutely, yes.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Shifting topics a bit, part of Force Design 2030 is about
retaining the best personnel, and that means keeping them in
fighting shape.
I teamed up with a fellow veteran in Congress a few years
ago and passed the National Mental Health Hotline, 988,
creating a three-digit mental health hotline, which should help
reduce the number of suicides in America. It was implemented in
July. It is already having a dramatic effect. Calls to 988 are
up 50 percent. Texts to 988, representing younger Americans,
are up 1,445 percent.
But I have asked a lot of friends on Active Duty, and I am
still not hearing about 988 being posted around our barracks,
our bases, so our servicemembers know that number and can call
it in a time of crisis and help you with a stronger force.
So what I would like to hear is, will you be willing to get
out by next Friday, May 5, a standard poster that can be sent
electronically and easily duplicated to post around Marine
Corps barracks all over the world so that Marines know this
number?
General Berger. We can do that.
Mr. Moulton. Admiral Gilday, will you do the same so that
it is on all our ships? Obviously, this is not something that
will be used--I shouldn't say ``ships''--is on all our Naval
bases in the United States?
Admiral Gilday. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moulton. And, Mr. Secretary, will you commit to making
sure that the other services not represented here today will do
the same by Friday, May 5?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, Congressman, I am not going to
commit to Friday, May 5. I know how tough the bureaucracy is in
the Pentagon to get something printed by Friday, May 5. But----
Mr. Moulton. Well, the gentlemen on your left and your
right just said----
Secretary Del Toro. --I will commit to doing this
expeditiously, as quick as we possibly can, to get the poster
made and get it distributed to where it needs to go.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Banks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Last fall, before the Supreme Court, the Solicitor General
argued in favor of continuing to use race as a factor in
university and service academy admissions.
Secretary Del Toro, if the Supreme Court, as we expect,
strikes down the use of racial preferences in universities and
includes the service academies in this ruling, will the Navy
stop its affirmative action practices for military academy
admissions at the Naval Academy?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, the United States Naval
Academy in Annapolis has used a whole multiple approach in
picking its candidates to become midshipmen at the Naval
Academy, and that is a methodology that has been successful for
decades. And it takes into account race; it takes into account
many other factors: whether you played sports, you know, what
job you had, where you came from, what hardships you might have
suffered through----
Mr. Banks. Mr. Secretary, will you make a commitment to
this committee----
Secretary Del Toro. --and it has worked very effectively--
--
Mr. Banks. --if the Supreme Court rules----
Secretary Del Toro. --and we have no intent on changing
that at all.
Mr. Banks. --if the Supreme Court rules and says to stop
using race as a part of the admissions standards at the
military academies, will the Naval Academy abide by it?
Secretary Del Toro. As a member of the executive, the
Department of the Navy, and me as Secretary of the Navy, we
will always follow the law.
Mr. Banks. Have you had any discussions at all with the
Naval Academy about what that transition plan might look like
if that Supreme Court ruling happens----
Secretary Del Toro. There is no----
Mr. Banks. --to prepare for it?
Secretary Del Toro. --need right now for me to have
discussions on a transition plan for a law that hasn't been
passed.
Mr. Banks. So how quickly could you change those standards
if the Supreme Court says to stop?
Secretary Del Toro. As quickly as is reasonably possible to
fulfill the law.
Mr. Banks. But no planning at this point? No discussions or
planning----
Secretary Del Toro. I have no plans to change the whole-
person multiple approach that the Naval Academy has used for
decades very successfully to create great leaders across the
Marine Corps and the Navy, as the two that are sitting here
before me now.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Well, understood.
This month, the Vice CNO, Lisa Franchetti, said that the
Navy will likely miss its recruiting goals for this year by
6,000 sailors, falling 16 percent short of its target.
Admiral Gilday, how is the recruiting crisis harming the
Navy's ability to fully man our deployed vessels?
Admiral Gilday. It is going to have an impact, sir, in
terms of our being able to man every billet at sea. What we are
trying to do to mitigate that--well, first of all, we are very
focused on recruiting in terms of attracting talent.
But in terms of what we are going to have to do to mitigate
that, we are trying to incentivize sea duty for those that have
moved ashore, as we owe them that kind of shore duty, but to
get them back to sea in leadership positions.
And we have had a lot of success in doing that. We are
trying to--right now, our manning at sea is over 90 percent.
Mr. Banks. And you would agree that the falling short of
recruitment puts more pressure on our sailors?
Admiral Gilday. Absolutely. We can't afford to have gaps
out there and to have people doing twice the work.
Mr. Banks. You did tell me before, though, that, while
recruitment is below our target, retention is strong in the
United States Navy. Is that right?
Admiral Gilday. It is.
Mr. Banks. And what can we learn from that?
Admiral Gilday. So, a few things. I think the work we have
done to empower people, to allow them to have more choices in
terms of where they are going to serve next--inside--it has to
meet their professional development in terms of, you know,
requirements. But for the system to be more transparent, to
give sailors and their families the ability to plan ahead, I
think we have given them that type of--we have empowered them
to have greater leverage in making those decisions.
Mr. Banks. Secretary Del Toro, last month in the Bahamas,
you said that fighting climate change was one of your top
priorities as the Secretary. This comes as the Biden
administration proposes to further shrink our Navy and while
China continues a massive expansion of our fleet.
Where do you rank climate change among other priorities of
yours as the Secretary? In the military, we know, when you make
one thing a priority, you have to acknowledge that other things
might be less of a priority. So where does climate change
factor in to the priorities that you have as the Secretary of
the Navy?
Secretary Del Toro. As I said then, it is a top priority.
And let me give you an example. When I was the commanding
officer of the USS Bulkeley and I tied up to one of our new
piers in Norfolk, it had a double-decker pier, actually. All
the utilities were on the lower part of the double-decker pier.
And now we have moved them up to the top----
Mr. Banks. I appreciate the anecdote----
Secretary Del Toro. --because of the rising sea levels.
Mr. Banks. --Mr. Secretary. I appreciate the anecdote.
Secretary Del Toro. Rising sea levels have an impact on our
ships' ability----
Mr. Banks. Sir, it is my time.
Secretary Del Toro. --to be tied to dock.
Mr. Banks. Where do you rank climate change with, say,
recruiting? What is more important?
Secretary Del Toro. They are all equally important. They
all have an impact on our combat readiness.
Mr. Banks. Or growing our fleet?
Secretary Del Toro. Everything that I do as Secretary of
the Navy----
Mr. Banks. If you make climate change the top priority----
Secretary Del Toro. --has an impact on the combat readiness
of our fleet----
Mr. Banks. --then recruitment is a lesser priority. So
where does it----
Secretary Del Toro. All right, sir. Do you want me to
answer----
Mr. Banks. --rank in your priorities as Secretary of the
Navy?
Secretary Del Toro. I stated what my priorities are:
strengthen maritime dominance, strengthen our culture of
warfighting excellence, and improve our relationships with our
allies and partners around the world. And climate is included
in all three of those.
Mr. Banks. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to all the witnesses.
Admiral Gilday and General Berger, thank you for your
service. I wish you the best in your next endeavors. And
certainly our country is better because of your service, so
thank you.
Today, I am going to focus on our most precious resource:
our personnel. I want to start with a focus on the recruiting
challenges our Department of Defense, the Navy and the Marine
Corps are facing today.
Secretary Del Toro, your testimony highlighted a demand for
a more aggressive recruiting approach. How are you getting
after it?
And can you touch on any strategies and metrics? Because
oftentimes we talk about a lot of programs, a lot of
interesting concepts, but do we have metrics to measure how
well we are doing?
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, Congressman. And we actually pay a
hell of a lot of attention to our metrics and our data on how
we recruit, obviously.
You know, when I have traveled the country talking to
recruiters both in the Marine Corps and the Navy, the number-
one complaint that they actually have is getting--regaining
access to our high schools. Now, this is largely because high
schools have been closed largely due to COVID. We haven't been
able to actually talk to the instructors, the guidance
counselors, the students themselves. So we have to regain that
credibility with all our high schools, be able to get back in
there and talk to our marketplace.
We also need to recruit from the entire marketplace, right?
So we need far more women in our Navy and our Marine Corps. I
am looking for tough women to join both the Navy and the Marine
Corps. And inspiring them in ways that proves to them that,
despite what Ms. Sherrill said, actually, that there is
actually hope for women that they will be able to advance to
the highest ranks in both the Marine Corps and the Navy. And
that is what this leadership team is dedicated to doing. And
Admiral Franchetti is the perfect example of that as our
current Vice Chief of Naval Operations, for example.
So that is the message we want to send. It is a positive
message: We need you. We need you to come join our service and
serve in our Nation's national security.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
Is there anything Congress can do to assist in boosting
recruitment and retention other than badgering you about silly
things?
Secretary Del Toro. Continue to send a positive message to
all Americans that service in the armed services is an
honorable thing. Despite whether you are a Democrat,
Republican, independent, where you may come from, this is about
serving our country, this is about protecting the Constitution
of the United States, and that there are many things that can
be drawn--positive lessons, lifelong lessons, that can be drawn
from a service in uniform.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
As we work to increase recruitment for our military, it is
important the new recruits and servicemembers understand the
life-changing potential opportunities the military presents. It
most certainly helped me.
As I looked at the DOD's 2021 demographic report, it shows
an increase in minority group representation in the officer
ranks from O-1 to O-6. However, all the general officer ranks
show a decline across the board, with the Navy showing an
unfortunate decrease of 4.2 percent.
What are we doing to change that, to make sure that the
demographics of our military represent the demographics of our
country at all levels?
For instance, the Marine Corps, one in every four Marines
are from Hispanic descent. So, when it comes to wars, who do
you think is at the front of the spear fighting these wars?
So what are we doing to address this serious issue with
metrics? And what is this telling young recruits and
servicemembers, that we don't take enough action to correct
that misrepresentation?
Secretary Del Toro. So, from the top, let me say that we
recognize this challenge. Our enlisted Corps needs to have
individuals that they see like themselves so that they can
continue to advance as well, too.
We are putting in a lot of resources in trying to recruit
more Hispanics, African-Americans, people of Asian backgrounds,
everyone across America, people from all over the country, of
all types, to come into our services so that we can actually
build the banks that are necessary to eventually get people to
rise to the general and the admiral levels as well, too.
And we are taking a very close look at how we select folks
and making sure that there is proper representation on those
boards that will take into consideration everybody's
capabilities, like a meritocracy actually should, in terms of
making those selections.
But there is positive news. When you take a look at the
advancements from O-6 to O-7 in the last couple of years, for
example, we see increasing numbers of minorities across the
board that are actually being selected from O-5 to O-6 and O-6
to O-7.
So I think it is trending in the right direction, but I
would allow the Commandant and the CNO to further comment.
Admiral Gilday. Sir, we have seen positive trends, O-1 to
O-6, across every demographic in the last 5 years. I can give
you specifics in all of those. He----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And as much as I respect my colleague, I don't think these
conversations are silly at all. I think they are fundamental to
the type of fighting force that we have. And when I continue to
have cadets, military members, or family members calling me and
reaching out with what I think is silly and things that divert
them from their warfighting focus and a meritocracy that the
military should be, it is incredibly concerning.
I just received a call from a senior cadet who has decided
not to join the Air Force because he was number one in his ROTC
[Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program but he was told by
his department that they have never had a woman at the top and
so he was going to be number two, because they weren't meeting
their diversity goals.
So I think these conversations are actually fundamental in
how we maintain the best fighting force. And I think, Black,
White, Brown, man, woman, you name it, they need to see their
leaders as the best that they absolutely can be, and they can
transcend whatever background or whatever held them back
through the United States military, which has been the
tradition. And I hope that we can stay focused on that.
In that regard, a lot of conversation on recruiting. I
asked all of the senior enlisted leaders, which service
actually is collecting data? Are they polling? Are they talking
to influencers? Are they talking to folks who were initially
interested but then said no? Only the Army has a system-wide
polling program.
Mr. Secretary, is that accurate? Because none of the senior
enlisted leaders said, besides the Army, that they can point to
data. We have narratives--COVID, wokeism, extremism, what have
you. We have a lot of thoughts on narratives. Do you have data
that you can send the committee?
Secretary Del Toro. I am pretty confident we have data
coming, particularly data coming into the recruiting commands
themselves----
Mr. Waltz. Have you seen polling?
Secretary Del Toro. I personally have not looked at polling
data, no.
Mr. Waltz. So we are short. We have a huge impact on the
force. But you are testifying today you haven't seen any type
of polling data.
Secretary Del Toro. Well, I leave that to my chief
recruiters both in the Navy and the Marine Corps----
Mr. Waltz. I would think it would be a key priority for
you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Del Toro. Well, I have had meetings where I meet
with them once a month.
Mr. Waltz. Okay.
Secretary Del Toro. But I myself have not looked at the raw
polling data coming out from the recruits themselves.
Mr. Waltz. I would encourage--I would encourage that,
obviously. But, also, if we could have a followup and if you
could share that with us. Because we are putting measures in
place, or authorizing measures--it needs to be based on data,
not what we think is going on. Fair?
Secretary Del Toro. No, it is fair. I mean, but I think
there is a wide recognition that we are struggling to recruit
across the board and we have to do better.
Mr. Waltz. And we need to have empirical data to understand
why.
Admiral Gilday, if we can just talk about ASW for a minute,
antisubmarine warfare--a key thing that, obviously, the PRC is
investing in to get at our advantage. I know we have a
significant advantage that they are trying to catch up with.
The Chinese have surpassed us in numbers of submarines, not in
capability but at least in numbers, coupled with the Russians.
I am concerned that there are no additional procurements
for P-8s. I understand there is a validated requirement for 138
but we are going to sit at 128. If you could speak to that
briefly.
But, also, in my visits out there--I mean, the P-8 is a
great platform, but it is burning through about 50 percent more
sonobuoys than the P-3 did.
I worry in general about our stocks forward, but I am
particularly worried about our ASW capabilities. Can you speak
to that, please?
Admiral Gilday. Yeah, sir. On the numbers, the 128--so the
initial--you are right, the initial requirement was up in the
mid-130s. We dialed back to 128 just based on what we were
seeing out there with respect to real-world missions or
efficiencies with respect to sortie rates and also the results
that we saw in war-game modeling ----
Mr. Waltz. Has the requirement lowered?
Admiral Gilday. It is. Right. So we came from 135 to 128.
With respect to sonobuoy usage, so we have seen an increase
in usage against certain types of submarines. I would, sir--I
don't mean to be evasive--I would like the opportunity to go
into more detail with you in terms of the different
capabilities that we are----
Mr. Waltz. We are breaking up the joint venture, right, or
we are moving beyond that, and I am worried that we have a gap.
And I would welcome a briefing on how we are going to address
that gap moving forward, not only for our own fleet but for our
allies that----
Admiral Gilday. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waltz. --we are also purchasing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maine, Mr.
Golden, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, gentlemen, thank you for being here today and for your
service to the country.
Admiral Gilday, as you know, getting the transition between
the Flight III DDG-51 production and the start of the DDG(X)
[Next-Generation Destroyer Program] program is going to be
important for the large surface combatant industrial base. And
Congress has taken steps to help this transition, including a
requirement for land-based testing programs for DDG(X)
components as well as last year's provision for a DDG(X) common
design collaboration with the industry.
According to a reporting requirement in a prior defense
bill, the Navy projected an optimal overlap transition period
for 3 years of additional DDG-51 procurement once the initial
DDG(X) is funded. And this seems to match up with comments you
have made before, such as last year at the Center for Strategic
and International Studies.
Is that still your position, Admiral?
Admiral Gilday. Yes, sir. And I won't speak for the
Secretary, but I know that our discussions have reflected that
we need a sound transition plan for industry with overlap
between Flight III DDGs and DDG(X). And that strategy is
absolutely going to be informed by the two prime vendors, HII
Ingalls and also Bath Iron Works.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
Just a few days ago, China conducted exercises around
Taiwan where it practiced blockading the island and precision
strikes, and in response the Navy carried out a routine Taiwan
Strait transit. And the Navy has also recently demonstrated
freedom of navigation by sailing near manmade Chinese-
controlled islands in the South China Sea.
What type of ship conducted these operations, Admiral?
Admiral Gilday. Destroyer.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
Admiral Gilday. Sir.
Mr. Golden. General Berger, what is the Marine Corps doing
alongside the Navy to complement freedom-of-navigation
operations to demonstrate to those in the South China Sea that
Chinese assertions that the entire body is their sovereign
territory is actually not the case and that freedom of
navigation will be enforced?
General Berger. As you pointed out--and I will use the
amphib ships as an example. The Chinese Navy has 38 amphib
ships, building more. They are exporting them. We have 31, and
we are going downhill.
What do we need to be doing forward? We need to be married
with the Navy as a deterrent force. And that means evolving
into, in addition to what we normally do in joint forcible
entry, things like expeditionary advanced space operations,
where we have Naval strike missiles that can assist, that can
be a complementary capability to the ASW and surface capability
that the Navy already has.
So it is a team approach with the stand-in forces and
embarked aboard amphibious ships, both anti-surface and anti-
subsurface--all of that.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
Before the hearing started, you spoke to me a little bit
about the importance of the Marine Corps mission at our
embassies around the world. And I wanted to give you an
opportunity to talk about the importance of that mission but
also about some of the most recent actions taken by Marines
abroad in service to the country.
General Berger. Thank you, Congressman.
He and I were talking about the Marine detachment that came
out of Sudan a few days ago, and they got back to Quantico the
day before yesterday. So Sergeant Major Black and I went down
there and met with them.
Like the rest of the diplomats, they flew out with a small
backpack, and that is it. But amazing, when you listen to them.
You ask them, how did the last 2 or 3 days go?
You are a Marine. You would know where I am going with
this.
Just flat-out disciplined focus on the mission: destruction
of classified materials, protection of the embassy. They manned
two posts, continue to man them until the Ambassador went on
the last aircraft. Brought down the American flag, folded it up
as you would expect, handed it to the Ambassador.
And through all this--all this is led by a staff sergeant.
No officers. A staff sergeant. Because that is how well-
trained, how disciplined they are.
You would be incredibly proud of them. And that is the case
at every embassy that we provide a security detachment to.
Small detachments, led by noncommissioned officers, staff
noncommissioned officers, doing what you would expect Marines
to do.
Mr. Golden. Thank you. I appreciate that. And I am proud of
them. I know you are too. And I know that we all are.
So thank you for your time leading the Marine Corps as
Commandant these past few years. I appreciate it very much.
Semper Fi.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Fallon, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, Secretary Del Toro and Admiral, you are both intimately
familiar, I am sure, with the water contamination aboard the
USS Nimitz?
Secretary Del Toro. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fallon. Okay.
So, last December, I had a constituent reach out. Her son
is a sailor on the Nimitz. And she was rightfully concerned,
you know, about the jet fuel and her son being sick.
And, of course, we want to be good Members of Congress. So
she said that they were told not to make much of a fuss and
don't bring it up, and they were even nervous about coming
forward. So I just want to get to the truth. So I wanted to
hear the Navy's side of the story.
So, January 4, we reach out to the liaison and ask for a
report back, and then it is--we get nothing. So 3 weeks go by,
to January--what was the exact date--January 23. It was January
4, nothing; January 23, nothing. Reached out again March 3,
nothing. And now April 28, nothing.
Can you all help me out with finding out what the Navy's
perspective is and how you are going to handle this? Because I
don't know what to tell this mom. And I hate to waste a minute
of my valuable 5 minutes to talk about this, because it should
have been done at a much lower level.
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, we will be happy to give
you a full report on the conditions that took place there. I
will tell you that the material conditions that were found at
fault were all fixed, and there are no current issues at all on
the Ike. But we will----
Mr. Fallon. It would be great----
Secretary Del Toro. --get back to you with the full detail.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah, because, I mean, we are working in good
faith here, but----
Secretary Del Toro. Absolutely.
Mr. Fallon. --I just--you know, crickets. And it is
unfortunate.
So, getting to recruiting, we have heard, now, three or
four members talking about it. I think it is an absolute
crisis. And I would encourage you, Mr. Secretary, to--I hate to
use baseball analogies, but, you know, as a Red Sox fan, we
didn't win the World Series for 86 years, and then we had
leadership come in and take care of this, and they examined the
data. They didn't delegate it down. The general manager and the
president and the owners looked at this stuff. So I would
really encourage you to be on the tip of the spear, because we
have got to figure this out.
And what specific plans do you have to increase recruiting
so we can actually hit our levels?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, let me assure you, this is all
hands on deck. I have been working on this for 18 months. I
don't want to leave you with the suggestion that the data
doesn't matter or we aren't looking at data. There are people
in the Department of the Navy, both in the Marine Corps and the
Navy, full task force, that are looking at everything that an
actual potential candidate recruit does.
We are also trying to be innovative about, what do we do
differently that we haven't done in the past in order to be
able to recruit more effectively, right?
Mr. Fallon. And what specifically----
Secretary Del Toro. So expanding the marketplace is one of
those things that we----
Mr. Fallon. But, okay, respectfully, specifically, what are
we going to do?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, I will give you a perfect
example. Just 2 days ago, I actually went to the St. John's
College High School, for example, that is a high school that
had not been specifically targeted for quite some time. I met
with the cadet corps there. There was a cadet corps of 300, for
example. We had an enormous amount of minority candidates and
specifically Hispanics and people who had come from Africa that
have a desire to join the Navy.
So we're now linking our recruiting forces up with that
school----
Mr. Fallon. With that school.
Secretary Del Toro. --specifically a cadet school, to
actually recruit.
Mr. Fallon. Can we do that, respectfully, with a thousand,
several thousand high schools?
Secretary Del Toro. That is exactly right. We are----
Mr. Fallon. One isn't going to solve it.
Secretary Del Toro. --looking to expand that model across
the United States.
We have also gotten additional funding from the Office of
Secretary of Defense for our marketing perspective as well,
too. I have actually even gone out to Hollywood, for example,
to try to engage their support in doing PSAs [public service
announcements] and reaching out to high schools and community
colleges and others to sort of help expand the message as well.
Mr. Fallon. And I think you have heard bipartisan concern,
so----
Secretary Del Toro. Absolutely.
Mr. Fallon. And if I could ask General Berger, the one
branch that has met the recruiting goals during this crisis has
been the Marines. Can you enlighten us as to--and I know you
are the smallest force, but what approaches are you taking to
achieve these goals? Because I would love the Navy, Air Force,
and Army to learn from the Marines.
General Berger. It is a tough recruiting environment.
Mr. Fallon. It is.
General Berger. One of our sons is on recruiting duty right
now. It is not easy. But the Marine Corps doesn't have a
recruiting crisis because--probably two or three main reasons.
One, people--high school, college--just like they always
have, want to join something that is a challenge, something
that allows them to push to another level, and they view the
Marines as sort of an elite force that would be hard to get
into. You cannot--you can't join the Marine Corps; you have to
become a Marine. So part of it is the Marine Corps.
Mr. Fallon. Well, it is more----
General Berger. Part of it is the quality of the
recruiters.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah.
General Berger. We hand-select everybody who goes out on
recruiting duty. They go through tough training. They are our
very best majors in 52 recruiting stations, the best majors we
have.
Mr. Fallon. Culture.
General Berger. We put the best people out there.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah.
Mr. Fallon. And just with the few seconds I have left.
I think China is the largest threat, Mr. Secretary,
respectfully, and not climate change, considering that the
United States footprint, carbon footprint, has been reduced by
almost 20 percent over the last 20 years, and China is opening
two coal plants, on average, a week, and their carbon footprint
has increased by 300 percent.
Secretary Del Toro. I agree with you. I never said climate
change was the number one priority. I said climate change was a
top priority. I have always consistently said that China is the
number one----
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 167.]
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Virginia, Mrs.
McClellan, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Del Toro, good to see you.
Admiral Gilday and General Berger, thank you very much for
your service.
I really appreciate in your submitted remarks your focusing
on quality of life issues, which are critical to recruitment
and retention, and particularly your focus on meeting the
mental health needs of our servicemembers and addressing
suicide.
And I want to talk a little more on the systemic mental
health crisis within our Armed Services, and particularly at
Naval facilities in Virginia, where at least five sailors
assigned to the USS George Washington, which has been docked in
Norfolk since 2017, have died by suicide in the last year. And
I appreciate the briefing that was held for some of the Members
of the House and Senate Armed Services Committees.
Unfortunately, these sailors are not alone, and several
sailors assigned to other ships undergoing refueling and
complex overhaul at the Mid-Atlantic Regional Maintenance
Center in Norfolk have died by suicide within the past 5 years.
I know from many of our sailors this seems like an
unrelenting tragedy, and I want to focus my questioning on this
issue.
So first, Secretary Del Toro, can you describe how acute
the shortage of trained mental health professionals is across
the Navy broadly and, more specifically, how acute is that
shortage for Naval bases where ships are frequently undergoing
refueling and complex overhaul?
Secretary Del Toro. It is a significant challenge,
Congresswoman. We have been trying to do everything else we
can, trying to work with the Office of the Secretary of
Defense, particularly the Defense Health Agency, who often owns
these professionals and assigns them to the locations where our
sailors and our marines work globally.
But we are trying to get to a better place. The Office of
the Secretary of Defense is fully hyper-focused on this issue
and trying to recruit as many as they can from the private
sector.
I believe the solution, quite frankly, is to train them
intrinsically from within. We need to actually train far many
more corpsmen, and we are moving in that direction. It may take
a year or two to get the number of mental health technicians
that we need.
But it is tough to compete with the private sector as well
too, where they are also extremely shorthanded as well.
At the same time, we are also doing other things, like
putting more chaplains on our ships, for example, and that has
proven to be very, very effective. Where we have chaplains on
our ships permanently stationed, on the average, we get
anywhere from 30 to 40, actually, calls. Where we don't have
them on the ships, it could be anywhere from zero to about five
calls to chaplains if they are stationed off the ship.
So a lot of it is helping with their life issues and not
necessarily the most complicated of the mental health issues,
but they are seeking life guidance.
There have been far too many sailors and marines and
servicemembers who we have lost due to suicide. We need to do a
better job across the board, and we are committed to doing
that.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you. And I would note, we have heard
anecdotally from mental health professionals at the USS George
Washington that they are overwhelmed with the needs of the
sailors there. So the more that you can do to address this
shortage, and particularly focusing on the ships that are
undergoing retrofitting, the better.
At this point, Secretary of the Navy I believe has
concluded its investigations into the series of suicides on
board the USS George Washington, the USS George H.W. Bush, and
the USS Theodore Roosevelt investigation is still ongoing.
In all of these investigations, is the Navy noticing a
pattern of what particular causes are for these suicides that
we should be aware of and seek to address, or is it a wide
range of reasons?
Secretary Del Toro. It is a wide range of reasons. And our
responsibility is to address as many of those reasons as we
possibly can with different approaches, which is what we are
trying to do; mental health providers certainly, but also to
make dramatic improvements in the quality of life.
Especially for those ships that are in shipyards, it is
hard duty, especially when you have so many young sailors
there. They require, actually, a proper amount of oversight.
To the CNO's point, having those ships properly manned with
individuals who can provide that oversight as well too and help
them through the problems that they face. We are making
investments, very specifically at HII in three parking garages,
for example, to try to relieve some of the stressors associated
with that.
We have moved many of the junior personnel off the ship
unless they are on duty itself to try to ease with some of the
stressors that come from living on board the ship as well too.
But there are many other aspects, negative aspects related
to suicide as well too that have to do with family
relationships.
And so we are taking an across-the-board approach to try to
help, to give people hope, because that is what we have to give
them, hope that they can get through the challenges that they
face, whether it be a family challenge, whether it be a drug
challenge, whether it be a performance challenge, or whether it
be a stressor challenge.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
McCormick, for 5 minutes.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Gentlemen, it is an honor to be amongst your presence. I
appreciate you being here today.
I want to note that when I was in the service, it truly
defined the rest of my life. I still identify as a marine in
everything I do. Whether I be a physician or a Congressman or
anything, I still think like a marine, like it or not.
I will say when I first joined, it was P.X. Kelley was our
commandant, God rest his soul. And then we had Al Gray. We had
some legends.
Actually, I had arguments with General Krulak on
reorganization of the Marine Corps. When I was at ANGLICO, he
cut our program significantly. And I remember having worries
about the reorganization of the Marine Corps back when I was
just a captain. And those conversations aren't quite the same
as when you are a Congressman, that is for sure.
I will say, as we have evolved, and the nice thing to see
about the Marine Corps, it is still maintaining its recruiting
standards, whether it be from our stellar reputation, our fine
uniforms or the handsome men that wear them. It has been nice
to see that continue.
What I am worried about is as we continue in our mission.
And you have seen that right now we have a humanitarian crisis
in Sudan, for example. And we will continue to see that
throughout the history of the world where we will have to go in
and rescue people from bad places.
Have we seen significant changes in the way we are
reorganizing and how we are going to be able to do a mission in
Sudan and other places when we have to go out and maintain that
new stability for those cycles, especially with ship and
personnel shortages?
And as we shrink to accommodate with technology, with that
deployment cycle that is very hard on families, but still the
same deployment cycle with fewer people because we are more
invested in technologies, how do we accommodate for that?
General Berger. First of all, the Marine Expeditionary
Unit, Amphibious Ready Groups that you remember, that is the
best chance you have of responding to a crisis immediately. And
there needs to be one in the Pacific and one in the
Mediterranean, Africa, CENTCOM [U.S. Central Command] area 12
months a year.
That is the most versatile tool that a combatant commander
has, because it is sovereign territory. And you can solve a lot
of problems coming from your own sovereign territory from the
sea.
The modernization of the Marine Corps is tailored. And I
would say in like the Marine Littoral Regiments that are in the
Indo-Pacific, they are focused on deterring a particular
threat. The rest of the Marine Corps and them are very
versatile and can handle the problems that we need to handle.
I think the challenge is not being nearby when the problem
happens, as you highlight. And you don't have 3 weeks to get
there. The Nation needs something there in a week or 3 days.
Dr. McCormick. Do you think we still have more to do in
Sudan?
General Berger. There are more Americans that are in Sudan,
from what I understand, that want to get out. Right now, there
are at least one or two convoys moving overland.
So I don't know how many eventually will want to get out,
but the numbers that we understand, there are still Americans
in Sudan, some of them that want to get out, correct.
Dr. McCormick. Okay. You mentioned that some forces are
dedicated towards a specific mission. Some are more flexible,
like the MAGTF [Marine Air-Ground Task Force] model.
Percentage-wise, what do you think that the mission--how
many people have a specific mission when you are talking about
the way we have reorganized?
General Berger. The two regiments that we are reorganizing,
one in Hawaii, one in Japan, they are still very flexible, very
adaptable, but they are tailor-made to be a forward-standing
force. That represents all of probably a total of less than
5,000 marines out of the whole operating force, which is
100,000.
Dr. McCormick. Got it.
Final question. I know this is probably short, because I
only have about a minute left. But there has been some
controversy. Obviously, we have had some legends weigh in on
this.
And I don't know how much--I am just curious. How much
interaction have you had with these former commandants and
former generals who have their own distinct opinions, based on
their unique experiences at that unique time? How much
interaction have you had with them? Do you think that is going
to continue to be a problem for future commandants as we
develop this political climate of reorganization?
General Berger. It varies between them. Some of them more
frequently, as you might imagine, some less frequently.
Probably the more recent former commandants, General
Neller, General Dunford, I talk with very frequently. The
farther back you go the less frequently, not because of
anything other than probably time.
Every redesign, every modernization document that we send
out, every update on training, every update on talent
management I send to all of them first before we ever release
it, because I need their feedback.
Dr. McCormick. Got it. Well, I have four seconds to say
Semper Fidelis, Semper Fortis. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. I thank gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Davis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member
Smith.
I want to start today, if I may, by extending a deep
appreciation especially to the wives who are here today--Ms.
Linda and Donna, thank you so much--and to obviously staff
members who are grinding it out every day to help your members.
Thank you for what you are doing.
I was talking to one, and I said I knew a little bit more
about the Air Force, and he forgave me today. But, for the
record, I am going with the President to present the Commander-
in-Chief's Trophy to the Air Force today.
But let me say, Admiral Gilday, General Berger, thank you
so much sincerely for your service to this country and all that
you continue to do. And to Mr. Secretary, thank you too.
General Milley came to this committee and he shared these
words as he spoke about losing men and women in combat. He said
it was personal. And then it went on for me to express it is
personal when we see our members go serve our country, come
back, take their lives. I am glad of the work that we are doing
there.
And I am going to tell you one other thing that is personal
today. It is when we inadvertently cause harm to our military
families.
So military families impacted by toxic water at Camp
Lejeune desperately need some level of certainty about how to
process these claims that they are bringing forward.
And according to former U.S. District Court Judge of the
Eastern District of North Carolina James Dever, he said, with
the possibility of one million cases getting filed, it could
take more than 1,000 years to resolve them without streamlining
the process.
Mr. Secretary, I am not sure if you plan on sticking around
for a thousand years. But my question is, how can we--or can
you give this committee just a sense of the timeline of how we
can maybe get these claims processed?
Secretary Del Toro. This is a very complicated issue. And
let me begin by saying how important it is actually and how
pleased I am that the Biden administration has actually worked
to ensure that we meet the commitment of these military
families who have been negatively impacted by the toxic water
at Camp Lejeune.
Having said that, there are an enormous number of cases
that are now coming in. And we in the military services across
the Department of Defense have to gear up to try to handle
these cases on a far more expedited manner. It is going to take
a lot of additional resources.
Mr. Davis. Mr. Secretary, if there is not a clear timeline,
then my question is, how do we streamline the process?
Secretary Del Toro. We will have to look at doing both,
Congressman. We will have to look at doing both. But each case
has to be investigated. Each case has to be looked at
carefully. It is a matter of law. Regretfully, there are steps
that we may not be able to cut out.
Mr. Davis. Mr. Secretary, let me ask, have we used, for
instance, data, a grid to group cases, have we given
consideration of that, or settlement?
Secretary Del Toro. General counsel is looking into all
these issues, Congressman. And I am more than pleased to get
back to you and work with your staff to come up with better
ideas on how to do it more expeditiously as well.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 168.]
Mr. Davis. Well, Mr. Secretary, some believe and have
conveyed to me--been from North Carolina--that they believe the
Navy has delayed, stonewalled, and even tried to cover up
perhaps what has happened at Camp Lejeune over 34 years.
What would you say to those families?
Secretary Del Toro. I can't speak to the ills of the past,
obviously, but I accept responsibility for what we do now. And
you have my commitment that we will do now to try to expedite
this process as quickly as I can to rebuild trust one action at
a time, one day at a time.
Mr. Davis. I would like to, Mr. Chair, enter this, it is an
article from WRAL in my home State titled ``Camp Lejeune toxic
water claims get first day in court,'' into the record.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 160.]
Mr. Davis. I just want to end on this note. This is a note
from Master Sergeant Jerry Ensminger, who is retired now from
the Marine Corps. He is talking about his daughter Janey who
died in 1985 at the age of 9 of leukemia.
``I started this journey in August of 1997, and even then
it was 14 years after Janey had been diagnosed and 13 years
after she died that I hadn't heard anything about the water
contamination at Camp Lejeune.''
I would hope that we would do the right thing by just
giving them their day towards justice and a fair process in a
timely manner.
Mr. Chair, I yield back on behalf of all these impacted.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Jacobs, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all three of you for being here, and in
particular General Berger and Admiral Gilday for your service
and your long career.
And also thank you, Admiral Gilday and Secretary Del Toro,
for all of your work on making sure we address the housing
issues while there have been three carriers in San Diego. I
appreciate your creativity and the many conversations we have
had over many meals on this topic. And I look forward to moving
even further in this year's NDAA on that issue, and I will be
continuing to track the situation closely on the ground in San
Diego.
As you know, while housing is a huge issue for us in San
Diego, it is not the only quality of life issue. One of the
things I hear a lot from sailors and marines in our region is
about childcare. As of June, Navy Region Southwest had 4,000
children on its wait list for Child Development Center slots.
And just last month, Ranking Member Smith joined me in San
Diego for a roundtable with parents and childcare providers at
Naval Air Station North Island, where we heard a lot about
these concerns.
So first, General Berger, I know the Marine Corps has had
some success here, including the $37.7 million construction
project at Miramar. And I have to say I am a huge fan of
Colonel Bedell and all of the work he is doing on quality of
life issues there.
How are you planning to address the remaining unmet wait
list for childcare services at Marine Corps bases, particularly
in the San Diego area?
And then, Admiral Gilday, how are you planning to address
your unmet wait list?
General Berger. Congresswoman, like other people have
said--you have mentioned it too--this is--we consider this a
readiness issue. If you can't solve healthcare, then people are
worried about other things other than the mission. This is
directly tied to readiness.
Our average wait time right now is about 100 days. That is
not acceptable. A hundred days is too long.
What do we need to do about it? In most cases, with the
exception of Miramar, it is not that we don't have the
building. It is that we don't have the childcare providers. We
can't hire them.
Now, I think our learning over the past 2 or 3 years, that
is two problems. Pay. In other words, they could make the same
salary or better outside the gate. Or it took me too long to
apply. I applied. It took me 4 months. I had to get a job.
Sorry, but I couldn't wait that long.
We have got to cut down the application time. And we have
brought up the pay now to be corresponding with outside the
gate. But the wait time right now is a real challenge.
Admiral Gilday. Ma'am, broadly, we have two childcare
centers in construction right now, one of them is at Point
Loma, and three additional in this proposed budget. Our wait
list has gone from 8,000 last year down to 5,500 this year
across the Navy.
And one area that we are trying to put more focus on is a
program called Military Childcare in Your Neighborhood, where
we actually go out and we try to find additional spaces. So we
have increased from 5,500 in 2023 up to, we hope, to beyond
6,000 in 2024 in this budget.
With respect to the comment that General Berger made about
childcare workers, right now our staffing is about 80 percent.
What we are trying to do to attract talent is to offer above
market median wages, as much as $5 above that median.
The last thing I would mention, we have gone out to a
couple of colleges. One of them is NC State. The other is Utah
Tech. And they are providing us additional surge help during
the high occupancy, during the high usage months, particularly
in the summer.
General Berger. If I could add just one, this is kind of a
shout-out thanks.
Part of it, part of the challenge in staffing was people
moving from one location to another and they had to start from
scratch. The transferability part, huge.
Also, the ability, the flexibility, like the CNO and I and
the SECNAV [Secretary of the Navy] were talking about
yesterday, where if you work in a Child Development Center and
you have a child that you want cared there, you get half off.
And if you have two of them, another 20 percent. Those are huge
positives.
Secretary Del Toro. If I can add just one last thing. We
have increased the stipends for those who choose to go to
outside daycare centers as well too, thanks to your support.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
And also, General Berger, thanks for your help in
addressing the issue at Pendleton where childcare workers
weren't able to have their kids at the same childcare center. I
know that has been huge.
I would just say I am very supportive of increasing pay for
our childcare workers. Anything I can do to help with that.
We also know that that can sometimes increase costs, and I
know DOD recently raised parent fees for on-base childcare. So
I just urge you to also make sure you are taking into account
and addressing the affordability for the families themselves
while we are working to make sure we are getting childcare
workers a living wage.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady's focus on that topic.
As the panelists all know, this is a big deal for me, that we
deal with the quality of life issue. And there is no more
important aspect than this childcare problem.
So with that, we will recognize another member of the
California delegation, Mr. Khanna, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your service to our Nation.
General Berger, would it be fair to say that right now we
have Naval superiority and could thwart any Chinese invasion in
Taiwan or any Chinese blockade of Taiwan?
General Berger. That is an accurate statement from my
perspective, yes, sir.
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Secretary, would you support that?
Secretary Del Toro. I absolutely support that statement.
Mr. Khanna. My second question is, what more do we need as
China continues to put more money to build their Navy? Do we
have sufficient long-range missiles to be able to shoot down
Chinese ships if that were needed? And do you think we should
be having more long-range missiles in that area? Any of you.
Admiral Gilday. Sir, the answer to that is no. And that is
why we are trying to do multiyear procurement, essentially
bundle buy across four significant missile systems in order to,
A, maximize production lines in the U.S., but also give a
steady demand signal to those vendors.
I would say--it hasn't come up, I don't think, in this
hearing yet--is that there are only two producers in the United
States of rocket motors for these exquisite weapons. And so we
are at a premium with respect to the capacity.
Mr. Khanna. And, Admiral, I think that is an excellent
point, because in World War II, in addition to the bravery of
our men who scaled Normandy, we won because we outproduced
Japan and Germany. We had double the production.
And today, one of my concerns is the state of our defense
industrial base, the fact that we are already stretched to get
weapons to Ukraine. We need to do better in terms of building
the defense capability, so that if there were ever an invasion
we are capable of quickly mobilizing.
Could any of you comment on the importance generally of
building American manufacturing and a defense industrial base
from a national security perspective?
Secretary Del Toro. I think you are absolutely right,
Congressman. I think this President's budget starts to send the
right signal, especially when you take a look at the doubling
of the amount of funds available for missile production.
And the shipbuilding plan over the course of the next 10
years, it sends a steady signal basically on what the
requirements are matched to the max capacity that those
shipyards can actually build.
And hopefully in the future they will continue to make
reinvestments in their own capabilities to build more ships
faster across the board, more submarines faster across the
board, so that we can continue to commit to those numbers in
greater numbers, actually, those funds in greater numbers.
Mr. Khanna. I am obviously biased. I represent Silicon
Valley. But I believe that a lot of the work being done there
on AI, on quantum, on advanced cyber is going to be critical
for our national security, to prevent jamming of any of our
communication systems, to be able to accurately identify and
target.
Could you help explain from your perspective, from a Navy
perspective, what we can do to adopt the latest technology and
why that is going to matter for our future national security?
Secretary Del Toro. I think as you look across the
Department of the Navy, we have a thousand projects alone that
are committed through AI for future investments.
We are standing up two Innovation Centers. The Marine Corps
is standing up an Innovation Center in Newburgh, New York, and
we are standing up an Innovation Center in Monterey,
California, as well to further expand those investments,
working closely with venture capitalists and others in Silicon
Valley and across the country, quite frankly, to transition the
innovative technologies that are developing at such a high pace
in the private sector, to be able to more effectively integrate
those into the military.
Mr. Khanna. Well, I appreciate it.
Chairman Gallagher on the subcommittee and I are very
interested in helping work in a bipartisan way to even further
improve the adoption of technology. And I know the chairman has
expressed an interest in that. And I will look forward to
working with you on that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Virginia, Mrs.
Kiggans, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you so much to our panel for being here today and
with us.
The average age of shipyard facilities and their supporting
infrastructure is 60-plus years old, and the average age of dry
docks is over 100 years old. Norfolk Naval Shipyard was ranked
as the worst, 69th, in regard to facility condition at any Navy
installation.
And we had in our office yesterday great guys from Norfolk
Naval Shipyard just talking to us not only about the condition
of the dry docks--and I know what happened on the West Coast
with those closures, and we are down to really one dry dock
that can repair an aircraft carrier on the East Coast--but also
the condition of their office spaces.
They said they have charts that are red and green with
different rooms. And they talked about the crumbling walls and
the leaking ceilings. And, I mean, the conditions that they
described that they are working really are unacceptable.
And I am sure there was a lot of discussion today about the
number of ships and the strategy that the Navy has. We are
trying to keep old ships at sea for longer, and we have got to
have our ship repair facilities there to do that. And we need
the people that can repair these ships.
They are competing with places like Huntington Ingalls for
shipbuilding, which is great. We want to build ships too. But
we can only offer this much money. They are offering more money
other places. So prioritizing just our ship repair facilities
is so important to me.
So, in your opinions, are you confident that, God forbid we
have some sort of conflict in the near future, are our
capabilities to repair ships, not just the regular maintenance
but there will be repairs needed if there was a conflict, do we
have that capability right now? Or what are we doing to
prioritize that?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, it is a priority. And we
recognize the negligence that has taken place over the past
decades, basically. And the SIOP [Shipyard Infrastructure
Optimization Program] investments that we are now making in
this President's budget alone, $2.8 billion. I just signed a
$2.8 billion contract to upgrade the dry dock in Hawaii, for
example. And in Norfolk, we are making great strides as well
too.
But more will be needed. We have $10 billion allotted over
the FYDP actually to address the dry dock problems and the
shipyard problems as well too.
More will be needed over the future to get these
capabilities to where they need to be in the future for us to
be able to maintain all the many submarines and ships that we
are building today.
Mrs. Kiggans. And I just ask that you prioritize their pay.
For example, they said they are offering $15 an hour at Norfolk
Ship Repair, whereas Huntington Ingalls can offer $20. So they
are not able to attract the people that they need to do that.
And then quality of life issues. I know we have made some
progress there for them, but continuing to work on that.
Also just wanted to point out about the smaller ship repair
industries. We look at the big ones, but I frequently hear from
the smaller guys that are worried about them being awarded
contracts too. And we are going to need everybody if needed. So
just looking out for those small businesses too is very
important in my district.
Then I would be remiss if I didn't spend the last couple
minutes talking about base housing. It is something that I am
passionate about at NAS Oceana. My understanding is that this
year's budget doesn't have any money that goes towards base
housing at NAS Oceana. We have three condemned barracks.
The first day I had my staff in D.C., I had them in my
minivan that weekend driving around Oceana saying, look at the
conditions that we are asking our single--these are our
unaccompanied sailors--to live in. Think of any 4-year college
and university you visit and the construction that goes on
there, how beautiful those campuses are.
I have a senior in high school and drove around for college
tours and taking pictures of the construction. It is
unbelievable how beautiful these campuses look.
Think about what we ask those kids to do every night of the
week in college and what we ask these guys to do every night of
the week standing watch for our great Navy. So it is
infuriating to me that we can't do better for them.
And then sitting down with leadership and listening to
their challenges of getting new living conditions and
facilities for their sailors. We are charging those guys for
WiFi at these barracks. We are moving them into crappy barracks
and then we are charging them for WiFi.
So what are you doing to prioritize living conditions?
I can't wait to participate in the task force on readiness,
recruitment, quality of life. But we have got to do better,
because you know as well as I do all the ships and the aircraft
don't go anywhere without great people behind it.
Secretary Del Toro. I will be happy to coordinate those
facts. But we are making investments in our unaccompanied
housing in this President's budget.
And if you just take a look at the efforts that are going
on in Key West, which is horrible because Key West has suffered
from the hurricane challenges that they have had, but we have
had to actually take down two unaccompanied housing barracks
there and we have had to work very aggressively to place those
sailors in the community and other MWR facilities that we are
actually building.
But you are right. I mentioned earlier in the hearing today
that when I came in as Secretary, about 1 percent of the budget
was actually dedicated towards infrastructure.
Those numbers have now gone up dramatically. Just in the
last year alone, a 7.3 percent increase in FSRM money that
allows us to take care of the worst of those scenarios.
Mike, would you want to comment further on it?
Admiral Gilday. Just real quick, ma'am.
The money we are spending on infrastructure has gone from
78 percent of the requirement to almost 90 percent of the
requirement just in the last year and a half.
I know that is still unsatisfactory and we have a long way
to go. We are behind. We are trying to get after it and
prioritizing exactly what needs to be fixed.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time is expired.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you.
The Chairman. I can't overstate how much that drives me
nuts to hear things like she just described. I want you all to
know it is our job to get you the money. You have got to tell
us what you need to fix those problems. We should not have
those problems at our installations.
And if we don't give you the money, then shame on us. But
you need to let us know what it takes to get after this in an
expeditious way, not over a 10- or 15-year period of time.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Veasey, is recognized.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask you, Mr. Del Toro, about the two
operational deployments for the CMV-22. They had really
unparalleled success when it came to conducting a COD [carrier
on board] mission, medical evaluation, Naval special warfare
support, and search and rescue operations.
And I was wondering if you could sort of enlighten us and
let us know how the CMV-22 transformed fleet operations, and
have they integrated well and improved the last mile of
delivering critical spare parts to the fleet.
Secretary Del Toro. They have, Congressman. I think it has
been a tremendous success story.
The concern I have, obviously, is with the combining gear
beyond 800 hours that these particular plants have not
experienced quite yet. But what happens when they do actually
get up there in hours?
And we are working with the manufacturer to try to come up
with a permanent solution to that problem set. And they are
looking at actually designing a new combining gear in order to
be able to fix that.
But operationally speaking, perhaps the CNO can expand on
what I said.
Mr. Veasey. Yeah, please.
Secretary Del Toro. I am not aware of any problems that we
have had.
Admiral Gilday. I would just say we are very bullish on
CMV-22. We ripped the Marine Corps off. It has been another
example of one service leveraging what has been going right in
another and at economies of scale buying these aircraft as
quickly as we can to replace an airframe, as you know, sir,
that was designed and built in the 1960s.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you. And I understand that the Navy is
actually reassessing its concepts and operations for CMV-22,
specifically concerning contested logistics scenarios.
When do you anticipate completing that assessment? And can
you share anything with the committee?
Admiral Gilday. Sir, if I could take that for the record, I
will get back to you with an answer on that timing.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 171.]
Mr. Veasey. Okay. Yeah. No, thank you very much.
General Berger. Could I just add one extra thought?
Mr. Veasey. Yeah, please.
General Berger. When we--when the U.S. military evacuated
the diplomats out of Sudan, V-22s.
Mr. Veasey. Yeah.
General Berger. It is the only aircraft that could do it.
And 2 weeks ago, 3 weeks ago, we flew MV-22s from Hawaii to the
Philippines. No other aircraft in the world does that. It is an
incredible capability.
Mr. Veasey. Yeah. Okay. No, thank you for sharing that.
I want to move over and ask a question about mental health
services to Secretary Del Toro.
What is the Navy and the Marines doing when it comes to
physical and mental health resources? And how are they
leveraging that for retention efforts?
And I also wanted for you to also think about an answer.
One of the things that we have heard from military service
people is privacy, because if someone has a mental health issue
and they think that it is going to inhibit them from getting a
clearance or a promotion for another job, they may not want to
share that with someone on base.
What are you doing in the area of mental health services?
Secretary Del Toro. Well, we increased funding
approximately 39 percent over the last year on mental health
services across the board. Also working very, very closely with
DHA as well to try to get more mental health providers.
Earlier in the hearing, I actually mentioned that, though
that continues to be a challenge because mental health
providers aren't out there in the private sector. So we have to
grow more of our own by training our corpsmen actually to be
mental health technicians. That may take a year or 2 or 3 in
order for us to intrinsically grow more of those, making them
available.
We have also put more chaplains on ships, which from a
family support, life support perspective, has helped
tremendously in tackling perhaps not the most challenging
mental health issues, but the many life stressors that are
associated with that.
We have put together actually a mental health playbook that
has been distributed throughout all of the Navy for all our
commanders and all our leadership to actually rely upon that
actually points towards the resources that we have available
and the teams that we have available, which we have also
increased as well too.
It is an all-hands-on-deck effort. And at the end of the
day, it is providing hope to our sailors and marines that
whatever challenge they have, whether it is a mental health
challenge or a life challenge, that their Navy family, their
Marine Corps family is there to provide them help and
assistance along the way so that they do not feel as if they
are disconnected from the environment in which they work and
live in.
Mr. Veasey. Yeah. Do you think that in regards to their
privacy, like if someone had a mental health issue and, for
instance, let's say that the person that they needed to meet
with, that the provider was in their chain of command, do you
think that sailors and marines feel like that they have enough
privacy so they wouldn't miss out on the next promotion or miss
out getting that next level of clearance?
Secretary Del Toro. Congressman, our number one priority is
the safety of that sailor and marine. Life is too precious. We
need them to do the right thing to take care of their safety
and their life.
And so we encourage them, whether it is under the Brandon
Act, to go seek help on their own, for example, if they choose
to do that. At the same time, we also need to have a
responsibility to know what is going on with that sailor so
that their military family can also try to help take care of
them, right?
So it is a dual-edged sword. You have to be very, very
careful with that as well. If they are seeking out mental
health help on their own and they never share any of that with
their military family, then how can we help them get to a
better place with perhaps some of the life stressors that they
are going through as well too?
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
Secretary Del Toro. We have to remove that issue
altogether.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you.
The Chairman. I want to once again thank Admiral and Mrs.
Gilday and General and Mrs. Berger for your decades of service
to our Nation. We cannot thank you enough for the sacrifices
you have made to ensure that we remain a free, great Nation.
So thank you very much. And I look forward to seeing each
of you in the next chapters of your life, which I am sure are
going to be awesome.
Secretary Del Toro, on behalf of Representative Chris Smith
of New Jersey, we are going to submit some questions for the
record on the status of the investigation into the death of
Seaman Mullen. And appreciate you responding to those when you
receive them.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 175.]
Secretary Del Toro. Absolutely.
The Chairman. And with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 28, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 28, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.001

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.002

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.003

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.004

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.005

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.006

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.007

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.008

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.009

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.010

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.011

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.012

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.013

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.014

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.015

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.016

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.017

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.018

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.019

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.020

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.021

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.022

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.023

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.024

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.025

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.026

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.027

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.028

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.029

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.030

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.031

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.032

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.033

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.034

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.035

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.036

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.037

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.038

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.039

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.040

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.041

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.042

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.043

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.044

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.045

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.046

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.047

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.048

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.049

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.050

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.051

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.052

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.053

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.054

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.055

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.056

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.057

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.058

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.059

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.060

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.061

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.062

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.063

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.064

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.065

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.066

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.067

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.068

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.069

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.070

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.071

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.072

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.073

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.074

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.075

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.076

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.077

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.078

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.079

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.080

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.081

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.082

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.083

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.084

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.085

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.086

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.087

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.088

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.089

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.090

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.091

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.092

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.093

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.094

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.095

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.096

.eps?

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 28, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.097

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.098

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.099

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.100

.eps?

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 28, 2023

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Secretary Del Toro. There are multiple concerns, Congressman. It
starts with the labor force. We need a really strong blue collar labor
force in this country to actually support our shipbuilding interests
across shipyards around the country. Furthermore, we don't have enough
of shipyards in general. We have shut down too many in past years.
Another concern I have is working with smaller shipyards, for example,
so that they can actually come on board and do Department of Defense
work and work as subcontractors to the larger shipyards so that we can
increase productivity. So labor force across all shipyards, getting
smaller shipyards to work with larger shipyards. The case in Austal,
for example, that is now building steel to support our Columbia class
program at Electric Boat is a perfect example of that. I believe Austal
is looking at hiring close to one thousand more people in the near
term. So we need more labor and we need more legal immigration. We need
more work visa programs that can bring the types of folks to this
country that allow us to work in the shipyards. That is my primary
concern. Of course, I meet constantly with the CEOs of all the
shipyards to understand how well they are moving with regards to their
production rates. I believe on the destroyer side, we are getting a lot
better now, to the point where we can build 1.8 per year between the
two primary shipyards.  [See page 14.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER
Admiral Gilday. Over the FYDP, the DON intends to procure the
following quantities, with USMC procuring NSM, the Navy procuring SM-6,
and the Navy joining the AF in procuring LRASM and AMRAAM:   [See page
20.]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.101

.eps__

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GAETZ
Admiral Gilday. This question is outside of the purview of the
witness.  [See page 32.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON
Secretary Del Toro. China is the number one priority. For the first
time since the defeat of the Soviet Union, we have a strategic
competitor with naval capabilities and capacities that rival and, in
some areas, even surpass our own. It's not just the ships and the
weapons that concern me. It's what Beijing does as it strives to
achieve leverage over its competitors. It uses every advantage in a
corrosive, extractive and dangerously irresponsible manner.  [See page
43.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON
Secretary Del Toro. Mr. Fallon, The U.S. Navy concluded its
investigation into the potable water contamination incident aboard the
USS Nimitz (CVN 68) on Oct. 26. We shared the results of this
investigation with the Committee on 12 May 2023 and to your personal
office on the same day. Regarding the USS Nimitz, here is the executive
summary of the investigation: The investigation into the presence of
jet propellant-5 (JP-5) aboard Nimitz found that JP-5 residue in the
ship's bilges entered an unused potable water tank through a
deteriorated gasket on top of the tank sometime between June 2020 and
March 2021, during the ship's previous deployment. On Sept. 16, while
the ship was operating off the coast of Southern California, Sailors
aboard the ship reported a fuel-like smell and taste in the ship's
potable water. Engineering personnel immediately secured access to the
ship's potable water and commenced testing of their potable water
tanks. Free bottled water was made available to the crew during this
time. While in port at Naval Air Station North Island Sept. 17-Oct. 2,
Nimitz was connected to City of San Diego water supply. On Oct. 1, test
results indicated that 22 of 26 potable water tanks tested below the
health action level for JP-5 in drinking water recommended by the Navy
and Marine Corps Public Health Center--266 part per billion (ppb)--and
the ship's potable water was determined to be safe. Nimitz returned to
Bremerton, Wash. on Oct. 28 and the isolated tanks were thoroughly
cleaned, repaired, inspected, and returned to service. Currently, all
26 potable water tanks on board are providing safe water to the crew.
Eleven Nimitz Sailors reported symptoms that may have been a result of
JP-5 ingestion. Those Sailors were treated by the medical staff aboard
the ship, their symptoms resolved, and all 11 Sailors were cleared to
return to duty by Oct. 5, 2022.  [See page 43.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. DAVIS
Secretary Del Toro. The Department of the Navy (DON) is working
with the Department of Justice (DOJ) to expedite the processing of
claims under the Camp Lejeune Justice Act (CLJA), to include grouping
injuries based on severity of injury and collecting evidence to
substantiate injury and residence at Camp Lejeune during the period of
time defined in the statute. DOJ is the ultimate decision authority
with respect to settlement of cases under the CLJA because of what is
referred to as the ``Aggregate Rule.'' If the aggregate amount of the
prospective settlements of all related claims exceeds the amount the
Department of Defense may adjudicate, which is $500,000, written
approval from DOJ must be obtained prior to the settlement of any
particular claim. Currently, the prospective settlement of claims
submitted under the CLJA exceeds $500,000. Therefore, the DOJ is the
ultimate decision authority on settlements under the CLJA. The DON
continues to refine processes to effectively manage the information
provided by claimants and evaluate claimants' eligibility for
compensation under the CLJA. The DON will work closely with the DOJ to
obtain approval for appropriate settlements as efficiently and
expeditiously as possible. Please see attached: Delegation of
Settlement Authority Under the Federal Tort Claims Act OSD005592-20
RES.pdf  [See page 48.]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.102

.eps[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.103

.eps__

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. VEASEY
Admiral Gilday. In 2021, VRM-30 conducted the first CMV-22
deployment, and had their first opportunity to collect operational
data. Employing 3 aircraft, they executed 182 events at a 95% sortie
completion rate, delivering over 267,000 lbs of cargo and 523
passengers in support of Carrier Strike Group one (CSG-1) while
utilizing seven forward logistics sites. Fleet Logistics Multi Mission
Wing (VRM Wing), the type wing for the CMV-22B, is in the development
process of their recommendation for adjustments to distribution, and
force structure in the current and projected environments. This
project, notionally referred to as a Concept of Employment (CONEMP), is
expected to complete within the next 12 months. The Navy also
recognizes a need to more broadly re-evaluate our Concept of Operation
(CONOPS) for the CMV-22B given the aircraft capability and operating
boundaries. The current CONOPS was written well before the first CMV-22
was delivered and informed by its predecessor, the C-2A, a vastly
different aircraft.  [See page 55.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 28, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS

Mr. Rogers. (On behalf of Rep. Chris Smith of New Jersey)
Can you provide information on any policy changes or medical
care and oversight improvements that the Navy has already
implemented for Navy Seal training in response to Kyle Mullen's
untimely and avoidable death?
Secretary Del Toro. On May 25, 2023, Navy leaders,
including Commander, Naval Ed. Training Command, RADM Pete
Garvin, briefed professional staff of the HASC and SASC on the
finding and recommendation of the NETC investigation into the
circumstance surrounding the death of SN Mullen. This brief
included information on policy changes and medical oversight
improvements.
Mr. Rogers. (On behalf of Rep. Chris Smith of New Jersey)
Can you provide an update on the status of the NETC
investigation and the timeframe in which you each will read,
review and release the command report on the death of Seaman
Mullen?
Secretary Del Toro. The NETC completed its investigation on
March 24, 2023 following briefs to SN Mullen's family and
congressional briefs. The NETC released the investigation to
the public on March 25, 2023.
Mr. Rogers. (On behalf of Rep. Chris Smith of New Jersey)
What accountability measures are available for those
responsible for the systemic medical care shortfalls present at
BUDS, such as those which led to Seaman Mullen's death?
Secretary Del Toro. Accountability measures available
include: administrative measures, non-judicial punishments, and
courts-martial.
Mr. Rogers. (On behalf of Rep. Chris Smith of New Jersey)
Can you provide information on any policy changes or medical
care and oversight improvements that the Navy has already
implemented for Navy Seal training in response to Kyle Mullen's
untimely and avoidable death?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Mr. Rogers. (On behalf of Rep. Chris Smith of New Jersey)
Can you provide an update on the status of the NETC
investigation and the timeframe in which you each will read,
review and release the command report on the death of Seaman
Mullen?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Mr. Rogers. (On behalf of Rep. Chris Smith of New Jersey)
What accountability measures are available for those
responsible for the systemic medical care shortfalls present at
BUDS, such as those which led to Seaman Mullen's death?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN

Mr. Lamborn. The Fiscal Year 2023 National Defense
Authorization Act required several reports on the development
of a nuclear sea-launched cruise missile (SLCM-N). Can you
please provide an update as to where these reports are in the
process and an estimate for when they'll be delivered to
Congress.
Secretary Del Toro. The Nuclear-Capable Sea-Launched Cruise
Missile (SLCM-N) spending plan was developed in accordance with
Section 1642 of the National Defense Authorization Act (Public
Law 117-263) for Fiscal Year 2023, and was completed and
delivered to Congress on 14 April 2023, and was completed and
delivered to Congress on 14 April 2023. The Administration
strongly opposes continued funding for the nuclear sealaunched
cruise missile (SLCM-N) and its associated warhead. The
President's Nuclear Posture Review concluded that the SLCM-N,
which would not be delivered before the 2030s, is unnecessary
and potentially detrimental to other priorities. The United
States has sufficient current and planned capabilities for
deterring an adversary's limited nuclear use. DoD's
conventional and strategic nuclear capabilities include the
W76-2 low-yield submarine-launched ballistic missile warhead,
the current air-launched cruise missile, its successor (the
long-range standoff weapon), and F-35A dual-capable aircraft
that can be equipped with updated B61-12 nuclear gravity bombs.
Further investment in developing SLCM-N would divert resources
and focus from higher modernization priorities for the U.S.
nuclear enterprise and infrastructure, which is already
stretched to capacity after decades of deferred investments. It
would also impose operational challenges on the Navy.
Mr. Lamborn. I am disappointed to see that the Navy
recently issued a sole source contract notification on a
federal contract for ejection seat upgrades. Will the Navy
commit to issuing a solicitation for a full and open
competition for its next generation ejection seat, or does it
plan to continue to issue sole source awards absent a fully
informed process? Assuming the Navy moves forward with a
competitive selection process, how does the Navy plan to
approach requirements around U.S.-based manufacturing for next
generation ejection seats, rather than just final assembly?
Secretary Del Toro. Navy Aircrew Common Ejection seats are
integrated in F/A-18 series, EA-18 and T-45 aircraft. The Naval
Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) provides engineering and logistic
services to variants of ejection seats in the F-5 and F-16
aircraft associated with Navy aggressor squadrons. The Navy
recently issued a notification for a sole source contract to
update the time limited components of ejection seats that were
already procured in FY15. These seats were originally procured
for legacy aircraft that were struck for cost savings. These
Government owned seats will be updated for installation in the
eight (8) F/A-18E aircraft that were authorized in the FY2023
NDAA. These components consist of thermal batteries, drogue
parachute and main parachute. There is only one vendor that can
provide these supplies and services to satisfy these
requirements. Currently, there is no requirement for a Next
Generation Ejection Seat. The Navy will approach the
requirements for any future competitive selection processes as
it is required to by FAR 15.3 and comply with the Competition
in Contracting Act.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT

Mr. Scott. We have been building DDG-51 for decades, so we
have a pretty good dataset for this class of warships and how
we have maintained them in through the years. A quarter century
ago in April 1998, DDG-58 through 63 were all in their third
year after commissioning. How may CASREPS were each of these
ships reporting in April 1998, and what was the average for
these 6 ships? In 2023, sadly we only had one DDG, DDG-119,
that was commissioned three years ago in 2020, so lets reach
back to DDG-116, 117 and 118 who were the only commissioned DDG
in 2018, 2019, & 2021. That gives us four DDG. What are the
number of CASREPS those ships carrying in April of 2023, and
what is the average of those four ships?
Secretary Del Toro. [See attachment]
Note 1--Source: Naval Vessel Register Note 2--Source:
Defense Readiness Reporting System. These totals do not account
for changes to or variations in equipment configuration,
changes in reporting system or data repository, or attitudes
and guidance concerning the submission of CASREPs from 1998 to
2023.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.104

.epsMr. Scott. We have reports throughout the fleet of
hours upon hours of time being spent in person and in zoom
calls by very senior leadership in coordination meetings
concerning your ``Get Real Get Better'' project. Do you know
how many cumulative work hours your Flag Officers and Master
Chiefs have invested in this project over the last year? Is
this even being tracked? How do you measure the effectiveness
of this investment? What was broken that this program is trying
to fix? Who and what broke it?
Secretary Del Toro. Get Real Get Better is an initiative to
advance our Navy culture. We use the term ``advance'' because
we are keeping what we know works. Get Real Get Better is
straightforward, proven leadership and problem-solving
behaviors already practiced by our best leaders, and we are
making it the standard. We are pursuing Get Real Get Better
because, although we are a world class Navy, not all
performance is world class. We have too much variability in
performance, notable in: shipyard delays, force development
failures, operational and safety incidents, and pay and
personnel issues.
Meanwhile, our pacing challenge is getting bigger and
better. Get Real Get Better is not just theory. We are adopting
measurable standards for these leadership and problem-solving
behaviors. The standards are:

LAlign on standards and goals

LFind and embrace the ``red''

LUse Navy problem-solving methods to get at root
cause

LFix or elevate barriers

LEncourage learning through trust and respect

LSpecify ownership Implementing Get Real Get
Better is a multi-year process.
Last fall, we trained leadership teams from echelon 1
through echelon 5, which encompassed about four hours of
training. This year, we are reinforcing this effort with
monthly leadership team discussions, which are accomplished in
less than one hour. Get Real Get Better is about building
better leaders and problem-solvers toward one goal: warfighting
advantage.
Mr. Scott. Prior to World War Two, the Two-Ocean Navy,
sponsored by Representative Carl Vinson of Georgia, ensured
that the U.S. Navy was prepared to fight a peer-to-peer
conflict across the Pacific. However, prior to that landmark
piece of legislation, the U.S. passed the Merchant Marine Act
of 1936 to ensure we had the ships to transport the Arsenal of
Democracy, mobilize the nation's shipyards and maritime base,
and provide ships to both the merchant marine and Navy as
auxiliaries and landing ships. As Secretary of the Navy, what
are you and the Navy doing to ensure that there is not just a
Navy but a Merchant Marine, as required by 46 U.S. Code
Sec. 50101?
Secretary Del Toro. The Merchant Marine is vital to our
national defense and an integral member of the Navy and Joint
Force that supports military operations across the spectrum of
strategic competition, crisis, and conflict. Military Sealift
Command (MSC) serves as the Naval Component of U.S.
Transportation Command and the Department of Defense maritime
logistics provider for over 130 government and commercially-
owned and chartered vessels.
MSC is also the largest employer of U.S. merchant mariners
in the United States with more than 5,000 Civil Service
Mariners who crew and operate government ships executing
national security missions. The Navy partners with the Maritime
Administration (MARAD) to resource the procurement and
maintenance of the Ready Reserve Force (RRF), which provides
10.6M sqft of rapid worldwide sealift deployment to transport
equipment for the Joint Force. The RRF currently consists of 48
government-owned vessels that are crewed and operated by U.S.
merchant mariners.
In addition, the Navy supports MARAD's Maritime Security
Program (MSP) as part of a whole-of-government effort to
generate cargo and requirements for U.S.-flagged vessels to
transport cargoes during peacetime. The MSP maintains a fleet
of commercially viable, militarily useful merchant ships active
in international trade, while also providing DoD access to a
global intermodal transportation network of terminals,
facilities, logistic management services, and U.S. citizen
merchant mariners. The Navy, along with other departments,
generate cargo (government-impelled cargo) with a requirement
to be shipped aboard U.S.-flagged vessels.
The Navy continues to support the development, training,
and/or credentialing of Sailors to pursue careers in the
Merchant Marine. The Navy maintains the Strategic Sealift
Officer Force, an all Navy Reserve program of 2,200 warfare
qualified Navy officers with civilian mariner licenses/
credentials to support the activation, operation, and
sustainment of US organic sealift fleet. To improve Sailor
opportunities in the Merchant Marine, the Navy provides
personalized analysis training and assessments to identify
eligible mariner credentials and, through Navy Credentialing
Opportunities Online, pays for the Transportation Worker
Identification Card and U.S. Coast Guard licensing
examinations.
Mr. Scott. In recent testimony, Admiral Aquilino said ``In
terms of Sealift, we have a distinct advantage over the PRC in
both numbers and capabilities.'' Sealift experts disagree. Can
you elaborate on Aquilino's comment?
Secretary Del Toro. A conflict with the PRC will require
the U.S. military to support forces with extremely robust
logistics. The DoD sustains expeditionary forces with both
organic and commercial contracted shipping assets. The PRC's
assessed plan during conflict is to use modified civilian Roll-
on/Roll-Off (RORO) ships vice building a dedicated logistics
fleet. The PRC does not have the organic capacity and
capability that U.S. Sealift provides, giving the U.S. military
an advantage in the movement of troops and logistic support.
Office of Secretary of Defense Cost Assessment and Program
Evaluation (OSD CAPE) and United States Transportation Command
(USTRANSCOM) Mobility Studies assessed the current validated
capacity requirement for Strategic Sealift in wartime as 19.6M
square feet (sqft). This requirement is met using three
mechanisms: 1) Afloat Prepositioning Forces, 2) Surge Sealift,
and 3) Commercial Sustainment.
1) Afloat Prepositioning Forces provide 4.7M sqft of lift
capacity via 15 government-owned and commercially-operated
Roll-on/Roll-off ships (ROROs). Ten prepositioned ships remain
in a fully operational status and are forward-deployed, while 5
prepositioned ships remain in CONUS in a reduced operational
status. These ships include USMC Maritime Prepositioning Force
(MPF) and Army Afloat Prepositioning Ships. MPF Next Generation
Ship requirements development is ongoing in support of the USMC
Global Positioning Network concept and will support the
delivery of a lead ship in FY32, aligning with the retirement
of the oldest MPF ships. Recapitalization of the MPF will
continue to support USMC equipment and material needs
prepositioned in INDOPACOM.
2) Organic Surge Sealift provides 10.6M sqft of lift
capacity using 48 government owned and commercially operated
ROROs. These ships are located in CONUS and are in a reduced
operating status with a 5-day activation requirement. By the
end of the FYDP, 71% of the Organic Surge Sealift vessels will
reach the end of their service life. Readiness and reliability
of the organic sealift force is being addressed with increased
maintenance and repair budgets aligned with age of ships,
extended service life of the most reliable ships, and an
accelerated recapitalization Buy-Used program. To date, the
Buy-Used program has purchased 1.1M sqft of younger, more
reliable capacity. Congressional support for the authorization
of additional used vessels will allow the Buy-Used program to
continue to provide ready, reliable ships to close the capacity
gap created by the retirement of ships.
3) Commercial sustainment provides 3.7M sqft of lift
capacity using 20 commercially-owned (US-flagged) and
commercially-operated militarily useful ROROs. These ships
commit capacity to the department under the Voluntary
Intermodal Sealift Agreement (VISA) program in exchange for
preference to peacetime cargo. Participating ships are engaged
in commercial trade at time of activation and, on average,
provide an 18-day response time if activated. The VISA also
provides assured access to heavy lift and containerships,
critical to the transportation of bulk ammunition.
4) Additional commercial contracted shipping assets are
provided through the Voluntary Tanker Agreement (VTA). This
partnership between the U.S. Government and the maritime
industry provides DoD assured access to commercial state-of-
the-art sealift, tankers and intermodal equipment during
national emergencies and wartime operations.
5) The Navy is addressing the age and reliability of the
current organic sealift fleet in order to provide sufficient
capacity and capability to support current and future defense
strategies. On-going recapitalization efforts of the organic
sealift fleet through a combination of new construction and
buy-used will provide sufficient capacity for the deployment
and sustainment of decisive land forces. Rationale: The
reference to service life extensions is outdated and we are no
longer pursuing this COA. VISA and VTA should be deleted as
they do not apply to the organic fleet.
Mr. Scott. Who is responsible to foster, promote and
develop the commercial shipyards building Navy ships? Who
provides shipyard subsidies? Is that the job of the US Navy or
the Department of Transportation's Maritime Administration? How
often do you meet jointly with Secretary Pete Buttigieg and
Commandant Ann Phillips to work on this issue?
Secretary Del Toro. Health and competition in the
shipbuilding industrial base and supply chain is vital to
meeting our National Defense Strategy. With the help of
Congress and working with local, state, and national
organizations, the Navy and its commercial shipbuilders are
identifying opportunities to generate resiliency and
productivity in the shipbuilding industrial base. The Navy is
taking steps to expand and strengthen our commercial
shipbuilding partners through targeted industrial base
investments in shipbuilder infrastructure, supply chain
capability/capacity, scaling new technologies, addressing
workforce trade skill gaps and constraints, and expanding
productive capacity via strategic outsourcing of large-scale
fabrication. In concert with the Navy's investments, the
Department of Transportation's Maritime Administration (MARAD)
manages the Small Shipyard Grant program that provides direct
subsidies to support small shipyards for projects that make
capital and related improvements or provide training for
workers in shipbuilding, ship repair. In addition to direct
subsidies, MARAD promotes the development of commercial
shipyards through financing programs such as the Federal Ship
Financing Program and the Capital Construction Fund. I, as
Secretary of the Navy, foster a collaborative relationship with
both the Secretary of Transportation and the Maritime
Administrator, which includes joint engagements and
collaborative working relationships across the three
organizations.
Mr. Scott. How important is the Ready Reserve Fleet to
logistics during a peer level conflict in INDOPACOM. How has
your office assisted Sec Buttigeig in improving the 40.7%
combined vessel readiness level identified during the joint
Turbo Activation exercise?
Secretary Del Toro. 90% of unit equipment flowing to
theater moves via organic and commercial sealift assets. The
validated capacity for Surge Sealift for all conflicts is 10.6M
square feet (SqFt) to meet delivery demand. Surge Sealift
consists of vessels from Military Sealift Command (MSC) and the
Maritime Administration's (MARAD) Ready Reserve Force (RRF). At
the time of Turbo Activation (TA-19), the average age of the
surge fleet was 47 years, readiness was 64% of available
sealift capacity and mission success rate was 78%. The combined
vessel readiness score, which measures reliability of ready
ships, was 40.7%. In response to the declining readiness and
reliability of the surge fleet, the Navy initiated a Sealift
Performance to Plan (P2P) initiative. The Sealift P2P
identified four levers to increase sealift readiness and
reliability. The Navy acted on all four levers beginning in
2021.
1) Inactivated seven low-performing, high-cost vessels
ahead of end of service-life.
2) Increased maintenance and repair (M&R) funding to align
with the increasing cost of maintenance as vessels age. PB22
added over $500M in M&R funding over the FYDP.
3) Transferred seven vessels from MSC to MARAD under the
RRF to take advantage of efficiencies of the commercial
maintenance model under a single reserve sealift manager.
4) Accelerated the Buy-Used program to close the capacity
gap created by the retirement of low-performing vessels and
planned age-related retirements. The first two Buy-Used vessels
are 25 years old and will be ready for tasking in June 2023.
MARAD purchased another three 15-year old ships in February
2023 with staggered delivery dates in March 2023, July 2023 and
Sept 2023. The three ships, providing 600K sqft, will be ready
for tasking by the end of FY24, approximately 8 months after
delivery. The 2023 Appropriations Act included funding for the
purchase of 300K sqft, or two used vessels. MARAD is conducting
a global market survey for the next used vessels, with results
available mid-summer and purchase anticipated Q4FY23 to Q1FY24,
based on market response. Ships would be ready for tasking 8
to10 months after delivery. PB24 requests funding for the
remaining 300K sqft required to close the capacity gap created
by the retired vessels. Average readiness since implementing
P2P levers has increased to 72% of available sealift capacity
and has been as high as 80%. Material readiness of the RRF
continues to increase as a result of the improvements.
However, ``fact-of-life'' issues, including competition for
commercial dry-docks and extended timelines due to COVID-
related labor and material shortages, are impacting MARAD's
ability to sustain these readiness levels. The Sealift P2P is
conducting a follow-on study using historical RRF data,
modeling and analysis to better predict readiness and
reliability.
Mr. Scott. NAVSEA has over 80,000 employees. MARAD has less
than 1,000 yet the Department of Transportation is building the
National Security Multi-Mission Vessel in Philly Shipyard close
to budget and schedule. What lessons has the Navy learned from
this project? How is such a small agency outperforming NAVSEA?
Secretary Del Toro. The Department of Transportation
Maritime Administration (MARAD) is using a commercial Vessel
Construction Manager (VCM) to ensure commercial best practices
are utilized in delivery of the NSMV. The Navy is utilizing a
similar concept in recapitalization of the Ready Reserve Force
(RRF) fleet through a Vessel Acquisition Manager (VAM) and an
Integrated Program Office (IPO) that includes MARAD, U.S.
Transportation Command, and the Navy. Partnering with a VAM and
IPO to replace aging sealift vessels has enabled the program to
leverage commercial best practices and recapitalize 960,000
square feet of cargo space to date at a reduced cost and
schedule.
Lessons learned and best practices utilized by the VAM and
VCM constructs are being applied to Navy shipbuilding programs.
Philly Shipyard leadership shared their approach to designing
and building the NSMV during visits by various Navy
representatives earlier this year. The shipyard's approach
involves maximizing the use of modular pre-package units to
speed up the assembly phases of construction. This is a good
practice that the Navy and a willing and able industry partner
can implement where possible. Furthermore, the Navy has learned
and benefited from experience in using Firm Fixed Price
contracts to procure low-complexity ships and a stable design
that leverages commercial designs. Philly Shipyard's approach
to shipbuilding involves a significant percentage of pre-
assembled and kitted material supplied by non-U.S. sources. The
Navy is required by law to buy American and leverage domestic
material sources as much as possible. NAVSEA is responsible for
designing, building, and maintaining the United States Navy's
fleet of surface combatants, aircraft carriers, auxiliary and
support ships, and submarines.
This portfolio includes a wide range of vessels with
different capabilities and specifications. Their projects
typically involve significant technical complexity, stringent
military requirements, strict acquisition policy and law, and
larger budgets. NAVSEA, and other Navy acquisition entities
strive to improve project management practices, foster
innovation, and enhance collaboration with commercial and
government organizations.
Mr. Scott. How could smaller domestic yards and allied
partners help the Navy rebuild its fleet and revitalize its
industrial base?
Secretary Del Toro. The Navy utilizes smaller domestic
yards, based on vessel requirements, in a similar manner to
larger shipyards to build and repair the Navy's fleet and
revitalize the domestic industrial base. The Navy has also
undertaken efforts to increase industrial base capacity through
strategic outsourcing of critical components to smaller yards,
such as non-nuclear submarine and carrier component work. In
addition, small business boat and craft builders play a crucial
role in any economy as they often form the backbone of local
communities, create jobs, and promote innovation and diversity.
Over the past five years, the Navy has awarded
approximately $1.02 billion in build contracts to our small
business ship, craft, and boatyards. Similarly, efforts to
expand capacity and capability across the shipbuilding
industrial base are reinvigorated by working with allies and
international partners. These efforts build overall resiliency
and complement existing industrial base efforts at the prime
and sub-tier suppliers, to include capital and workforce
investments. Current events have shown the genuine value in
maintaining relationships among partners and allies. This
approach to revitalizing the industrial base will leverage
industries' pace of technology, allies, and partners'
capabilities while exploring new concepts. The return on
investment includes a more flexible hybrid fleet that can be
scaled with our allies and partners to help fill gaps brought
on from world conflicts, or industrial base challenges, at a
more affordable cost.
Mr. Scott. What lessons learned from the 1980s Ocean
Venture exercises are applicable to Great Power Competition
today? Do you support establishing standing South China Sea and
Eastern Mediterranean task forces?
Secretary Del Toro. In late 2016, realizing that long-term
Great Power Competition was likely inevitable, senior leaders
across the Department of the Navy (DoN) began a structured
effort to study the lessons of the Cold War and apply the most
applicable elements to the implementation of the National
Defense Strategy. By early 2017, in coordination with then
Deputy Secretary of Defense Work, the CNO and CMC established
the Naval Strategy Panel (NSP)--a fully-informed, senior
decision body to adapt and modernize cold war-informed
strategies for use in the modern application of GPC. In 2021,
this effort expanded to merge with other efforts ongoing in the
Department to mitigate threats posed by our competitors. While
an exact parallel to the 1980's Ocean Venture exercise series
is no longer feasible within the DoN, due to Goldwater-Nichols
reforms, the concepts, philosophies and structures that drove
those strategies are being successfully applied within the NSP
and we are actively working to synchronize those efforts with
the other services, the combatant commands and the DoD writ
large. Progress has been demonstrable and is accelerating. We
would be happy to provide additional details at a higher level
of classification.
Mr. Scott. The requirement for RORO surge sealift capacity
is 10.6 million square feet. The recent Turbo Activations have
highlighted issues with readiness. What is the status of the
seven ships identified to be ready by FY 2024? Why is the Navy
not advocating for a building program similar to that developed
in the 1990s that resulted in the 20 large medium speed ro/ros?
Can the Navy provide a breakdown of the 51 RoRos identified in
the FY 2024 surge sealift fleet, their age, and when were the
last time they were activated and exercised?
Admiral Gilday. 90% of unit equipment flowing to theater
moves via organic and commercial sealift assets. The validated
capacity for Surge Sealift for all conflicts is 10.6M square
feet (sqft) to meet delivery demand. Surge Sealift consists of
vessels from Military Sealift Command (MSC) and the Maritime
Administration's (MARAD) Ready Reserve Force (RRF). Over 70% of
the Ready Reserve Force (RRF) will reach expected service life
over the next 10 years. Procuring used Roll-On/Roll-Off (RO/RO)
vessels is the fastest and most cost-effective recapitalization
approach to meet surge sealift requirements within an
acceptable level of risk.
Joint Staff validated Navy's decision; the FY22
Appropriations Act provided additional funding for the program.
Constructing new surge sealift vessels would significantly
increase the time and cost of bringing surge sealift vessels
online to replace ageing capacity; contract award to delivery
of the first new ship would take approximately five (5) times
longer and cost four (4) times more than the purchase and
refurbishment of a used vessel. The Navy supports
recapitalizing the Maritime Prepositioning Force (MPF), which
is prepositioned in full operating status. Navy and Marine
Corps are developing capability requirements for a new
construction program aligned to the MPF retirement schedule
beginning in 2030. The Navy, along with MARAD, is receiving
1.1M sqft of younger, more reliable capacity with the purchase
of five used vessels. Collectively, the five purchased used
ships provide 70K sqft/ship more than the baseline requirement
of 150K sqft and meet the intent of the purchase of seven
smaller ships. The first two used vessels are 25 years old and
will be ready for tasking in Sep 2023. MARAD purchased three
10-11year old ships in February 2023 with staggered delivery
dates in April 2023, June 2023 and Sept 2023.
The three ships are planned to be ready for tasking by the
end of FY24 approximately eight months after delivery. The FY23
Appropriations Act included funding for the purchase of 300K
sqft, or two used vessels. MARAD is conducting a global market
survey for the next used vessels, with results available Q4
FY23 and purchase anticipated Q2FY24 based on market response.
Ships would be ready for tasking 10 -18 months after delivery
dependent on the age and material condition of the ship. PB24
requests funding for an additional 300K sqft required to close
the capacity gap created by retired vessels. The table below
provides a breakdown of the FY24 RO/RO inventory, age and
activation/exercise dates.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.105

.epsMr. Scott. In testimony before the Defense
Appropriations Subcommittee you said icebreakers are not in the
latest budget because they are not included in navy
requirements. How does this effect NAVSEA's current mandate to
assist the USCG in building icebreakers? How can military
sealift command operate in arctic regions without icebreakers?
Do the Navy requirements need to change?
Admiral Gilday. Through the Coast Guard (USCG)-Navy
Integrated Program Office, NAVSEA continues to assist the USCG
by providing contracting and technical expertise. $300 million
in Shipbuilding and Conversion Navy funding was appropriated in
Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 and FY 2018 to fund detail design and
long lead time materials for Polar Security Cutter (PSC) #1.
Navy funding will also be used to acquire and support
approximately $83 million in Navy Type Navy Owned equipment,
which will ensure the PSC fleet's interoperability with the
Navy and other Department of Defense platforms.
USCG appropriations have provided sufficient funding for
the remaining PSC program efforts to date, with $47.2 million
appropriated in FY 2023. Military Sealift Command time-charters
with US Flagged ships that are compliant with International
Safety Management Polar Code, which allows them to operate in
the arctic regions. When icebreaking capabilities are required
for these vessels, arrangements are made through the US Coast
Guard to coordinate US Coast Guard, Canadian Coast Guard, or
NATO Ice Breaker services. Icebreaking for national defense is
inherently a United States Coast Guard (USCG) mission, as
agreed upon in a 1965 United States Navy and Department of
Treasury (USCG's Department in 1965) Memorandum of Agreement
and codified within United States Code (14 USCSec. 102), which
states that the USCG shall ``develop, establish, maintain, and
operate, with due regard to the requirements of national
defense, aids to maritime navigation, ice breaking facilities,
and rescue facilities for the promotion of safety on, under,
and over the high seas and waters subject to the jurisdiction
of the United States.''
The Navy supports the Nation's need for icebreaking
capability and surface presence in the polar regions and is
assisting USCG efforts to recapitalize its polar icebreaking
fleet. As stated in the Tri-Service Maritime Strategy, the
USCG's polar icebreaker fleet modernization provides the
capabilities to project national sovereignty, counter malign
activities, uphold international norms, and enable
interoperability with allies and partners in the polar regions.
Mr. Scott. Everyone is focused on helping US shipyards
succeed but they are corporate entities subject to the vagaries
of financial markets, inflation and the codes of capital. Is
the Navy working with Wall Street or the Department of Treasury
to fully understand financial constraints our shipyards face?
Are you working on finace opportunities? Are you working
jointly with the SEC and FBI to understand how money from Wall
Street might be used to support PLA Navy shipbuilding efforts?
Admiral Gilday. Navy contracts are executed in accordance
with the Federal Acquisition Regulations to ensure contractors
are eligible to bid on contracts, as well as to ensure they
meet the requirements set forth in the contracts. As such, the
Department utilizes all the authorities provided by Congress.
The Navy closely monitors the shipbuilding industrial base to
ensure that they comply with all Federal regulations as
specified in their contracts. Questions regarding potential
funding of PLA Navy shipbuilding efforts from Wall Street would
best be addressed by the Securities and Exchange Commission
and/or the Federal Bureau of Investigations.
Mr. Scott. In several venues you have emphasized the
importance of working jointly with allies. What efforts have
been made to work with allied US Merchant Mariners aboard
foreign ships, allied Merchant Marines including the Ukraine
and Philippines, and allied shipyards in Japan and Korea? What
opportunities for working jointly with shipbuilding and
merchant marine allies need to be further explored?
Admiral Gilday. Our alliances and partnerships remain our
key strategic advantage. Working together, we strengthen our
ability to prevail in conflict and further bolster integrated
deterrence by demonstrating a united front against potential
adversaries. The Navy operates forward alongside allies and
partners in activities that strengthen our strategic
partnerships and increase interoperability, information
sharing, and capacity for resilient, integrated logistics. Navy
vessels routinely conduct maintenance and voyage repairs in
foreign shipyards, as allowed by U.S. law. Details on specific
initiatives with the Merchant Marine are deferred to the U.S.
Maritime Administration. Although we have a very close working
relationship with the Maritime Administration, which oversees
and manages the overall health of the U.S. Merchant Marine
Force, the United States Navy does not directly interact with
our allied partners' merchant marine industry, unless it is
conducted indirectly through our partnerships with allied
Navies. That said, we do work closely with our allies and
partners to leverage their industrial base capacity at
shipyards, when required, to carry out work on our ships that
are forward deployed and home ported overseas, as well as
emergent work for ships that are deployed, but home ported in
the United States. We will continue to leverage our
partnerships with our allied navies, as well as the use of
their shipyards when required.
Mr. Scott. The US Air Force consumes over 50% of DoD fuel,
is the most restricted in terms of using alternative energy,
and is projected to consume large amounts of heavy munitions in
a peer level conflict. Yet the Pacific ocean is vast and they
do not have the airlift capacity to move heavy cargo vast
distances. How involved is the USAF in supporting military
sealift command requirements?
Admiral Gilday. Military Sealift Command (MSC) provides
ocean transportation for the Department of Defense and other
federal agencies during peacetime and war. United States
Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) provides support to the ten
other U.S. combatant commands by conducting global integrated
mobility operations, including sealift movements through MSC.
Movement requirements are analyzed by USTRANSCOM for
transportation feasibility, including airlift and sealift, with
inputs from Combatant Command planning conferences--a
collaborative effort between USTRANSCOM planners and combatant
command planners, including service component planners. The Air
Force participates in these planning conferences through their
service component of United States Indo-Pacific Command and
other combatant commands. In addition, MSC operates and
maintains two (2) Air Force container ships prepositioned with
ammunition stocks. The Air Force provides financial resourcing
in support of their mission requirements for sealift, with
official MSC tasking originating from USTRANSCOM.
Mr. Scott. Lieutenant Kyle Cregge, U.S. Navy, wrote an
article in the April 2023 issue of PRoceedings entitled ``SWOs
Need Higher Classification Training Pipelines.'' According to
the author, ``At present, no policy or program exists to fully
inform department heads before they assume their roles on
board.'' What plans, if any, does the U.S. Navy have to
maximize Surface Warfare Officer combat readiness with higher
classification training pipelines?
Admiral Gilday. Surface Warfare Officer (SWO) Department
Head (DH) course provides SWO DHs the appropriate level of
classification focused on establishing a baseline level of
knowledge for all prospective DHs to effectively lead and
manage their departments. The SWO DH course trains the
fundamentals of how to lead a shipboard combat watch team as a
Tactical Action Officer (TAO) utilizing tactics, techniques,
and procedures while preparing for platform-specific follow-on
training.
Per the approved Training Project Plan dated March 2020,
the DH school course uses fleet-oriented material and
operational programs to provide background instruction in
combat systems theory, basic engineering, and material
readiness. The curriculum employs a ``theory-to-practice''
approach while still stressing an understanding of combat
system operation and weapons employment.
However, the TAO phase is focused on the fundamental level
of knowledge of five major areas required for surface ship TAO
qualification which are: Information Warfare, Integrated Air
and Missile Defense, Surface Warfare, Undersea Warfare, and
Amphibious Warfare. Students are also required to have a
baseline level of knowledge of the capabilities and limitations
of both the U.S. Navy and our adversaries. The Surface Combat
Systems Training Command teaches the Aegis TAO class, the Ship
Self-Defense System TAO course, the Combat Systems Officer and
Prospective Executive and Commanding Officer Courses at the
SECRET General Service level with specific briefs conducted at
the Top Secret Level to address specific threats and system
issues.
The training systems used to conduct the performance phase
of these courses are designed to employ surrogate targets that
reflect general characteristics of higher classification
threats which maintains the SECRET level of classification
while optimizing student throughput. Significant investment in
Surface Combat Systems training combined with advancements in
our new ship baselines allowed the Surface Navy to field new
high fidelity training systems through the Surface Training
Advanced Virtual Environment--Combat System. These training
systems provide more realistic surrogate targets with advanced
missile models increasing training effectiveness. These new
systems combined with specific threat briefs at higher
classification levels are producing officers who are ready and
prepared to fully employ their ships upon arrival in the fleet.
Mr. Scott. Commanders Matt Wright and Jamie Powers, U.S.
Navy, wrote an article in the April 2023 issue of Proceedings
entitled, '' How to Build ASW Air Combat Elements.'' Should
Expeditionary Strike Groups (ESGs) have an antisubmarine
warfare mission? Would ESGs with ASW capability be an advantage
to the U.S. in large scale combat operations against an enemy
peer nation?
Admiral Gilday. When the need for extra defense of the
Amphibious Ready Group (ARG)/Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU)
arises due to operational circumstances, adding surface
combatants to the ARG/MEU formation to form an Expeditionary
Strike Group (ESG) will enhance the overall capabilities of
that task group, particularly in the area of Anti-Submarine
Warfare (ASW). To ensure the ESG is ready to execute ASW
missions, ESG Staffs are required to train and prepare to lead
ASW missions as a Primary Mission, assigned in the Navy's
Required Operational Capability (ROC) and Projected Operating
Environment (POE) instruction. During large scale combat
operations against an enemy peer nation, ASW capabilities will
be essential for every naval formation.
Mr. Scott. Ms. Annabelle Hutchinson wrote an article int he
April 2023 issue of PRoceedings entitled ``Naval Intelligence
Must Keep Pace with Software Innovation: Continually acquiring
the cutting-edge software that powers artificial intelligence
and machine learning is a community imperative.'' Moreover,
according to the author, ``If naval intelligence seeks to
maintain superiority in the digital age, it has no choice but
to innovate and adopt powerful new software, AI, and machine-
learning tools to meet that challenge.'' Do you agree with the
author that naval intelligence ``has no choice but to innovate
and adopt powerful new software, AI, and machine-learning tools
to meet that challenge?''
Admiral Gilday. In this era of digitally-intensive great
power competition, I agree that the rigorous, focused, and
disciplined adoption of advanced analytics, to include AI and
machine-learning tools and tradecraft, is needed to secure
decision advantage for the Navy and the Intelligence Community.
Naval Intelligence will continue to work closely with other
elements of the Navy, the Defense Intelligence Enterprise, and
Intelligence Community to make deliberate and tangible progress
in the adoption of new technologies.
Mr. Scott. The Missile Defense Review prioritized
solidifying the capability to counter small Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (sUAS). In November of 2022, the Chinese military
presented a light vehicle drone swarm launcher that can
seemingly launch up to 18 drones. Over the last few years, we
have seen greater accessibility, usage, and more rapid
advancement in drone technology. Drones today are more durable,
sustainable, and autonomous than ever before. What is your
assessment of the current and future drone and drone swarm
threat? What solutions are the Navy and Marine Corps currently
working in the near and far term? Do you feel the Navy and
Marine Corps are receiving adequate resourced to defeat the
growing drone and drone swarm threat? What is the Navy's and
Marine Corps' timeline to integrating and fielding these
capabilities? How is the Army bringing solutions via emerging
technology into theater to operationally test and gain critical
feedback from the war fighter?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy recognizes the proliferation of
unmanned systems and the potential for adversaries to exploit
low cost, commercial technology to create a warfighting
advantage over our existing systems. The greater accessibility,
usage, and rapid development of these technologies presents
unique challenges for the Navy to address the threat.
Currently, the Navy Shore C-sUAS program is looking into
technologies that increase the ability to detect sUAS swarms,
and ``dark drones'' that have historically gone undetected due
to rapid technology advancements. Navy Shore has the ability to
react appropriately today for a swarm scenario at the majority
of locations minimizing any potential impact. Our focus
currently is on employing a variety of sensor technologies
(Radio Frequency (RF), Electro Optical/Infrared (EO/IR), and
radar) working in concert to give operators greater confidence
in the ability to detect swarms. At sea, we are investing in
upgrades to existing portable equipment as well as system
integration for the shipboard combat systems suite to counter
the sUAS threats. These efforts will be executed in line with
Navy priorities to defeat the growing sUAS challenges. We are
continuing to take the threat posed by sUAS seriously and are
investing in systems to protect Navy ships at sea and in port.
The standup of the Joint Counter small Unmanned Aircraft System
Office (JCO) has created many opportunities for RDTE efforts,
which is attempting to close the gap where Services are limited
in readily available capabilities. It is imperative to work
with the JCO to reduce wasted resourcing and time in pursuit of
material solutions and procedural changes. Furthermore, via the
JCO, the opportunity exists to eventually establish a truly
Joint solution that can benefit all Services.
Mr. Scott. The Navy's recently announced Force Design 2045
Plan calls for a 373-ship fleet, of which 150 will be unmanned.
How is the Navy leveraging commercial best practices including
modeling and simulation to quickly develop, test, scale, and
deploy a fleet with such a large share of unmanned vessels?
What lessons has the Navy drawn from commercial industry? What
mechanisms are currently set to adopt tested industry
solutions?
Admiral Gilday. 1. Force Design 2045 calls for the Navy of
the 2040s and beyond to include more than 350 manned ships and
about 150 large unmanned surface and subsurface platforms. The
Navy has incorporated commercial best practices to rapidly
design and mature unmanned platforms and systems. Some key
examples include:The Navy has adopted industry's practice of
applying a digitally based, modular open systems approach to
ensure major systems and interfaces use recognized standards as
broadly as possible. A prime example is the Navy's employment
of an open Unmanned Maritime Autonomy Architecture (UMAA),
developed in collaboration with industry.
UMAA, which utilizes open interfaces and services, will
allow more rapid integration of new or improved capabilities
including from potential commercial sources. The Navy is
investing in collaborative development environments such as the
Rapid Autonomy Integration Lab (RAIL) where industry will apply
digital engineering infrastructure, tools, and processes--like
those found in commercial projects--to rapidly develop, test,
certify, and deploy new and updated autonomous capabilities.
The Navy has adopted modern industry software development best
practices and has begun to collect the data necessary to fuel
validated modeling and simulation tools to be collaboratively
used with our industry partners. Collaboration with our
laboratories, academia, and industry partners, in a balanced
mix of pre-construction simulation and land/sea-based
prototyping, will accelerate the ``build a little--test a
little--learn a lot'' process for unmanned technologies, as
well as provide feedback and lessons learned from experiments
and exercises to accelerate the deployment of unmanned vessels.
2. The Navy continues to incorporate feedback and lessons
from Industry's commercial efforts. The Navy recently completed
an Unmanned Systems Industry Day in March 2023 with 430
companies participating, nearly half of whom were small
businesses. Much of the feedback the Navy received focused on
existing commercial industry capabilities and the perceived
cost/schedule/performance risk associated with advancing
commercial performance up to Navy requirements. There are
specific considerations and military requirements that often
impact direct transition of commercial systems for military
purposes, but through open dialogue the Navy seeks to work with
industry to maximize as many opportunities which may exist and
minimize the impact of risk-driving technical requirements. One
such example put into practice is the use of commercial vessel
standards for large and medium unmanned surface vessels (USV).
The Navy is working with the American Bureau of Shipping (ABS)
to leverage commercial best practices and standards, and take
advantage of aspects in the unmanned space that enable a
reduction in military standards.
3. The Navy is using innovative methods to test industry
hardware and software solutions. Some key examples include: The
Navy successfully operationally employed tested industry
solutions in the ongoing testing and experimentation that Task
Force 59 is conducting with USVs. Task Force 59 was able to
rapidly lease and learn from existing industry vessel
platforms. The Navy is expanding this learning approach to the
US Fourth Fleet.
These initiatives support continued refinement of platform
requirements, technical maturation, capabilities development,
and procurement program planning. The Navy's future hybrid
fleet will likely employ a mix of commercial-based solutions
and technologies, and military-specific systems, depending on
the operational environment and mission. In unmanned systems
acquisition, the Navy also employs RAIL to test in-situ
software reliability and integration across platform, payload,
and mission software applications derived from commercial
solutions. RAIL also employs modeling-and-simulation technology
with software-in-the-loop testing to validate integration of
various autonomous behaviors, sensors, and payloads.
The Navy is using multiple USV prototype platforms,
including commercially derived support vessel designs, as test
beds for industry solutions. Other examples include the
reliability testing of six different USV engine solutions at
industry sites. The Navy utilized a commercial solutions
opening (CSO) approach in collaboration with the Defense
Innovation Unit (DIU) to test candidates for the next
generation of expeditionary mine countermeasures small Unmanned
Underwater Vehicle (UUV), designated Lionfish. Two industry
UUV's were then tested by Fleet Explosive Ordnance Disposal
(EOD) groups supported by the Navy program office. This
approach was used to select the ultimate Lionfish protoype.
Mr. Scott. While the Navy demonstrated its ability to
rapidly advance innovation through the Task Force 59, more
action is needed to scale the lessons learned across programs
of record. How does the Navy assess the success and measurable
impact of Task Force 59? How is the Navy incorporating these
lessons learned to transition prototypes into programs of
record that will field this technology to the warfighter?
Admiral Gilday. TF-59 has introduced new opportunities for
operationalizing commercial systems and creative use of
service-based capability models to further accelerate the
Navy's Unmanned Campaign Plan. These efforts have been
foundational and they continue to inform our operations in
these types of systems. They also contribute to a deliberate
development plan across six Lines of Effort (LOE): 1) reliable
Hull, Mechanical and Electrical (HM&E); 2) advanced networks
and radios; 3) USV Integrated Combat System (ICS); 4) vessel
control software; 5) sensory perception and autonomy; 6)
platform and payload prototyping; demonstrating new
capabilities to inform the requirements and programs by
providing both learning and operational value today. The Navy
is expanding the lessons into other operating areas and
modifying the construct in ways that further integrate systems
into more complex and rigorous naval activities while also
driving to potential future programs of record. The next
opportunity to combine the campaign objectives and TF-59
lessons will be our efforts with the 4th Fleet area of
responsibility, focusing on further integration and scaling
operationalized efforts.
Mr. Scott. The Navy's ``NavalX'' innovation cell is
designed to accelerate the adoption of commercially proven
technologies into the Navy through its ``tech bridge''
programs. What success stories can the Navy point to where a
commercial technology was successfully adopted into a program
of record? What actions are being taken to scale the success of
NavalX across key technologies like autonomy?
Admiral Gilday. NavalX focuses on identifying opportunities
for commercial solutions to DoN problems as defined by the
Chief of Naval Operations Navigation Plan 2022 and Marine Corps
Force Design 2030 objectives. NavalX builds momentum through
commercial partnerships resulting in an increased return on
investment and more transitions to the Fleet and Programs of
Record (PoR). To accomplish this, NavalX engages local business
ecosystems through a network of 16 nationwide Tech Bridges.
These Tech Bridges host and facilitate outreach events in the
following commercial technology areas:
1) Autonomy & Robotics, 2) Artificial Intelligence/Machine
Learning, 3) Space, 4) Cyber, 5) Energy & Materials, 6) Health
& Human Systems, and 7) Extended Reality. Additionally, NavalX
aligns activity with the DON Technology Transfer, Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) programs. NavalX also collaborates
with the Department of Defense (DoD) Office of Strategic
Capital (OSC), Rapid Innovation Funding (RIF) office, Defense
Innovation Unit, National Security Innovation Network, and
AFWERX. Going forward, NavalX intends grow within the DoN by
leveraging industry best practices to enable the rapid and
affordable introduction of commercial capability to solve naval
problems, first to the user and then scaling in partnership
with PoRs. Specific examples of accelerating the adoption and
transition of commercial technology include:

LThe Palmetto Tech Bridge, representing South
Carolina and Georgia, refined and developed the Network and
Data-center Intelligent Assistant (NADIA) from technologies
developed by their local business ecosystem. NADIA provides
network administrators with an AI-based tool that will automate
and assist root cause identification and corrective actions in
response to network disruptions, degradation, and/or related
system failures. The NADIA project transitioned in 2022 to the
Naval Information Warfare Systems Command (NAVWAR), in support
of the Program Executive Office Command, Control,
Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (PEO C4I), Program
Manager Warfare for Tactical Networks (PMW-160) as part of the
Consolidated Afloat Network and Enterprise Services (CANES)
PoR.

LThe Southern Maryland Tech Bridge collaborated
with the Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIRSYSCOM) in support of
the Program Executive Office for Unmanned Aviation and Strike
Weapons (PEO U&W), Navy and Marine Corps Small Tactical
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Program Office (PMA-263).
Together they conducted a Marine Corps Tactical Resupply UAS
Prize Challenge to demonstrate autonomous resupply in austere
environments. Sixteen proposals were received--a majority from
small and non-traditional companies--and six teams were
selected to compete in a flying competition at the Yuma Proving
Ground. As a result, PMA-263 selected and awarded a production
contract with one of the companies in April 2023 with an
expected initial operational capability in October 2023.

LThe Pacific Northwest Tech Bridge, encompassing
the Washington State and Oregon areas, incubated a university-
sourced research project that employed small unmanned, remote-
controlled water jet modules to clean the air exchanging
condensers during routine ship maintenance at US Navy
shipyards. The Pacific Northwest Tech Bridge helped secure
funding and contracts to get prototypes built from two of the
competing companies. These prototypes resulted in significant
reduction in hazardous labor and rework. The project
transitioned to NAVSEA, who issued a $100k contract through the
Defense Logistics Agency to purchase three additional units for
other shipyards that perform ship depot maintenance and
overhaul.

LThe Ventura Tech Bridge representing Central
California, in cooperation with Midwest Tech Bridge centered
around Crane, Indiana, transitioned anti-corrosion and signal
blocking covers developed by Transhield (an Indiana company)
for radars, weapon systems, and other topside equipment. Since
its initial production in FY21/22, numerous ships have used it
to reduce corrosion, decrease maintenance, and lower radar
cross section on their critical topside equipment and weapons.

LThe Southern Maryland Tech Bridge executed a FY22
prize challenge for an unmanned air vehicle (UAV) performing a
Maritime Intelligence, Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and
Targeting (MISR-T) mission off a Guided Missile Destroyer
(DDG). L3 Harris was the awardee and conducted a successful
shipboard flight demonstration in the summer of 2022, resulting
in continued maturation and development with the intent to
explore transition into the operational force.

LThe Southern California Tech Bridge, encompassing
the greater San Diego area, executed a FY22 5G Prize Challenge
to develop and transition a ``5G Living Laboratory'' for Marine
Corps Air Station (MCAS) Miramar, CA. Awards were provided to
vRotors (Mixed Reality Platform for Remote Drone Operation),
Omnispace (5G Non-Terrestrial Network (NTN)), COMSovereign
(Portable Network and Tethered Drone), and GenXComm (True Relay
5G Mesh Node Relay).
Mr. Scott. Are the 2022 National defense Strategy and the
Joint Warfighting Concept non-executable fantasies without an
increase in sealift?
Admiral Gilday. Today, the National Defense Strategy (NDS)
and Joint Warfighting Concept (JWC) rely both on mobility
capabilities for global campaigning and collaboration with our
allies and partners to bolster the strategy's cornerstone of
integrated deterrence. At least 90% of unit equipment flowing
to theater in conflict will be transported via organic and
commercial sealift assets. The organic validated capacity for
Surge Sealift for all conflicts is approximately 10 million
square feet (sqft) to meet delivery demand.
This capacity is provided by vessels operated by the Navy's
Military Sealift Command and the Maritime Administration's
Ready Reserve Force (RRF). By the end of the FYDP, a majority
of the organic Surge Sealift vessels will reach the end of
their service life. To address readiness and reliability of the
organic sealift force, MSC and MARAD have increased maintenance
and repair budgets to align with the age of ships, extended the
service life of the most reliable ships, and accelerated
recapitalization through the Buy-Used program. To date, the
Buy-Used program has purchased 1.1M sqft of newer, more
reliable capacity.
Procuring used Roll-On/Roll-Off (RO/RO) vessels (``Buy-
Used'') is the fastest and most cost-effective recapitalization
approach to meet surge sealift requirements within an
acceptable level of risk. The Joint Staff validated Navy's
decision to buy used vessels, and the FY22 Appropriations Act
provided the additional funding for this program. The FY23
Appropriations Act included funding for the purchase of
approximately 300K sqft, or two used vessels. PB24 requests
funding for approximately 300K sqft required to continue to
close the capacity gap created by retiring vessels.
Congressional support for the authorization of additional used
vessels will allow the Buy-Used program to continue to provide
ready, reliable ships at the rate required to close the
capacity gap created by the retirement of ships.
The Navy is addressing the age, reliability, and cost of
the current organic Surge Sealift fleet in order to provide
sufficient capacity and capability to support current and
future defense strategies. On-going recapitalization efforts of
the organic surge sealift fleet will provide sufficient
capacity for the deployment and sustainment of decisive land
forces.
Mr. Scott. Does the U.S. Navy have enough public shipyards?
Should the U.S. Navy increase the number of public shipyards?
Admiral Gilday. Although having additional public shipyards
would be helpful in meeting our ship maintenance and
modernization requirements, the significant cost and time
required to build an additional public shipyard make this
option very difficult in the current fiscal environment.
Alternatively, Navy is implementing several efforts to improve
overall maintenance and modernization capabilities and
capacity, including:

LInvesting in and executing the Shipyard
Infrastructure Optimization Program (SIOP) at all four of our
current public shipyards to upgrade and repair dry docks,
optimize workflow within the shipyards, and recapitalize
industrial plant equipment which will substantially increase
productivity and safety.

LImproving availability planning and execution to
optimize performance.

LIncreased public shipyard workforce and providing
innovative training to promote overall system capacity.

LWorking with and leveraging the entire public/
private nuclear-certified industrial base to meet workload
requirements and mitigate workload peaks within any given year.
The capabilities and capacities of these private sector
shipyard partners are integral to build and maintain the Navy's
nuclear fleet.

LIn addition to the four public shipyards,
maintaining and modernizing two floating dry docks to support
nuclear-powered submarines--one on the east coast and one on
the west coast.

LLeveraging Trident Refit Facility Kings Bay
(TRFKB) and TRF Bangor to perform maintenance and repair work
in support of all submarines. These critical investments and
partnerships responsibly improve maintenance and modernization
capacity separate from increasing the number of public
shipyards.
Mr. Scott. What is the status of updating the online
Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships (DANFS)? How many
ships are complete? How many need to be updated? How many need
to be created? How much per year across the FYDP is needed to
update DANFS?
Admiral Gilday. BLUF: In September 2021, the House Armed
Services Committee (HASC) declared DANFS ``severely out of
date.'' HASC also directed SECNAV to brief HASC by March 2022
on ``efforts to update the Dictionary of American Naval
Fighting Ships'' to include ``at a minimum: (1) timeline; (2)
scope of project; and (3) existing and proposed budget needed
to update the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships
within five years.'' CURRENT STATUS: There are  11,238 DANFS
entries. Each entry represents the Navy's official history of a
specific ship. Formerly published in hardback books, the
entries are now available on the Naval History and Heritage
Command (NHHC) website. 77% of these are complete; both new
and/or updated. The other 23% require significant updates
including 117 vessels which are missing entirely. BACKGROUND:
One of the driving factors behind Navy's decision to establish
NHHC was the need to address 60 years of systemic neglect of
Navy's history and heritage assets. From 1991 until NHHC was
stood up in 2008, work on DANFS had largely stopped. In 2013
HASC made a request to Navy regarding the speed at which DANFS
could be made current. WAY AHEAD: CNO Gilday directed a funding
increase for NHHC across the Future Years Defense Program to
ensure NHHC was mission capable. The DANFS restoration now has
stable funding of  $500K per annum in OPTAR and  $264K in
CIVPERS assigned to the project. This level of funding
establishes a trajectory that allows NHHC to have an additional
271 entries, approximately 6.6% of the total original backlog
plus  48 ships scheduled to be decommissioned, completed by end
of 2028 for a total of 80% complete. NHHC has completed
analysis of DANFS completion; starting with the current funding
profile, for consideration by Navy Leadership and the Program
Objective Memorandum process.
Mr. Scott. How many Cable Repair ships are needed by the
United States for large scale combat operations against an
enemy peer nation? Should the Navy or Tech Giants protect
undersea cables? What strategies need to be developed jointly
by the U.S. Navy and the private sector that mitigate potential
disruptions?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy requirement is two cable repair
ships to support the Integrated Undersea Surveillance System
(IUSS). This cable ship requirement reflects peacetime needs
and is independent of large scale combat operations as cable
repair ships are non-combatant ships that operate only in
benign conditions. US owned undersea cables are critical
infrastructure for our government and economy, consequently
their protection is a whole-of-government responsibility, not
just Navy. The whole-of-government response to any crisis or
war will by necessity have to include private sector service
providers (``Tech Giants'') to manage any service disruptions
within their undersea cables. In times of crisis or war, the
Navy will execute its assigned roles to protect freedom of
navigation, U.S. property, and commerce as part of the whole-
of-government response.
Mr. Scott. What additional forward repair capacity is
needed for large scale combat operations against enemy peer
nations?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy continues to conduct studies,
exercises, and wargames to analyze the repair structure,
capacity, and organization required when performing combat
operations against peer competitors. These analyses have
identified gaps in our forward repair capacity, such as lack of
processes and procedures, lack of subject matter experts,
limited materiel, and limited optimal forward repair locations.
Navy stakeholders are quantifying those gaps and beginning to
provide options to close those gaps. Ongoing studies and
exercises supporting battle damage assessment and repair are
anticipated to complete by April 2024; providing solutions and
required resources to enable expeditionary repair.
Mr. Scott. Is the U.S. Navy optimized for sustained
contested strike operations? What investments are still needed
to enhance the U.S. Navy's ability for sustained contested
strike operations?
Admiral Gilday. It's our responsibility to field the most
lethal, capable, ready force, not sometime in 2027, but today.
In this budget request, we again prioritized readiness, but
also request new investments over the Future Years Defense
Program that will enhance weapons capability and capacity,
enable us to close the kill chain faster than our adversaries,
and create resilient command and control capabilities. The
Navy's Aircraft Carrier Strike, Expeditionary Strike, and
Surface Action Groups supported by our submarine force remain
the Nation's most persistent, responsive, and sustainable
forward capabilities for contested strike operations--around
the globe, day in and day out. For the contested environment,
we will continue to need manned, multi-mission platforms to be
the core of our future fleet, but increasingly augmented by a
host of manned, unmanned and optionally-manned platforms
operating under, on, and above the seas. So, we look for
Congress' support to continue funding the development of these
next-generation platforms along with hypersonic weapons and
long-range precision fires, cyber capabilities, integrated
networks, AI, and resilient logistics. Only with stable and
predictable funding can we innovate and modernize, sustain
gains in readiness, and send a strong signal to our industrial
base. Our PB24 request demonstrates our significant focus
through industrial base modernization efforts (e.g. for
submarines), weapons manufacturing multiyear contracts (e.g.
Tomahawk, Standard Missile).
Mr. Scott. Does the U.S. Navy have enough command ships for
large scale combat operations against enemy peer nations?
Admiral Gilday. Yes, the U.S. Navy has enough command
ships. Navy's most recent battle force structure analysis,
completed in June 2023 and based on the tenents of the 2022
National Defense Strategy and current defense planning
scenarios, determined that two command ships are sufficient.
The U.S. Navy currently operates two Blue Ridge-class
Amphibious Command Ships (LCC): USS Blue Ridge (LCC 19),
homeported in Yokosuka, Japan; and USS Mount Whitney (LCC 20)
homeported in Gaeta, Italy. These ships provide Fleet and Joint
Task force Commanders a deployable headquarters to command and
control widely dispersed air, ground, and maritime forces. USS
Mount Whitney is scheduled to be inactivated in Fiscal Year
2026. USS Blue Ridge remains active until Fiscal Year 2039.
Given this timeline, Navy is in the process of validating the
operational capability needed for expeditionary maritime
operations centers to perform command ship functions. Once
validated, the Navy will determine a course of action to
deliver expeditionary maritime operations center capability to
support the Combatant Commanders and large scale combat
operations.
Mr. Scott. Does the U.S. Navy have any plans to invest in
and repurpose riot-control technologies in maritime situations?
Admiral Gilday. No, the Navy does not provide or intend to
invest in any riot-control technologies for the maritime
environment beyond the standard-issued oleoresin capsicum spray
(tear gas) and collapsible batons for our shipboard Security
Force personnel, and shipboard non-lethal effects such as
acoustic hailing devices and laser dazzlers used to determine
the hostile intent of vessels.
Mr. Scott. What additional options are needed by the
commanding officers of U.S. Navy ships to counter aggressive
and unprofessional seamanship? How much does each of these
options coast? How long will it take to field any such options?
Admiral Gilday. Commanding Officers, and the units they are
responsible for leading, receive training through the Fleet
Commanders and Type Commanders to counter aggressive and
unprofessional seamanship. Every ship and aircraft deployed to
an area of responsibility where they expect to have
interactions with other adversarial countries' navies, (i.e.
Russian, China, Iran) are trained to follow tailored responses
with pre-planned responses that are updated on a routine basis.
We place a great amount of trust and confidence in our
commanding officers, and rely on them to manage risk, make
decisions, and communicate openly and honestly, especially in
crisis. Deployed units are also manned with teams of Sailors
who are specifically trained and certified to effectively and
accurately document any and all aggressive and unprofessional
interactions with vessels and aircraft of countries such as
Russia and China. Furthermore, during the training cycles to
certify units for deployment, they go through several training
exercises that simulate interactions with aggressive and
unprofessional seamanship. Those exercises ensure that our
units are prepared and ready to react to any types of
interactions, from routine to those that might be aggressive
and unprofessional.
Mr. Scott. Which office on the Navy Staff is responsible
for fielding maritime autonomous systems to include
bioengineered systems?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy is working as a team to deliver
the Hybrid Fleet and has several distinct senior leaders
driving the advancement and adoption of autonomous systems into
our day-to-day operations. Currently, the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of the Navy for Research Development Test and
Evaluation (DASN RDT&E) is the principal advisor and policy
coordinator on all matters pertaining to Navy science,
technology, advanced research, and development programs; system
prototype programs; and management of science and engineering.
The Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development,
and Acquisition (ASN RD&A) monitors and coordinates with senior
Naval officials among the various warfare centers and labs,
including the Naval Research Laboratory; the Office of Naval
Research; the Naval systems commands; and others in the Naval
enterprise to facilitate the advancement of autonomous systems
into the fleet. We developed the Unmanned Campaign Framework
and stood up the Unmanned Task Force to meet the mission of
delivering the Hybrid Fleet. The strategic vision aligns
efforts across the next three FYDPs and ensures all
stakeholders work together across lines of effort. Our North
Star is to introduce trusted, autonomous systems that are
distributed and connected with manned systems and integral to
all missions in all domains in support of Joint warfighting
concepts with Service and mission partners. DASN RDT&E is
working to accelerate the operationalization of mature systems
with the support of PEO USC (the executive agent for autonomy
in maritime systems), PEO U&W for air systems, and NAVWAR/the
Project Overmatch team in the information warfare domains.
Additionally, the exploration of bioengineered and bio-mimicry
systems is currently the work of the Chief of Naval Research
and Naval Research Labs.
Mr. Scott. Do you support rebuilding in-house naval design
capacity to Cold War levels? How many engineers are needed and
how much would it cost?
Admiral Gilday. Yes, I support rebuilding in-house naval
design capacity. The Navy has established a Task Force to
reinvigorate in-house capabilities and to establish
requirements to address the appropriate design capacity needed.
Mr. Scott. What increased advanced educational
opportunities are needed for the Navy's civilian engineers? Do
you support expanding commercial industry's participation in
concept design teams at the Navy's Center for Innovation in
Ship Design to include nonmaritime industry?
Admiral Gilday. Advanced education is an important enabler
for the Department of the Navy (DON) engineering community, and
employees are encouraged to pursue elective learning. The DON
encourages these opportunities through programs such as the
Acquisition Workforce Tuition Assistance Program (AWTAP).
Additionally, the DON continues to explore and encourage
advanced education to ensure that we keep pace with technology
modernization. We are targeting learning areas to include data
science and software innovation and using a variety of learning
management offerings to support this effort. Collaboration with
industry is a priority for the Navy. The Navy recently has
adopted a collaborative Integrated Product & Process
Development (IPPD)-type programmatic approach to great success.
The Navy would welcome opportunities to expand on this
collaboration, including from non-maritime industry.
Mr. Scott. Do you support designating life-of-program
System Command leads early in the material solution analysis
phase to inform new design by incorporating commonality with
legacy system parts and life cycle sustainment?
Admiral Gilday. Yes, I do support this approach and the
Navy's System Commands are designated during the material
solution analysis phase and continue to support programs
throughout their full lifecycle. The Navy continues to make
improvements to our processes through practices that drive
sustainment requirements earlier into our adaptive acquisition
framework pathways. Examples include lifecycle sustainment
considerations during the analysis of alternatives to ensure we
are selecting supportable capability. Additionally, we are
applying data driven insights to our accountability and
performance oversight practices that are improving our
strategic long term decision making in cost, schedule, and
performance, and helping us understand true and accurate
impacts to our topline, such as total ownership cost for
programs, in design decisions.
Mr. Scott. Do you support applying authorities granted to
the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund to the entirety of the
Navy's shipbuilding budget?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy budgets for shipbuilding in the
Shipbuilding and Conversion account, and moves some money into
the National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund. The Navy would work
with Congress if any additional authorities were needed for the
shipbuilding budget.
Mr. Scott. How can the U.S. Navy leverage the resources of
the Navy Reserve and naval militias more effectively?
Admiral Gilday. The mission of the Navy Reserve is to
provide strategic depth and deliver operational capabilities to
our Navy and Marine Corps team and Joint forces, from peace to
war. Our vision for the Navy Reserve is to be a provider of
choice for essential naval warfighting capabilities and
expertise, strategically aligned with mission requirements and
valued for its readiness, innovation, and agility to respond to
any situation. Our Navy is carrying out this mission and
working toward that vision.
In the decade since the September 11, 2001 attacks on our
nation, our Navy Reserve has answered the call. Going forward,
we face a changing global security and economic environment,
and we will ensure our Navy Reserve remains aligned with
mission requirements. Because our Navy Reserve is ready,
innovative and agile, we can assign capabilities and missions
to our Reserve Component with confidence. Even as we reduce our
presence in Iraq and Afghanistan, I see a continued need and
desire to keep our Navy Reserve engaged as a full partner in
Navy's Total Force.
We will work together to ensure Navy's Total Force, active
and reserve, delivers the right capabilities to the Nation at
the best value to the taxpayer. The 2022 National Defense
Strategy (NDS) directs a refocus of military efforts to
strengthen U.S. deterrence, with the People's Republic of China
(PRC) as the pacing threat. This refocus on the Asia-Pacific
area of operations demands that the Navy Reserve return to its
roots of providing strategic depth to the Navy and Marine
Corps.
This will, in turn, require a renewed focus on improving
warfighting readiness in order to prepare for the complexities
of a potential high-end fight with a near-peer competitor. In
2020, the Navy Reserve began a transformation to improve and
modernize the way we organize, man, train, equip, and mobilize
to generate the combat power and critical strategic depth the
Navy requires to prevail in conflict. We have embraced the
imperative to redesign the Reserve Force--structurally,
procedurally, and operationally--to align with strategic
priorities calibrated for a competitive security environment.
With a singular focus on generating warfighting readiness, this
generational transformation will provide the most capable force
possible to our Navy's Numbered Fleets and deliver integrated
all-domain naval power to the Joint Force in competition,
crisis, and conflict.
The Navy will continue to rely on the Navy Reserve to
deliver modern capabilities through three employment models:
readiness units that augment active Navy units with trained,
warfighting- ready Reserve Sailors, individual Sailors with
unique skills that enhance the Total Force, and stand-alone
operational units that supplement active component
capabilities. Militia forces such as the naval militias (e.g.,
New York, Ohio, Texas, etc.) and state defense forces (e.g.,
Virginia Defense Force, Georgia State Defense Force, Texas
State Guard, etc.) are under the direction of the governors of
their respective states and are most closely aligned with their
National Guard counterparts.
However, there is adequate opportunity for the naval
militias and state defense forces to collaborate with Title 10
forces. Specifically, the naval militias and U.S. Navy/Navy
Reserve can coordinate on missions in which federal response is
requested by the governors of the respective states, or in
which a declaration of national emergency (DNE) is declared
within the United States and its territories.
Mr. Scott. Do you support the U.S. Navy ships having a
common bridge navigation system across the fleet? Will the next
generation of bridge navigation equipment be developed from the
ground up with watchstanders in mind?
Admiral Gilday. The US Navy is working to reduce variations
in bridge navigation equipment across the fleet. A qualified
bridge watchstander should be able to step foot on any bridge
and know how to operate the navigation equipment. The next
generation of bridge navigation equipment is being developed
with the watchstanders in mind and also to standardize
navigation equipment across the fleet.
Mr. Scott. How many heavy-lift ships are required for large
scale combat operations against an enemy peer nation? Can the
U.S. Navy count on commercial heavy-lift ships to transport
damaged ships during a war? How much will it cost to purchase
heavy-lift ships on the open market?
Admiral Gilday. The ship classification ``Heavy Lift'' is
an overarching term for numerous ship types--most importantly
1) Project Cargo Ships--A combination breakbulk/container
vessel with cranes designed for lifting heavy and larger/odd
size items on itself (locomotives, smaller ships/boats, large
wind turbine blades, etc.) and 2) Float On/Float Off (FLO/FLO)
(Semi-submersible)--Designed to ballast down to float on cargo
(Floating oil rigs, very large Barges, and other large ships).
The Maritime Administration (MARAD) has five dry cargo heavy-
lift (Project Cargo) ships in the Maritime Security Program.
These ships are multi-purpose dry cargo ships that are
equipped for carriage containers, strengthened for heavy cargo
and equipped with multiple heavy lift shipboard cranes. While
these five heavy-lift ships guarantee assured access during
time of war, they are not capable of transporting damaged
ships. There is currently no organic requirement for FLO/FLO
capability within the Navy. The Navy does not have any FLO/FLO
ships in inventory and relies on commercial heavy lift FLO/FLO
ships to transport damaged or non-open ocean capable ships. The
Navy would require continued support from commercial FLO/FLO
ships in the event USN ships sustain heavy damage.
The Navy charters one Heavy Lift FLO/FLO ship every two
years on average. The Navy is conducting studies and exercises
to determine requirements and long term solutions for damage
assessment and repair. Heavy Lift requirements are part of the
Battle Damage Assessment Repair studies to be completed at the
end of this FY. The Navy is also analyzing a proposal to
convert T-ESD-1 (MONTFORD POINT) into a heavy lift FLO/FLO
ship. MONTFORD POINT is 10 years into a 40-year service life
and has the heavy-lift hull form required. Estimates for the
conversion are approximately $20M and would allow her to
transport ships up to LPD-17 class ship tonnage (25,300 tons)
(DDG FLT IIA--9,500 tons). The Navy has not conducted a market
survey on purchasing heavy lift FLO/FLO ships, given our
ability to charter from the commercial market in time of need,
and the low demand signal.
Mr. Scott. Half of the Ro/Ros in the prepositioning fleet
were built in the 1980s and the two aviation logistics ships
are nearly 60 years old and are reaching (if not have reached)
the end of their service lives. What is the long-term plan for
the Maritime Prepositioning Force and how does this fit into
the overall shift in the Marine Corps strategy?
General Berger. In support of Distributed Maritime
Operations (DMO) the Marine Corps is in the early stages of
planning and integrating a Marine Corps Global Positioning
Network (MCGPN) of materiel prepositioned afloat and ashore.
The MCGPN will support the deployment, employment, and
sustainment of Fleet Marine Forces (FMF) during day-to-day
campaigning, and in response to global crisis and
contingencies. The current Maritime Prepositioning Force (MPF)
is an element of, but not the totality of this globally
responsive, regionally aligned MCGPN. Afloat and ashore
prepositioning are complementary to each other, one is not a
replacement for the other. The Marine Corps has identified the
coming inactivation of select roll-on, roll-off (RO/RO) vessels
as an opportunity to develop future afloat platform
replacements to align with the MCGPN concept. In concert with
the Navy, an analysis of alternatives (AoA) is scheduled to
commence in FY24 that will help to define a right sized afloat
platform. These new prepositioning ships will need to have
greater access to unimproved and degraded ports, while
providing the ability to embark, stow, maintain, and
selectively offload operationally configured equipment and
supplies. The Marine Corps requires a credible Maritime
Prepositioning Force and we will work to prioritize the funding
needed to support our prepositioning strategy.
Mr. Scott. With the USMC's divestiture of heavy equipment
and large preposition ships, would there be a benefit to
prepositioning smaller/lighter equipment such as man-portable
missile systems and at sea? Could these be prepositioned aboard
smaller and faster vessels such as fast ferries?
General Berger. The future operating environment requires a
deep look at core methods of how the Service employs forces. At
an enterprise level, the service's prepositioning program of
record requires modernization. It lacks flexibility across the
competition continuum, its Maritime Prepositioning Fleet (MPF)
is aging and incurs long force closure times. Analysis supports
transforming our current program into a Global Positioning
Network or GPN. The GPN will integrate afloat/ashore
capabilities to enable day-to-day campaigning, rapid response
to crisis and contingency, and deterrence. Fully realized, the
GPN will dynamically employ multiple ashore sites and a
modernized MPF fleet responsive to the joint force commander.
It will be regionally aligned yet globally employable and
positioned astride key maritime terrain. We began this
modernization with the funds provided in FY23 and will continue
with additional resources, as requested in FY24. Current and
requested programmed funding will support initial equipment
maintenance, facility leasing, contracted labor, and varying
level of consumable support. We intend to establish three GPN
sites in the priority theater NLT FY27. Specific to the future
concept of operations in the Pacific, expeditionary medicine
advances underway will position critical trauma level care
closer to the point of injury and enhance patient holding
capacity. Examples of enhancement include the Emergency Fresh
Whole Blood program that enables walking blood banks and direct
transfusions, smaller and more capable expeditionary Damage
Control Resuscitation and Damage Control Surgery equipment and
advanced team training, to enable greater survivability. The
ability to constantly sustain forces across the conflict
spectrum is critical and will be accomplished through the
Global Positioning Network, a combination of new ashore and
legacy afloat prepositioned equipment and supply stocks. Near
term investment will complete the realization of several
initial Global Positioning Network ashore locations, deemed
most essential, while the legacy afloat capabilities and
capacity will be tailored to the needs of the future concept of
operations.
Mr. Scott. The Marine Corps is making great strides in
working jointly with the Philippines Navy and Marine Corps but
the largest component by far is the Philippine Merchant Marine
(PMM). This organization has hundreds of thousands highly
trained mariners operating in every port and ocean around the
world. What is the Marine Corps doing to work jointly with the
PMM?
General Berger. Current US law authorizes the Marine Corps
to train with the military forces of friendly foreign
countries. With proper authority, we may engage in building
capacity of the national security forces of a foreign country
as well. We also are authorized to cooperate with governmental,
non-military disaster relief organizations. As a result, the
Marine Corps focuses its efforts with the Armed Forces of the
Philippines as our security cooperation partner. However, if
the Philippine Navy were to choose to include the PMM in
security cooperation events, we would certainly be willing to
interact with them consistent with U.S. law and DoD
regulations.
Mr. Scott. At the National Press Club on March 14, 2023,
you said, ``What's not so cool to talk about: logistics. But if
you were trying to counter the United States right now
militarily, I think you would go after our logistics. We're not
overconfident, but, frankly, since World War II, no one has
challenged our logistics.'' In terms of sealift, what is needed
to help you focus on this priority?
General Berger. In recent years, we have identified
logistics as the ``pacing function'' for operations. Among the
seven warfighting functions, logistics most dictates the tempo
of operations and the operational reach of a unit. No other
warfighting function more profoundly affects our ability to
persist in contested spaces. Within the context of a contested
operating environment, which will be the case in a peer/near-
peer conflict, our ability to perform logistics and sustain
operations, such that we maintain a competitive advantage, will
be heavily dependent upon sealift. Sealift provides an
amphibious force like the Marine Corps with the logistical
capability required to operate in, contest, and control
littoral key terrain and shape the maritime domain to meet our
nation's objectives. To do this, we require:

LNo less than (31) Amphibious or L-Class Ships.
The following three class ships fall into this category: LPD,
LHD, LHA. Achieving amphibious warfighting capability remains a
top Marine Corps priority.

LNo less than (35) Medium Landing Ships (LSM). We
recognize these will take some time to field, so in the
interim, the USMC is leasing (2) Stern Landing Vessels (SLV)
for use as a functional prototype for the LSM.

LBased on current Maritime Prepositioning Ships
(MPS) inventory, no less than (12) MPS.
This accounts for (9) forward deployed around the globe and
(3) in maintenance at any given point in time. The minimum
number of MPS required will likely increase once the design of
the MPS NEXGEN is developed starting in FY24 to replace aging
MPS. The requirement for 12 MPS is to support 2 Marine
Expeditionary Brigades; specifically, 3 T-AKs, 2-AKRs, and 1 T-
AKE per MEB. From FY22-FY23, the Navy put 5 of our 12 MPS into
a reduced operating status (ROS).
In FY23, the Navy reduced and restructured Navy units that
support Maritime Prepositioning Force (MPF) operations to no
longer support the simultaneously offload of two Maritime
Prepositioning Ships Squadrons (MPSRON). In FY25, the Navy
plans to transfer 3 of the 5 MPS in a ROS status to United
States Transportation Command and these MPS will no longer be a
part of the Marine Corps Maritime Prepositioning Force program.
In FY24, an analysis of alternatives (AoA) is scheduled to
commence that will help to define a future afloat ship to
replace aging MPS. These new prepositioning ships will need to
have greater access to unimproved and degraded ports, while
providing the ability to embark, stow, maintain, and
selectively offload operationally configured equipment and
supplies.
The Marine Corps requires a credible Maritime
Prepositioning Force and the funding to support our
prepositioning strategy. Current and planned ashore
prepositioning sites does not negate the requirement to embark
materiel, move by ship, and disembark at the point of need.
Therefore, MPS will remain the most effective means for
prepositioning equipment and supplies. The above requirements
reflect the absolute minimum number of type-model ships to
provide combat-credible, stand-in forces capable of deterring
and defeating our adversaries.
The above requirements also reflect the absolute minimum
number of type-model ships required to secure an essential
capability of our national power--the expeditionary force in
readiness, that this nation has consistently called upon to
respond to crisis around the world. Our campaign of learning
has taught us that an increased and robust logistics posture in
the Pacific during campaigning will not only contribute to
integrated deterrence but will also aide in the rapid
transition required to support a future conflict. In doing so,
we can lessen the burden the on strategic sealift required to
close sustainment and forces from CONUS when the nation's
strategic lift is most strained and contested in a multi-domain
environment. Analysis has shown, if we are not in the First
Island Chain when the battle begins, our chances of fighting
our way into the fight will be significantly more contested.
The global positioning network (GPN) is a key component in
transforming our brittle supply chains of today into a more
resilient supply web inside the First Island Chain. By
integrating afloat and ashore supply nodes into the improved
sustainment webs of the future, Stand in Force commanders will
maintain multiple options to sustain and persist. A key
component to establishing these webs are Multi-Capable
Distribution Platforms that capitalize on manned and unmanned
surface, subsurface, air, and ground platforms to close the
distance to the forward edge of tactical needs.
Mr. Scott. How can the U.S. Coast Guard be better
integrated with the U.S. Marine Corps?
General Berger. Advantage at Sea, the tri-service maritime
strategy released in December 2020, provides guidance for the
Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard throughout the competition
continuum. The Marine Corps regional components leverage this
strategy by integrating with the Coast Guard whenever possible
to coordinate security cooperation efforts to build
interoperability with allies and partners, increase collective
deterrence, and secure access, basing, and overflight to
support distributed operations. The Marine Forces Pacific's
annual partnership with Coast Guard District 14 in Exercise Koa
Moana highlights the success of the Marine Corps and Coast
Guard working together. The Coast Guard seeks support from the
Marine Corps in intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, and
intermediate force capabilities, complementing the Coast
Guard's unique capabilities and authorities to improve allied
and partner nation maritime security and maritime domain
awareness. The Coast Guard is uniquely positioned to help
vulnerable nations protect their exclusive economic zones from
illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, as well as from
other territorial integrity violations. Marine Corps support to
the Coast Guard increases the Marine Corps access to vulnerable
nations experiencing maritime security challenges without
requiring a large military presence.
Mr. Scott. Is a new expeditionary field kitchen needed by
the Marine Corps? If so, how many? Will a new field kitchen be
light, mobile, and easy to move by air, land, or sea?
General Berger. A new Expeditionary Field Kitchen (EFK) is
not needed at this time. The current configuration of the EFK
allows it to be transported by air, land and sea. Additionally,
the EFK complies with Department of Transportation, is rail
transportable in the Continental United States (CONUS) and
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries without
restrictions and meets air transportability requirements for
Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR.) Where I see the EFK being
deployed and employed are at those second island chains which
will include a scalable field fielding site through the
utilization of the tray ration heating systems (TRHS),
enhanced, or tray ration heating system--improved (E-TRHS and
TRHS-I) and expeditionary field kitchens (EFK) to sustain a
larger size element.
But to be efficient and effective in a contested
Expeditionary Advanced Basing Operational (EABO) environment,
the ideology of using large pieces of field food service
equipment that feed a maximum of 750 and minimum of 250
personnel with a massive logistical footprint is outdated. The
legacy field food service equipment is not made to support
small littoral units in an austere environment. Therefore,
smaller and lighter pieces of field food service equipment will
become the norm, while its intended usage will require less
fuel and water consumption and become scalable when required.
My strategic vision of Expeditionary Advanced Base
Operations (EABO) and Stand-in Forces (SIF), concepts meet the
2022 National Defense Strategy (NDS) intent and are theater
agnostic, will utilize maritime operations with a limited
logistical footprint to develop afloat and ashore capabilities.
The plan for light, lethal, and distributed forces would be
successful in other Combatant Commands (COCOMs), such as
European Command (EUCOM) or Central Command (CENTCOM) -- and
have shown to be successful. For example, Task Force 61/2
executed a proof of concept during 2022 in which they provided
6th Fleet Headquarters with real-time Maritime Domain Awareness
(MDA).
In that effort, Marine forces tested, refined, and
validated concepts of employment for MDA and closing kill webs,
while also conducting real-world, time sensitive
reconnaissance-counter reconnaissance missions. These efforts
continue to support 6th Fleet operations as nested within EUCOM
and Africa Command (AFRICOM) priorities and have sense turned
into a rotational force. Lastly, Marine Food Service
Specialists are relied on to perform a myriad of functions
which provide more in-depth skills and abilities to harvest,
sustain and contract `forward' to ensure an optimal human
weapon system while increasing lethality and preserving health,
readiness, and resiliency for a competitive edge over the enemy
within the nutritional fitness domain.
These skills, knowledge and abilities achieve and sustain
the peak physical and cognitive capabilities through human
performance optimization to fight against inadequate daily
caloric intake, which results in the loss of muscle mass, loss
of bone density and an increased risk of fatigue, illness,
injuries, and poor recovery in combat. The food service
occupational field can provide support to the warfighter in a
contested and distributed environment where Class I resupply
resources are limited. This modernization of food service
personnel coupled with scalable equipment will shift our
concept of support to a field feeding platform that provides
maximum flexibility to combatant commanders.
Mr. Scott. Will forward provisioning of food supplies be
part of an overall feeding plan to support expeditionary
advanced base operations?
General Berger. Yes, we have an established Class I War
Reserve Materiel at locations throughout the globe that
specifically meets our current operational requirements and
we're in the process of making necessary changes to establish
additional forward locations of stocks throughout the Pacific
region. Stand-in Forces will need to capitalize on newly
adapted systems, newly developed rations and or leverage
contract/host nation feeding. For Stand-in Forces to be able to
persist inside a contested area, Class I will need to be
replenished via connectors (surface/air) from a mobile and
maneuverable hub, either the Light Amphibious Warship or
another navy class replenishment ship. Commanders will also be
required to employ contract feeding from host nations where
feasible and acceptable. The Marine Corps' feeding platform
will continue to advance, adapt, and accommodate the mission to
retain a logistical competitive edge.
Mr. Scott. The Missile Defense Review prioritized
solidifying the capability to counter small Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (sUAS). In November of 2022, the Chinese military
presented a light vehicle drone swarm launcher that can
seemingly launch up to 18 drones. Over the last few years, we
have seen greater accessibility, usage, and more rapid
advancement in drone technology. Drones today are more durable,
sustainable, and autonomous than ever before. What is your
assessment of the current and future drone and drone swarm
threat? What solutions are the Navy and Marine Corps currently
working in the near and far term? Do you feel the Navy and
Marine Corps are receiving adequate resourced to defeat the
growing drone and drone swarm threat? What is the Navy's and
Marine Corps' timeline to integrating and fielding these
capabilities? How is the Army bringing solutions via emerging
technology into theater to operationally test and gain critical
feedback from the war fighter?
General Berger. From intelligence reports to news articles,
enemy drones have shown to be a significant threat on the
battlefield; drone technology is maturing exponentially. The
ease of procurement and operations of these systems is
unprecedented. Moreover, drones will remain a considerable
weapon on the battlefield and continue to evolve making them
more dangerous to friendly forces.
To counter the threat posed by drones, the Marine Corps is
investing in multiple air defense programs: the Marine Air
Defense Integrated System (MADIS), the Light-MADIS (L-MADIS),
the Installation Counter Unmanned Aircraft System (I-CUAS), and
the Medium-Range Intercept Capability (MRIC). The MADIS, L-
MADIS, and I-CUAS systems are all scheduled to begin fielding
in FY24. Currently fielded are urgently needed variants of the
L-MADIS and the I-CUAS systems. Future increments of these
systems will have increased capabilities in terms of lethality,
range, and type of weapons used (i.e., directed energy)
providing commanders multiple options to defend critical assets
and maneuver forces with a layered defense. L-MADIS is 100%
funded.
MRIC, primarily used for counter cruise missiles, will also
be used for countering larger UAS at greater distances than
traditional short range air defense systems. MRIC is currently
funded for only a single protype platoon. Based on task
organization (activations and changes) of Low Altitude Air
Defense (LAAD) Batteries and the Marine Littoral Regiment's
(MLR) Littoral Anti-Air Battalions (LAAB), the Marine Corps is
receiving adequate funding for MADIS and L-MADIS. With full
funding, the first of three MRIC batteries could be fielded in
FY26. Capacity remains a significant challenge for the Marine
Corps when defending itself from enemy drones, as the
proliferation of drones on the battlefield and their
maneuverability out pace air defense systems in terms of
maneuverability and cost.
Moreover, air defense systems are expensive due to advanced
components that detect, track, identify, and defeat enemy
drones. The Marine Corps stays actively engaged with the Joint
Counter small Unmanned Aircraft System Office (JCO), sharing
lessons learned from experimentation and procurement of Marine
Corps programs. Similarly, the Marine Corps takes lessons
learned and after actions from the JCO to inform decision about
air defense systems within the Service.
Mr. Scott. How many excess M1150 Assault Breacher Vehicles
(ABV) does the U.S. Marine Corps still have in storage? Do you
agree that, if provided to Ukraine, they would detonate Russian
explosives from safe distances, clearing the way for follow-on
Ukrainian combat formations to penetrate heavily mined areas of
operation?
General Berger. Through detailed operational planning,
historical analysis, and a rigorous Campaign of Learning we
made some hard decisions regarding engineering and breaching
capabilities. The requirement for a globally responsive Marine
Air Ground Task Force (MAGTF) remains imperative. More
specifically, strategic guidance has driven us to focus on
enabling the Naval Expeditionary Force to rapidly respond to
crisis and persist in the distributed maritime operating
environment of the Indo-Pacific region.
This focus requires a force that is distributed but lethal,
low signature, mobile, and sustainable in a forward
environment. The equipment we field to our Marine forces needs
to match those force attributes, and many of our legacy
engineering and breaching capabilities were not appropriate to
enable this responsiveness. Our legacy engineering and
breaching capabilities were designed for land-centric campaigns
with mechanized and motorized forces that we experienced in the
Central Command (CENTCOM) area of operations over the past 30
years.
Breaching remains a critical capability to support
maneuver, however with the decision to divest the M1A1 main
battle tank, the Marine Corps also divested the Combat Engineer
M1150 Assault Breacher Vehicle (ABV) as well as associated
force structure. The ABV is built upon the M1A1 chassis which
presents significant embarkation and debarkation challenges for
amphibious and littoral operations. As with legacy bridging
solutions, the ABV requires black-bottom shipping or Maritime
Prepositioning Ships to get into the theater. This limitation
restricts the ability to even get the ABV to many of the
locations where we will be operating across the Indo-Pacific
region or as a 911 Force in Readiness. With the divestment of
tanks, this heavy breacher vehicle was no longer relevant to
support maneuver. The Marine Corps does not have excess M1150
Assault Breacher Vehicles (ABV) in storage.
Mr. Scott. How many excess M198 Howitzers does the Marine
Corps have in storage? How would it stack up with other Cold
War-era artillery being used by Ukraine in the Russo-Ukraine
war?
General Berger. The Marine Corps does not have any M198
howitzers in storage. The inventory was disposed of when the
M777A2 howitzer replaced them. The M198 had the same range and
effects as many of the 155mm howitzers in use by Ukraine,
including the M777; however, it is significantly heavier than
the M777 and would present a significant mobility challenge
compared to the M777 or to the self-propelled howitzers that
have been provided.
Mr. Scott. 155mm Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional
Munitions (DPICMs) possess a 155mm-class artillery shell that
sprays grenade-like munitions with a shrapnel-like effect.
These cover a larger area than traditional artillery shells,
making them highly effective against fortified positions. Do
you believe that DPICMs would help Ukraine penetrate Russian
defenses and serve as an artillery force multiplier that could
propel operational breakthroughs?
General Berger. 155mm Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional
Munitions (DPICMs) have proven to be more effective than High
Explosive (HE) ammunition against certain targeting scenarios
and in most types of terrain. DPICMs are more effective than HE
munitions particularly when targeting personnel and equipment
especially those that are gathered in dense formations. Based
on the total area DPICM munitions can cover when compared to
tradition 155mm HE rounds, the DPICM rounds could provide
efficiencies in respect to the number of rounds needed to
achieve desired battlefield effects. The use of DPICM munitions
has the potential to result in residual unexploded ordinance.
Our legacy DPICM dud rate (>1%) create maneuver and safety
challenges that potentially place non-combatants at risk in
areas if the DPICM munitions were to be employed.
Mr. Scott. Do you support establishing a U.S. Marine Corps
Baltic Sea Rotational Force similar to the Black Sea Rotational
Force?
General Berger. U.S. Marines from II Marine Expeditionary
Force (II MEF), Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, have deployed to
Europe as part of Marine Rotational Force-Europe. From January
to September 2023, more than 1,300 Marines from II MEF and
subordinate units are set to deploy throughout the European
theater, training in more than 15 countries and supporting a
variety of joint, multinational exercises.
The United States has a longstanding relationship with NATO
Allies and Partners in Europe on issues of defense and security
cooperation. Since 2017, U.S. Marines have trained in Norway
during Marine Rotational Force--Europe, strengthening bonds by
working hand-in-hand with the Norwegian military. The success
of the relationship with Norway has allowed an expansion of the
MRF-E in 2023, enabling Marines to deploy across Europe to
receive world-class cold-weather and mountain warfare training
and participate in a host of valuable named exercises across
the European theater.
The training that takes place during MRF-E 23 is designed
to strengthen the development of teams who understand the
synergy of air, sea, and land power in joint multi-domain
environments. The Marine Corps' rotational presence in Europe
facilitates military exercises in the Nordic regions and
throughout Europe that: supports NATO and U.S. European Command
operational plans; increases interoperability with Allies and
Partners; and improves the Marine Corps' cold-weather and
mountain expertise, staying true to any clime and place.
One of the most significant contributions the Stand In
Force (SIF) makes to the Joint Force is the ability to sense
and make sense of the environment by creating maritime domain
awareness. Forces ``stand in'' during competition alongside
partners and allies, are forward postured to respond during
crisis, and are capable of seizing and defending key maritime
terrain during conflict while maintaining critical target data
and maritime domain awareness for the Joint Force to project
fires into the battlespace.
Task Force 61/2 demonstrated this capability in the
European Command (EUCOM) area of operations with a Navy-Marine
Corps integrated team. TF 61/2, led by a Marine General Officer
with a task-organized staff was integrated into the U.S. 6th
Fleet Headquarters in Naples, Italy, and executed a combined
joint exercise, planned operations for various ARG/MEU teams in
multiple locations throughout the theater, and improved
Maritime Domain Awareness for the Fleet Commander and partners
and allies. This proof of concept has now transitioned into a
rotational headquarters that aligns forces under a Naval
Amphibious Force Commander to orchestrate a wide range of
integrated operations, from exercises to contingency planning.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KIM

Mr. Kim. When was the initial command investigation of the
death of SEAL candidate Kyle Mullen completed and endorsed?
Secretary Del Toro. The NETC completed and endorsed its
investigation on March 24, 2023 and released it to the public
on March 25, 2023.
Mr. Kim. When were you briefed on the initial investigation
results? Have there been any further investigations since? If
so, what is their status?
Secretary Del Toro. The NETC completed its investigation on
March 24, 2023. Additionally, the following investigations were
completed: 1) NSW Line of Duty Investigation 2) NCIS Death
Investigation 3) Naval Safety Center Command Safety
Investigation 4) Bureau of Medicine and Surgery Quality
Assurance Investigation
Mr. Kim. When will the Navy brief the Mullen family on the
final investigation results?
Secretary Del Toro. The NETC completed its investigation on
March 24, 2023. The Mullen family was briefed on March 25,
2023.
Mr. Kim. We know the DOD IG has initiated an evaluation of
the medical care, policies, and procedures provided to SEAL
candidates. Does the Navy support a full, independent Inspector
General investigation into the circumstances surrounding Kyle
Mullen's death?
Secretary Del Toro. Inspector General of the Department of
Defense is an independent and objective office within DoD. The
Department of Navy fully supports the DOD IG's efforts.
Mr. Kim. When was the initial command investigation of the
death of SEAL candidate Kyle Mullen completed and endorsed?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Mr. Kim. When were you briefed on the initial investigation
results? Have there been any further investigations since? If
so, what is their status?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Mr. Kim. When will the Navy brief the Mullen family on the
final investigation results?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Mr. Kim. We know the DOD IG has initiated an evaluation of
the medical care, policies, and procedures provided to SEAL
candidates. Does the Navy support a full, independent Inspector
General investigation into the circumstances surrounding Kyle
Mullen's death?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GAETZ

Mr. Gaetz. Secretary Del Toro, could you please provide
more details on your short-term and long-term plan to reopen
the Naval Aviation Museum on Naval Air Station Pensacola to the
public, including any specific strategies or actions that will
be taken to ensure a safe and enjoyable visitor experience?
Secretary Del Toro. In spring 2023, I approved an exception
to policy providing guidelines that allow non-DOD affiliated
visitors access to the National Naval Aviation Museum (NNAM).
CURRENT STATUS: Non-DOD affiliated visitors who provide
identification at the NAS Pensacola West Gate are allowed to
proceed in their vehicles to the NNAM. Additional security
personnel are stationed at key posts during museum open hours
as a mitigation measure and to prevent non-DOD affiliated
visitors from accessing other parts of the base. Through the
first two weeks, the museum has seen visitation rates increase
by 94%. Information for museum operating hours as well as the
guidelines for base access are posted on the base website,
museum website, and social media. LONG-TERM STATUS: The Navy is
open to long-term solutions that would allow greater access to
the NNAM without requiring an exception to DoD security policy.
To date, these solutions have been prohibitively expensive. A
technological solution using Real ID to allow expedited or real
time vetting to access the base may be possible, but requires
further study. The access and security measures afforded
through the current exception to policy directive allows for
the safe operation of the museum until a long term solution is
implemented.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SHERRILL

Ms. Sherrill. Please provide an update on your service's
implementation and a current status of the FY2022 NDAA changes
to MST policies.
Secretary Del Toro. The Department of the Navy (DON) is
committed to implementing the military sexual trauma (MST)
policies outlined in the National Defense Authorization Act.
The DON stood up the Implementation Advisory Panel in January
2022 to help DON, Navy, and Marine Corps track and assist with
implementation of all Independent Review Commission
recommendations, as approved by the Secretary of Defense, and
NDAA requirements, to include those that outline changes to
MST.
In December 2022, DON issued an administrative message to
emphasize that any Active Duty and Reserve Service Members that
experience sexual assault, sexual harassment, were deployed
overseas to hostile fire pay zones, or have other qualifying
military service related trauma/experiences are eligible to
receive confidential counseling services from the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) without a TRICARE referral at Vet Centers
in communities around the country. The Department of Defense
continues its work with the VA to determine what additional
care and services may be provided to Service members without a
referral.
Both the Navy and Marine Corps have taken additional
actions within their services to implement these policies. In
January 2022, the Navy published and widely disseminated
standardized posters and marketing materials to Sexual Assault
Prevention and Response (SAPR) personnel and commands. Included
in the materials is a fact sheet outlining VA resources for
Service Members who have experienced sexual trauma. The Marine
Corps released marketing materials referencing available MST
services offered through the VA and directed commands to post
conspicuously the information regarding these programs and
resources. Both Navy and Marine Corps Sexual Assault Response
Coordinators (SARCs) and SAPR Victim Advocates support the
survivor through the lifecycle of their case, from initial
reporting through final disposition or until the Service Member
no longer wants their services.
Support includes reviewing a Victim Reporting Preference
Statement with the survivor at the initial intake, connecting
them with medical and mental health resources, and facilitating
contact with Veterans Health Administration (VHA) MST
Coordinators and Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) MST
Outreach Coordinators who can advise the survivor about non-
medical counseling available at VA Vet Centers and VA services,
benefits and support options upon separation or retirement.
Both services have distributed the revised DD Form 2910,
``Victim Reporting Preference Statement'' (VRPS) to all SARCs
and SAPR VAs providing services to Sailors and Marines.
The revised DD Form 2910 includes information about VA MST-
related health care and benefits available, as well as links to
find the names and contact information for the nearest VHA and
VBA MST Coordinators. In January 2023, both Services completed
manpower analysis on the SAPR workforce and submitted
implementation plans to the Department of Defense Sexual
Assault Prevention and Response Office (SAPRO). Findings from
these studies will highlight where SARC-specific military
occupational specialties may be beneficial.
The Navy and the Marine Corps have also each made progress
incorporating MST program information in their Service-specific
SAPR 40-hour Initial Victim Advocate Training and SARC Initial
Training. The trainings provide SARCs and SAPR Victim Advocates
methods to consult with MST Coordinators and outline available
services and resources for survivors. Finally, the Navy and
Marine Corps are steadfast in promoting participation in
collaborative webinars to SARCs and SAPR VAs from the
Department of Defense SAPRO and the VA. These include a virtual
training for DoD SAPR personnel about sexual trauma services
available from DoD and VA held in May 2023, and training on
sexual trauma and the disability compensation claims process
for DoD personnel.
Ms. Sherrill. What concrete steps does your service take to
reduce retaliation and reprisal of witnesses?
Secretary Del Toro. The Department of the Navy (DON) has a
responsibility to prevent retaliation and reprisal and hold
leaders appropriately accountable when lives and careers are
harmed as a result of victims or witnesses reporting a crime,
participating in an investigation, or making other forms of
protected communications. DON commands are inspected to ensure
commanders foster a climate of dignity, respect, and inclusion
for all that encourages the reporting of crimes without fear of
retaliation, reprisal, ostracism, or maltreatment.
5 U.S.C. Sec. 2302(b)(8) establishes whistleblower
protections against reprisal for civilian employees.
Specifically, the Federal statute ensures that no Federal
employee who is authorized to take, direct others to take,
recommend, or approve any personnel action takes, fails to
take, or threatens to take any personnel action against an
employee because of protected whistleblowing. The Department of
Defense (DOD) Office of Inspector General (OIG) Whistleblower
Reprisal Investigations (WRI) Directorate and the United States
Office of Special Counsel (OSC) address allegations of
whistleblower reprisal made by civilian employees. DON Hotline
personnel assist civilian employees to file their whistleblower
complaints with either OSC or DOD OIG.
With oversight from DoD OIG WRI Directorate, the DON
implements protections established by Title 10 for Military
Whistleblower Protection. Secretary of the Navy Instruction
5370.7E establishes the DON's policies and assigned
responsibilities for military whistleblower protection.
Specifically, the instruction ensures that no person will
restrict or attempt to restrict Service Members from making
lawful communications to a member of Congress or an Inspector
General; preserves Service Members protections surrounding
unfavorable and withheld favorable personnel actions that are
connected to a protected communication; and ensures that DON
personnel will not retaliate against a Service Member because
the member reported a criminal offense.
Commanders are required to publicize and display provisions
of law and regulation that prohibit retaliation and reprisal,
the procedures for filing complaints, and the rights of
affected personnel. Victims of alleged retaliation or reprisal
have various reporting options. The Navy and Marine Corps
Hotline programs allow Sailors, Marines, and civilian personnel
to confidentially and reliably report allegations of reprisal
and retaliation. These Hotline complaints can be made
anonymously. Military Whistleblower Reprisal complaints are
addressed by an Inspector General.
Witnesses and subjects are advised of the applicable Title
5 and Title 10 whistleblower protections during an
investigation. Allegations of non-reprisal retaliatory action
are promptly investigated by the commander or other responsible
management official (RMO). When necessary to avoid the
appearance of a lack of impartiality or objectivity, these
allegations are referred to the next higher commander or RMO.
Upon conclusion of an investigation, commanders, or other RMOs,
take appropriate action against those found to have engaged in
retaliation or reprisal. Such action regarding Service Members
may include punitive or administrative action for violating
Article 92 (failure to obey order or regulation) or Article 132
(retaliation). Actions regarding civilian employees range from
informal counseling to removal.
The Navy and Marine Corps Offices of Special Trial Counsel
will be fully operationally capable by 27 December 2023.
Thereafter, independent, specialized, and expert Special Trial
Counsel will exercise prosecution authority over allegations of
retaliation in violation of Article 132. In the court-martial
and command investigation context commanders are provided
training and resources to both recognize and act upon instances
of retaliation and reprisal of witnesses. Specifically, 10
U.S.C. Sec. 931b, obstructing justice and 10 U.S.C. Sec. 932,
retaliation are two Uniform Code of Military Justice provisions
that commanders may use to address instances of retaliation and
reprisal towards witnesses when such conduct meets the elements
of those offenses. I require commanders at every level to
receive scenario based training so they can explain to their
subordinates how to appropriately respond when a sexual assault
allegation is reported.
This training should also include discussions on how to
eliminate retaliatory behavior. Both services have updated
their policies and general military training curricula to
include information on what retaliation is, how to prevent
retaliation, and resources for those who have been retaliated
against. HQ USMC conducts retaliation training with their
leadership during Cornerstone twice a year. Department of the
Navy is working with Navy and Navy Legal to develop additional
retaliation training for their leadership.
Ms. Sherrill. How are your service's sexual assault and
sexual harassment victim advocates chosen? What information
between them and a victim is considered privileged? What
happens if privileged information is wrongly shared with
command teams and leadership?
Secretary Del Toro. Question: How are your service's sexual
assault and sexual harassment victim advocates chosen? Answer:
Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Victim Advocates (SAPR
VAs) consist of both collateral duty military positions and
full-time civilian victim advocate positions, selected based on
fulfilment of the evaluative criteria established for these
positions. Because the Navy and Marine Corps are present
worldwide in all corners of the earth, on shore, above and
below the seas, both services use a combination of civilian and
military personnel for these positions. Regardless of service
or status, there are common individual qualities sought among
candidates for victim advocate positions.
These include the ability to: manage high stress
situations, maintain confidentiality and exercise discretion,
establish rapport, be an empathetic listener, work with all
ranks, be approachable to individuals of varied backgrounds,
and consistently exercise good judgement. Victim advocates
should have strong communication skills with the ability to
discuss and train sensitive Sexual Assault Prevention &
Response (SAPR) topics, conduct training for unit personnel and
work within established policies. Additional personnel
requirements for SAPR VAs are detailed in DoD Instruction
6495.03, the Department of Defense Sexual Assault Advocate
Certification Program (D-SAACP).
The DoN is currently working towards implementation of the
Independent Review Commission (IRC) recommendation that VAs are
resourced from outside the chain of command. Civilians must go
through an application process, meet the positive education and
experience requirements, interview, and complete all background
investigations with favorable results prior to being selected
for employment. Service members must be screened and approved
by their Commanding Officers. There are certain specified
disqualifying criteria (i.e. unfavorable service record,
criminal convictions for sexual assault, child abuse or
domestic violence, a requirement to register as a sex
offender), which includes conflicts of interest (i.e. mandated
reporter or direct supervisor) based on current roles and
assignment.
All victim advocates must undergo satisfactory background
checks, complete 40 hours of Initial Victim Advocate training,
and obtain a D-SAACP credential. All victim advocates complete
the same required initial training, ongoing continuing
education, and maintain the same D-SAACP Code of Professional
Ethics in accordance with established Department of Defense
guidance and service regulations to ensure a standardized and a
professional response to victims of sexual assault. On 12
January 2023, I signed interim policy authorizing victims of
sexual harassment to also receive advocacy and support services
from the Sexual Assault Response Coordinator and SAPR VAs. This
interim policy addresses a key recommendation of the
Independent Review Commission (IRC) on Sexual Assault in the
Military, as approved by the Secretary of Defense.
Additionally, this policy aligns with the Department of
Navy's (DON's) ``No Wrong Door Policy,'' ensuring that a victim
who contacts a helping professional from any DON victim care
and support office must either receive services from that
office, or with the victim's permission, be directly connected
to the appropriate service provider. The DON continues to
support the services with development and implementation of the
approved IRC recommendations. Question: What information
between them and a victim is considered privileged? Answer: The
DON, Navy and Marine Corps adhere to Military Rules of Evidence
(MRE) 514 that provides victims of sexual assault or other
violent crimes with the right to refuse to disclose and prevent
disclosure of confidential communications between the victim
and a SAPR VA in military justice cases. All communications
between a victim and their SAPR VA, which are not intended to
be disclosed to a third party and made for the purpose of
facilitating advice or supportive assistance, are considered
privileged information. SAPR VAs across the DON must safeguard
confidential communications pertaining to victims to prevent
unauthorized reading, printing, retaining, copying, or
dissemination of any correspondence.
Additionally, SAPR VAs work diligently to ensure any
communication regarding a victim is conducted on an official
``need to know'' basis with the informed consent of the victim.
Question: What happens if privileged information is wrongly
shared with command teams and leadership? Answer: Victim
Advocate personnel in Navy and Marine Corps are responsible for
safeguarding confidential and privileged information shared by
victims of sexual assault or sexual harassment during the
reporting process and through provision of victim support
services. All Navy SAPR VAs are accountable to the Sexual
Assault Response Coordinator (SARC) while carrying out advocacy
responsibilities.
If a SARC or SAPR VA fails to maintain the privacy of
victims before, during, or after the professional relationship,
the commander, supervisor, or other appropriate authority may
initiate investigative, adverse, or other administrative
procedures. Information that sufficiently indicates DON
personnel acted in conflict with applicable federal, DoD, or
Navy privacy laws and regulations or violated the D-SAACP Code
of Ethics could result in the suspension or revocation of the
D-SAACP certification and inability to perform any SAPR-related
duties. If confidential information is inappropriately shared
by a Marine Corps VA or SARC, a Code of Ethics violation is
reported to the first general officer in the chain of command
and to Headquarters Marine Corps (SAPR). An investigation into
the reported wrongdoing is opened, and the SAPR VA's D-SAACP
credentials are suspended pending outcome of the investigation.
They are not permitted to continue in the capacity of a
victim advocate while pending an ongoing investigation. If the
SAPR VA is a Marine, and the investigation is substantiated,
the SAPR VA credentials are revoked, their appointment or
assignment is terminated, and they are no longer permitted to
be selected or appointed to the role of victim advocate. If the
SAPR VA is a civilian employee, the investigation findings are
relayed to human resources for appropriate action, to include
termination of employment. All findings are reported and
tracked by Headquarters Marine Corps SAPR and D-SAACP
credentialing office.
Ms. Sherrill. What is the process for your command climate
survey? What percentage of personnel are required to complete
it? How are irregular results flagged and reviewed? What
actions are taken based on perceived negative command climate
survey results?
Secretary Del Toro. The Department of the Navy (DON), Navy,
and Marine Corps administer Command Climate Assessments (CCAs)
to conduct command or unit-level climate assessment. The CCAs
are a tool for commanders designed to provide them with
important information about the health and overall climate of
their unit that enable them to make important decisions about
their unit, and ultimately improve their command climate.
CCAs will include consideration of multiple sources of
information about risk and protective factors for a variety of
harmful behaviors within the unit, such as administrative
records, reports, interview data, focus group data, or other
existing data, in addition to current and previous Defense
Organizational Climate Survey (DEOCS) and other survey results.
As outlined in the Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI)
6400.11 ``Integrated Primary Prevention Policy for Prevention
Workforce and Leaders,'' Commanders of military units and
civilian organizations must conduct a CCA within 90-days after
assuming command; and annually thereafter. An important part of
the CCA process is the DEOCS.

LThe DEOCS contains over 100 questions that
measure 10 protective factors and 9 risk factors to help unit
and organization commanders and leaders better understand the
current climate within and across units and organizations.

LEach DEOCS administration may include up to 15
custom questions (10 multiple choice and five short answer)
beyond the core DEOCS survey questions.
These questions are selected from a large bank of options.
Navy and Marine Corps Commanders designate an on-the ground
survey administrator or team to administer the DEOCS. Survey
administrators request a new DEOCS by accessing the DEOCS web
portal and providing the requisite information about the unit.
For security, the system requires commanders to approve the
request for any DEOCS for which they are identified as the
commander. After a survey is registered by the unit
administrator, the system will automatically send a
notification to the commander identified in the registration
that a survey has been registered on their behalf.
Service members and civilians (respondents) will receive
the notification to voluntarily participate in the DEOCS.
Respondents take the survey online by accessing the DEOCS
survey website. The website is mobile optimized and does not
require a Common Access Card (CAC). If the survey close date is
nearing and response rates are lower than desired, then the
survey administrator can choose to extend the survey past its
original end date. Conversely, if everybody has responded, then
a survey administrator could close the survey early to receive
results sooner. After a DEOCS closes, results are analyzed and
summary metrics are provided to survey administrators,
commanders, and commander's supervisors. Upon completion of any
CCA activities, including the DEOCS, the unit leadership,
survey administrative team, and integrated primary prevention
staff analyze and interpret the data, identify strengths of the
command, outline irregular results and areas of concern, and
develop a Comprehensive Integrated Prevention Plan (CIPP) to
include corrective actions describing how these aspects will be
addressed.
Actions following the results of the CCA often include
focus groups, interviews, observations and reviewing command
records and reports. These follow-on actions are meant to
enhance the results of the CCA by providing additional data
points to act as extra contextual information when considering
CCA results. Following the CCA, commanders conduct an in-person
debrief of their command climate assessment executive summary,
results, and CIPP to address findings with their immediate
superior. What percentage of personnel are required to complete
it? All Service members and civilian employees in a command or
organization must have the opportunity to participate in CCAs.
In the case of the DEOCS, it functions as a census, such that
all Service members/civilians of a unit/organization are
required to be included in the DEOCS survey sample population.
If the response rate is less than 30%, then the system will
automatically extend the end date by one week. If in a week the
response rate is still below 30%, then the system will
automatically extend the end date one more time for a week.
While CCAs, such as DEOCS, are voluntary, the DON, Navy and
Marine Corps average between 40-50% participation. The higher
the completion rate, the greater confidence Commanders can have
in the health of their unit or organization and what areas need
improvement. How are irregular results flagged and reviewed?
What actions are taken based on perceived negative command
climate survey results? Upon completion of the CCA, the unit
leadership, survey administrative, and integrated primary
prevention staff analyze and interpret the data, identify
strengths of the command, outline irregular results and areas
of concern, and develop a CIPP to include corrective actions
describing how these aspects will be addressed. Irregular
results that do not reach the threshold of scoring benchmarks
will also be flagged.
The CIPPs are not limited to irregular results and can
address areas that are already meeting benchmarks. The
Department of the Navy encourages leaders to take actions to
address concerns and risk factors that are identified through
the assessment. There is always room for improving command
climate. Actions following the results of the CCAs often
include focus groups, interviews, observations and reviewing
command records and reports. These follow-on actions are meant
to enhance the results of the CCAs by providing additional data
points to act as extra contextual information when considering
CCA results.
Ms. Sherrill. How many women are currently serving as
aviators? How many women are currently in your pilot pipeline?
How many women typically enter flight school? How many women
typically graduate from flight school? How many female aviators
are O5 and above? How many women are general officers? How many
female generals are serving in joint roles?
Secretary Del Toro. How many women are currently serving as
aviators? Answer: There are currently 1,523 female aviators
serving on Active Duty within the aviation community. How many
women are currently in your pilot pipeline? Answer: There are
currently 314 student naval aviators and 139 student naval
flight officers in the training pipeline. How many women
typically enter flight school? Answer: From FY10 through April
FY23, on average for the Marine Corps, approximately 17 women
start flight school each year; ranging from 11 through 23 per
any given year. For context, for the same timeframe,
approximately 288 men start flight school each year; ranging
from 253 to 364 per any given year. These numbers will
fluctuate depending upon needs the service and other factors.
How many women typically graduate from flight school?
Answer: From FY10 through April FY23, on average for the Marine
Corps, approximately 70% of women complete flight school each
year. For context, for the same timeframe, approximately 78%
men complete flight school each year. How many female aviators
are O5 and above? Answer: There are 72 female aviators on
Active Duty in the O5 or senior paygrade, based off the April
30, 2023 aviation inventory file. How many women are general
officers? Answer: There are three female aviation flag
officers: one Vice Admiral, one Rear Admiral Upper Half
nominated for Vice Admiral, and one Rear Admiral Lower Half
(select). How many female generals are serving in joint roles?
Answer: There is one female aviation flag officer serving in a
joint role.
Ms. Sherrill. How many women are currently serving as
aviators? How many women are currently in your pilot pipeline?
How many women typically enter flight school? How many women
typically graduate from flight school? How many female aviators
are O5 and above? How many women are general officers? How many
female generals are serving in joint roles?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Ms. Sherrill. Please provide an update on your service's
implementation and a current status of the FY2022 NDAA changes
to MST policies.
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Ms. Sherrill. What concrete steps does your service take to
reduce retaliation and reprisal of witnesses?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Ms. Sherrill. How are your service's sexual assault and
sexual harassment victim advocates chosen? What information
between them and a victim is considered privileged? What
happens if privileged information is wrongly shared with
command teams and leadership?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Ms. Sherrill. What is the process for your command climate
survey? What percentage of personnel are required to complete
it? How are irregular results flagged and reviewed? What
actions are taken based on perceived negative command climate
survey results?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Ms. Sherrill. How many women are currently serving as
aviators? How many women are currently in your pilot pipeline?
How many women typically enter flight school? How many women
typically graduate from flight school? How many female aviators
are O5 and above? How many women are general officers? How many
female generals are serving in joint roles?
General Berger. How many women are currently serving as
aviators? There are currently 336 women serving as Naval
Aviators, including Student Naval Aviators. For context, there
are 4,623 men serving as Naval Aviators, including students.
Females make up 9% of the total Marine Corps and 10% of the
officer population. How many women are currently in your pilot
pipeline? There are 152 women who are Student Naval Aviators.
For context, there are 1,342 men who are Student Naval
Aviators. How many women typically enter flight school? On
average, 30 women begin flight school each year. For context,
an average of 363 male Marines begin flight school each year.
How many women typically graduate from flight school? On
average, 18 female Marines graduate from flight school each
year. For context, an average of 289 male Marines graduate
flight school each year. How many female aviators are O5 and
above? There are 16 female aviators in the grade of O5 or above
in the Marine Corps, two of whom are in the grade of O6. For
context, there are 583 male aviators in the grade of O5 or O6.
How many women are general officers? There are five women
serving as general officers in the Marine Corps. Two major
generals, one active brigadier general, one reserve brigadier
general, and one brigadier general (frocked). For context,
there are 98 men serving as general officers between the active
and reserve components. How many female generals are serving in
joint roles? There are two female generals serving in joint
roles--one of the major generals and a brigadier general. Our
second major general is already joint qualified due to her
previous service in the Office of the Secretary of Defense;
additionally, our reserve brigadier general just completed
duties in a joint billet OCONUS. I view assignments to joint
roles as an investment in that officer, particularly general
officers. After he or she has served in a joint role as a
general officer, an officer is qualified to promote to
Lieutenant General.
Ms. Sherrill. Please provide an update on your service's
implementation and a current status of the FY2022 NDAA changes
to MST policies.
General Berger. Marine Administrative Message 047/22,
issued 14 Feb 2022, requires all Marine Corps Sexual Assault
Prevention and Response (SAPR) programs to post information
regarding the Department of Veterans Affairs Military Sexual
Trauma (MST) services in high traffic locations. Sexual Assault
Response Coordinators (SARC) and Sexual Assault Prevention and
Response Victim Advocates (SAPR VA) support the survivor
through the life cycle of their case from initial report
through final disposition, or until the Marine no longer wants
their services. They connect the survivor to medical and mental
health resources, facilitating contact with MST Coordinators,
who can advise the survivor on the Veterans Affairs healthcare
options and Vet Centers for non-medical counseling. The SARC or
SAPR VA review the Victim Reporting Preference Statement (DD
Form 2910) with the survivor at initial intake, ensure they
retain a copy, and refer them to the Veterans Affairs MST
website to locate the MST Coordinator or MST Outreach
Coordinator near them. The Marine Corps added information and
discussion regarding the resources and services available
through the VA MST program in the SAPR 40-hour training and
SARC Initial training. The information and discussion include
ways to consult with the MST Coordinator, share information
about available services, and participate in staff training
events in partnership. The Marine Corps disseminates all
training webinars provided in collaboration with DoD SAPRO and
VA to include MST Teleconference training series, VA trauma
informed training, and disability compensation claims process
training.
Ms. Sherrill. What concrete steps does your service take to
reduce retaliation and reprisal of witnesses?
General Berger. The Marine Corps has a responsibility to
prevent retaliation and reprisal. Commanders at all levels are
held to a high standard, and among their many important
responsibilities is to foster a climate of dignity, care, and
concern for all that encourages the reporting of crimes without
fear of retaliation, reprisal, ostracism, or maltreatment. More
specifically, commanders must publicize within their commands
provisions of law and regulation that prohibit retaliation and
reprisal and the procedures for filing complaints of such.
Within the Department of the Navy, the following conduct is
prohibited by an order of the Secretary of the Navy:
(1) restricting or attempting to restrict Service Members
from making lawful communications to a member of Congress or an
Inspector General;
(2) taking or threatening to take an unfavorable personnel
action, or withholding or threatening to withhold a favorable
personnel action as a reprisal against any Service Member for
making or preparing, or being perceived as making or preparing,
a protected communication; and
(3) retaliating against a Service Member because the member
reported a criminal offense. Those subjected to retaliation or
reprisal have options for reporting it. Notably, the Marine
Corps Hotline Program allows Marines, Sailors, and civilian
personnel to confidentially and reliably report violations of
law, rule, or regulation; inefficiency, misconduct,
impropriety, mismanagement, gross waste of funds, abuse of
authority, military whistleblower reprisal, or security
violations within the Marine Corps.
Hotline complaints can be anonymous and made in various
ways. Reprisal complaints are forwarded to an Inspector
General, while allegations of non-reprisal retaliatory action
are promptly investigated by the commander or, when necessary
to avoid the appearance of a lack of impartiality or
objectivity, referred to the next higher commander. Commanders
take appropriate action against those found to have engaged in
retaliation or reprisal, which may include punitive or
administrative action for violating Article 92 (failure to obey
order or regulation) or Article 132 (retaliation). Further, the
Marine Corps Office of Special Trial Counsel will be fully
operationally capable by 27 December 2023, and it will begin to
exercise prosecution authority over allegations of retaliation
in violation of Article 132 that occur after that date.
Ms. Sherrill. How are your service's sexual assault and
sexual harassment victim advocates chosen? What information
between them and a victim is considered privileged? What
happens if privileged information is wrongly shared with
command teams and leadership?
General Berger. Sexual Harassment Victim Advocates: Equal
Opportunity Advisors (EOA) assist and support victims of sexual
harassment, advise commanders, and advocate for the service
member throughout the reporting process. EOAs help ensure the
safety of the service member, provide resources and referrals,
assist in making an informal/formal complaint, and provide the
required updates/notifications per MCO 5354.1F. The Military
EOA is an occupational specialty (MOS) that is solicited
annually via MARADMIN identifying billet vacancies. The Marine
must meet the following criteria to apply:

Lbe a Staff Sergeant through Master Gunnery
Sergeant.

Lnot have any adverse fitness reports in grade.

Lnot have any history of prohibited activities and
conduct or sexual assault allegations.

Lmust have completed at least 24 months' time on
station upon class graduation and execution of PCS orders.

Lmust be able to extend or reenlist to meet
minimum of 36 months obligated service from the date of
graduation from EOA course.
The Marine Corps conducts a board to consider qualified
applicants to fill projected vacancies. Once the EOAs are
selected they will attend the Defense Equal Opportunity
Management Institute (DEOMI). This two-phase course entails a
virtual portion lasting between 2 to 3 weeks, followed by an
in-person, 8-week course at DEOMI, on Patrick AFB. To support
the Independent Review Commission (IRC) requirements, the MEO
Program is adding civilian EOAs at the general officer level.
Applicants must meet the requirements listed within the
position, follow the GS hiring process, and graduate from
DEOMI. Sexual Assault Victim Advocates: Full-time Civilian
Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Victim Advocates (SAPR
VAs) must go through the application process, meet the minimum
qualifications, interview, and complete all background
investigations with favorable results prior to being selected
for employment.
Upon hire, they must successfully complete the SAPR 40-hour
Victim Advocate Course, obtain the Defense Sexual Assault
Advocate Certification (D-SAACP), and be appointed by command.
Marine SAPR VAs must hold the rank of Sergeant/E-5 or higher,
complete all background check investigations with favorable
results, pass the SAPR 40-hour Victim Advocate Course, obtain
the Defense Sexual Assault Advocate Certification (D-SAACP),
and be appointed. Commanders are provided with guidance on
selecting and appointing a SAPR VA within the Commander's Smart
Pack. The Commander's Smart Pack identifies character qualities
a SAPR VA should exhibit and specifies immediate disqualifiers.
Commanders are encouraged to interview potential Marines
prior to beginning the background investigation process and
required trainings. Certain military occupational specialties,
and positions, cannot be selected as SAPR VAs because they
create a conflict of interest, or the roles have competing
priorities. These roles are Commanders, Executive Officers,
Sergeant Majors, First Sergeants, Staff Judge Advocates,
Inspector Generals, Equal Opportunity Advisors, Substance Abuse
Control Officers (SACO), Uniformed (Deployment) Readiness
Coordinators, Victim Witness Assistance Coordinators, and Drill
Instructors. What information between them and a victim is
considered privileged? All USMC SAPR VAs sign a Defense Sexual
Assault Advocate Certification Code of Ethics stating they
understand their confidentiality requirements and privileged
communication protected under Military Rule of Evidence 514.
All communications between a victim of sexual assault and
their SAPR VA are considered privileged information. SAPR VAs
must safeguard confidential communication pertaining to victims
to prevent unauthorized reading, printing, retaining, copying,
or dissemination of any correspondence. SAPR VAs work
diligently to ensure any communication regarding a victim is
conducted with official need to know, and with the informed
consent of the victim. What happens if privileged information
is wrongly shared with command teams and leadership? If
confidential information is inappropriately shared, a Code of
Ethics violation is reported to the first general officer in
the chain of command, the Inspector General, and to
Headquarters Marine Corps.
An investigation into the reported wrongdoing is opened,
and the SAPR VA's D-SAACP credentials are suspended for the
ethical violation, placing them on suspension. They are not
permitted to continue in the capacity of a victim advocate
while an ongoing investigation of wrongdoing is underway. If
the SAPR VA is a Marine, and the investigation is
substantiated, their credentials are revoked, and they are no
longer permitted to be selected or appointed to the role of
victim advocate. If the SAPR VA is a civilian, the
investigation findings are sent to human resources to determine
the next steps, whether reassignment to another position, or
termination of employment. All findings are reported and
tracked by Headquarters Marine Corps SAPR and Department of
Defense SAPRO. The Chief Victims' Legal Counsel of the Marine
Corps (CVLC) selects Victims' Legal Counsel (VLC) in
coordination with the Judge Advocate Division Plans and
Innovation Branch (JPI) and command and legal leadership at the
local installation to which the prospective VLC is assigned.
Marine Corps policy requires prospective VLC to have at least
six months of military justice experience as a trial or defense
counsel and to have tried at least one contested court-martial.
A candidate selected for VLC duty must successfully
complete an interview with the CVLC and attend a VLC
certification course approved by the Staff Judge Advocate to
the Commandant. JAD and Victims' Legal Counsel Organization
(VLCO) Headquarters ensure all prospective VLC are licensed
attorneys in good standing with their state bar and conduct a
sensitive screening process to ensure the candidate is suitable
for duties as a VLC. Following successful completion of all
screening and training requirements, and on recommendation of
the CVLC, the Staff Judge Advocate to the Commandant of the
Marine Corps certifies VLC as competent to practice and
eligible for assignment to VLC duties. Once certified and
assigned, Marine Corps VLC represent eligible victims of sex-
related offenses and domestic violence as required by 10 USC
1044e and section 548 of the FY2020 National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA) (133 Stat. 1378), respectively.
Marine Corps VLC may also represent victims of other
crimes, including sexual harassment, if the CVLC approves an
Exception to Policy (ETP) request from a potential client.
Victims of sexual harassment are not statutorily entitled to
VLC representation, and the Marine Corps is the only service
that provides representation to victims of sexual harassment,
even on an ETP basis. Pursuant to 10 USC 1044e(c), the
relationship between a VLC and client is protected by the
attorney-client privilege set forth in Military Rule of
Evidence (MRE) 502.
A broader scope of information related to the
representation of a client is protected from disclosure by Rule
1.6 of the professional responsibility rules governing Navy and
Marine Corps judge advocates (JAGINST 5803.1E), which bars VLC
from disclosing information related to representation unless
disclosure is authorized by the client, furthers the purpose of
the representation, or meets other specifically enumerated
exceptions.
There is no specific legal remedy available for wrongful
disclosure of privileged material beyond the Privacy Act,
Inspector General complaints, Congressional correspondence or,
at trial by court-martial, the Military Rules of Evidence
(MREs). MRE 510 provides for waiver of a privilege through
voluntary disclosure ``under such circumstances that it would
be inappropriate to allow the claim of privilege.'' MRE 511
states that ``evidence of a statement or other disclosure of
privileged matter is not admissible against the holder of the
privilege if disclosure was compelled erroneously or was made
without an opportunity for the holder of the privilege to claim
the privilege.''
Lastly, note 4 of the discussion guidance related to
imputed disqualification of attorneys (Rule 1.10 of JAGINST
5803.1E) notes: A covered attorney who mistakenly receives any
such confidential or privileged materials should refrain from
reviewing them (except for the limited purpose of ascertaining
ownership or proper routing), notify the attorney to whom the
material belongs that he or she has such material, and either
follow instructions of the attorney with respect to the
disposition of the materials or refrain from further reviewing
or using the materials until a definitive resolution of the
proper disposition of the materials is obtained from a court.
Taken together, these rules should be interpreted to mean
that privileged material which is erroneously disclosed retains
its privileged character and any person receiving that
information should notify the attorney and/or holder of the
privilege, return the information, and make other notices
necessary to appropriate disposition. However, this
interpretation is strongest as applied to attorneys, and the
safeguarding and return of privileged information related to
other essential services (psychotherapists and victim
advocates, for example) is far less certain. Further, none of
these rules lays out a specific procedure or provides any
remedy at law for spillage of privileged information.
Because neither the MREs nor rules of professional
responsibility provide a specific remedy for victims whose
privileged information is wrongly disclosed, Marine Corps VLC
often assist clients in filing Inspector General complaints and
communicating with Congress pursuant to the VLC authority
contained in 10 USC Sec. 1044e(b)(9). However, doing so cannot
contain the damage to victims' rights under 10 USC 806b, the
MREs governing privileged information, and the essential
treatment and care those privileges protect.
Ms. Sherrill. What is the process for your command climate
survey? What percentage of personnel are required to complete
it? How are irregular results flagged and reviewed? What
actions are taken based on perceived negative command climate
survey results?
General Berger. What is the process for your command
climate survey? Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI)
6400.11 is the governing policy for Command Climate Assessments
(CCA). Commanders of military units and civilian organizational
leaders conduct a CCA within 90 days after assuming command or
leadership of an organization and annually thereafter. During a
Change of Command CCA, unit commanders and organizational
leaders review the unit or organization's most recent annual
CCA and assess the previous commander or leader's progress in
implementing the relevant actions in the comprehensive
Integrated Primary Prevention plan, as well as consider other
sources of data about command climate and the risk and
protective factors as determined by the Secretary of Defense.
What percentage of personnel are required to complete it?
All Service members and civilian employees (except for
contractors) within a command are given the opportunity to
voluntarily complete the organizational climate survey. The
training environment is unique in that students are transitory
and survey administration has not always included them in past
command surveys. Training and Education Command is updating its
policies and procedures to ensure that students are included in
future DEOCS. When the DEOCS Annual Survey Window opens 1 Aug--
30 Nov, the Marine Corps emphasizes the process of
administering the DEOCS, to ensure that all eligible members of
a command, to include students, have the opportunity to
complete the survey. How are irregular results flagged and
reviewed? When DEOCS factors do not meet the scoring benchmarks
specified by the Executive Director, Force Resiliency (EDFR),
the comprehensive Integrated Primary Prevention (IPP) plan must
outline how those factors will be addressed.
Actions outlined in the comprehensive IPP plan need not be
constrained to only areas that do not meet scoring benchmarks.
Actions may address multiple DEOCS factors simultaneously. What
actions are taken based on perceived negative command climate
survey results? The designated Integrated Primary Prevention
Workforce (IPPW) staff have CCA review sessions with unit
commanders or organizational leaders to review the results of
the CCA and collaborate on potential actions to improve or
sustain their climate. These review sessions take place within
60 calendar days of the close of the DEOCS or next drill period
(for Annual CCAs) or within 120 calendar days after a commander
or leader assumes command or office or next drill period (for
Change in Command CCAs). Unit commanders or organizational
leaders must share the current CCA results within 30 days for
transparency and accountability with their unit or organization
members, as well as their next higher level of command or
leadership. The CCA results shared include DEOCS results (for
Annual CCAs), insights from other data that was considered, and
directed actions from the comprehensive integrated action plan.
Ms. Sherrill. General Berger, during your most recent SASC
hearing earlier this year, you stated that there has been an
85% increase in the number of female aviators serving in the
USMC over the past ten years. How many women are currently
serving as USMC aviators, how many women served as aviators 10
years ago, and what is the source of that statistic?
General Berger. How many women are currently serving as
USMC aviators? There are currently 336 women serving as Naval
Aviators, including Student Naval Aviators. How many women
served as aviators 10 years ago? There were 194 female aviators
in 2013, including Student Naval Aviators. What is the source
of that statistic? The source of those statistics is the Total
Force Data Warehouse and the Defense Manpower Data Center. Data
fluctuates over time based on accessions, school attrition,
separations and retirements.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN

Mr. Bergman. I would like information on the length of time
a pilot spends in the various stages of his or her first
contract with the service. The timeline would start with the
point the 2nd Lieutenant is commissioned and end when the
pilot's initial contract is up and they are able to leave
active service. Please include pertinent milestones in the
timeline such as the point he or she reports to flight
training, the point he or she receive their wings, the point
they go through transition training to their type model series
that they'll be operational capable, to the point they are
deployable, etc. Include any other milestones you feel are
relevant. The end state would be to identify the length of time
for each major milestone to include how long this pilot fully
trained and ready to fight until the first contract is up.
Secretary Del Toro. The following information was gathered
by the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) Training Command and the U.S.
Navy's Chief of Naval Air Training and is being reported for
the QFR by Chief of Naval Air Training (CNATRA). The following
table provides USMC pilot entitled Time-to-Train (TTT) and
pertinent milestones from The Basic School (TBS) until
completion of the Fleet Replacement Squadron (FRS) where the
Officer has been trained in their Fleet aircraft. Additional
training takes place at the Fleet Squadron before the Officer
is considered available for deployment.
[See attachment]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3392.106

.eps1. These are entitled TTTs. Each milestone includes
time to transfer between milestones. 2. The time from
Commission to TBS (Post-Commission) is not tracked by either
USMC Training Command or CNATRA. Information must be requested
from USMC Headquarters. 3. USMC Training Command's and CNATRA's
mission concludes at the time an Officer graduates from the
FRS. At this time, the Officer is available to a Fleet Squadron
as a replacement pilot. Additional training occurs at the Fleet
Squadron before an Officer is deployable. TTT at Fleet
Squadron's must be requested from USMC Headquarters. 4. USMC
currently has an eight (8) year contract with its pilot which
starts at the day of graduation from Advanced Flight Training
(winging).
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ

Mr. Waltz. Can you please discuss how the plans for
hypersonic Conventional Strike Program (CPS) production rate
mesh with STRATCOM requirements? What would the impact of a
full year CR be on CPS production plans?
Secretary Del Toro. The Navy's Conventional Prompt Strike
(CPS) and Army's Long Range Hypersonic Weapon (LRHW) share a
production line due to the common nature of the All Up Round
(AUR). Based on the production schedule outlined in the
President's Budget 2024 (PB24), the CPS and LRHW programs will
deliver 61 tactical All Up Rounds (AURs) by 2027. These
tactical deliveries include 40 AURs for the LRHW program and 21
for the CPS program. This tactical AUR delivery profile coupled
with test AUR requirements meets the maximum production
capacity at the prime contractor. The details of the STRATCOM
requirements are available at a higher classification level.
The eight AUR+Cs included in the PB24 WPN request contribute to
completing the first ZUMWALT loadout of 12 AUR+Cs. In the case
of a full year Continuing Resolution, should the shift of
funding from RDT&E to WPN for AUR+C procurement be considered a
New Start, and without an anomaly in place, the missile
procurements necessary to complete the full loadout of the
first Zumwalt Class destroyer will be delayed a year. Note:
Procuring eight AUR+Cs in PB24 accommodates the maximum
production capacity at the prime contractor (including test
assets and Army AUR procurements) while still delivering to the
first ZUMWALT as quickly as possible.
Mr. Waltz. Can you please discuss the benefits of the MACH
TB (Multi-Service Advanced Capability Hypersonic Test Bed)
hypersonic program for rapidly onboarding new capabilities and
improving affordability of the CPS program?
Secretary Del Toro. The Multi-Service Advanced Capability
Hypersonics Test Bed (MACH-TB) will enable U.S. hypersonic
technology development and transition by providing an
affordable, rapid hypersonic flight test capability for DoD
programs, NASA, national labs, academia, and industry.
Leveraging commercial launch providers that provide turnkey
launch services, MACH-TB will increase the accessibility and
reliability of DoD hypersonic flight tests and allow the
Department to conduct hypersonic flight testing more often and
more affordably.
The use of non-traditional/commercial and surplus DoD
launch vehicles ranging from expendable sounding rockets to
reusable full-size launch vehicles, in both ground-launched and
air-launched configurations, will provide a wide range of
flight environments for stakeholders to develop and validate
technologies prior to being integrated into weapon systems.
MACH-TB will also develop a modular experimental glide body,
which will enable the integration of advanced technologies into
a full hypersonic glide body.
Through MACH-TB, Navy Conventional Prompt Strike (CPS) will
leverage both sounding rockets and a full-scale booster with
the experimental glide body to mature next-generation
capabilities without incurring risk to the baseline CPS program
or the cost of all up round demonstrations. These tests will
evaluate next-generation capabilities such as alternate
navigation, seekers, and lethality, while exploring additively
manufactured materials as a capability to provide
affordability. Additionally, CPS will use the MACH-TB
experimental glide body to explore design margin, which might
then be leveraged in favor of affordability. MACH-TB will
enable CPS to test at a tempo and responsiveness previously
unattainable.
For example, the first MACH-TB test will demonstrate the
mission planning and physical interfaces to integrate a DoD
hypersonic vehicle with a commercial space launch provider and
insert the vehicle into a relevant flight trajectory. It will
be executed only weeks after planning was completed and an
execution task contract was awarded on May 2nd. MACH-TB was
initiated by the CPS program in 2022 and is managed by the Test
Resource Management Center executing through the Naval Surface
Warfare Center Crane.
Mr. Waltz. Recently, the U.S. Department of Commerce has
found that Chinese solar-equipment manufacturers were
circumventing tariffs by sending components to Cambodia,
Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam for assembly before exporting
the finished products. I note that the U.S. sources 80% of its
imported crystalline silicon solar modules from these four
countries.

LWhat safeguards are in place to ensure that the
Department of the Navy isn't helping fund the Chinese Communist
Party's industrial complex by purchasing photovoltaic cells and
modules sourced from China?

LWhat requirements do you place on contractors to
ensure they don't procure these cells and modules for the
Department of the Navy?
Secretary Del Toro. The Department of the Navy (DON) is
acutely aware of Chinese efforts to circumvent tariffs through
activities such as supply chain modification, white labeling,
and transshipments and actively works with government partners
and industry to ensure the supply chain and components in DON
platforms are free from product integrity, resilience, and
assurance concerns. The DON utilizes all available means to
limit the impact to DON programs, including performing due
diligence and supplier health assessment reviews. The DON
ensures that DON contracts and solicitations are compliant with
applicable statutes and Executive Orders, the Federal
Acquisition Regulation, and the Defense Federal Acquisition
Regulation Supplement, including those provisions that
specifically address malign Chinese influence.
Mr. Waltz. Can you please discuss how the plans for
hypersonic Conventional Strike Program (CPS) production rate
mesh with STRATCOM requirements? What would the impact of a
full year CR be on CPS production plans?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Mr. Waltz. Can you please discuss the benefits of the MACH
TB (Multi-Service Advanced Capability Hypersonic Test Bed)
hypersonic program for rapidly onboarding new capabilities and
improving affordability of the CPS program?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. MCCLAIN

Mrs. McClain. Mr. Secretary, there is currently a fully-
supported DoD Program of Record called the Tactical Combat
Training System--Increment II (TCTS-II) established to provide
advanced training for the near-peer, high-end fight that
improves training realism to ``train like you fight,'' in an
NSA approved environment. This technology will protect our
warfighting Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTPs) and will
enable scalable training scenarios to include LVC. While this
system is moving to full rate production and a key piece in
your Operational Test and Training Initiative, incorporating
the TCTS-II Combat Training System remains elusive for many
reasons I'm concerned about, specifically on accelerated
fielding given the broad DoD support.
1.) Can you provide the Navy's roadmap, complete with
dates, funding plan and capabilities achieved, to incorporate
4th and 5th Gen aircraft training?
2.) Will this roadmap also discuss a plan for a Navy and
Air Force `Super Range' and CVN-based untethered ranges?
Secretary Del Toro.1.) Can you provide the Navy's roadmap,
complete with dates, funding plan and capabilities achieved, to
incorporate 4th and 5th Gen aircraft training? Answer: Tactical
Combat Training System Increment II (TCTS II) is a multi-phase
effort to provide an advanced, near-peer training capability
through encrypted Air Combat Maneuvering Instrumentation (ACMI)
and a gateway for Live, Virtual, and Constructive (LVC)
training integration. Phase I delivers a solution to the F/A-18
E/F and EA-18G. Phase II will provide an F-35 solution. TCTS II
Phase I achieved Initial Operational Capability (IOC) in Q1
FY23.
This phase will deliver 494 externally mounted pods through
2031, with more than 50% delivered by 2026 to the Navy's three
fleet concentration sites. Phase I will also provide TCTS II
ground infrastructure to all Navy and Marine Corps tactical
training ranges. TCTS II's role as a gateway for LVC training
is dependent upon the Navy's Aviation LVC Live Aircraft
Integration (ALLAI) program, which uses the TCTS II
infrastructure to inject synthetic training entities, and
provide a level of training that would otherwise not be
obtainable due to cost, operational security, aircraft, or
geographic range constraints. Similar to TCTS II, ALLAI is
constructed with a Phase I for 4th generation aircraft and a
Phase II for 5th generation aircraft. ALLAI Phase I funding
began in 2023 and is scheduled to incrementally deliver LVC
capabilities across the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP).
Injecting synthetic entities into an aircraft's weapons
system requires modifying the platform's code. Due to the
complexities of developing a solution for the F-35 and the
requirement for an integrated, non-pod solution, several
courses of action are being investigated that will ultimately
determine TCTS II and ALLAI Phase II funding requirements and
timeline. 2.) Will this roadmap also discuss a plan for a Navy
and Air Force `Super Range' and CVN-based untethered ranges?
Answer: The Navy will leverage the interoperability of TCTS II
to expand its training into both Air Force and Test and
Evaluation ranges. Navy and Air Force aircraft carrying the
TCTS II pods will seamlessly operate between ranges due to
common TCTS II ground infrastructure. Additionally, the TCTS II
roadmap includes funding to procure ship-based subsystems in
2028 to create a CVN-based range capability.
Mrs. McClain. Background: Increasing missile inventories in
the Pacific is a priority--classified analysis shows total
inventories across the entire Department sufficient to support
only a very brief period of intense combat operations. The Navy
FY24 budget request proposes a Multi-Year request for the
Standard Missile Six (SM-6) program, with significant
additional funding ($269M) to add capacity and drive
inventories higher. SM-6 is the premier multi-mission missile
for the fleet, and over the course of the FYDP, the Navy
proposes to increase production from 100 to 200 to 300 missiles
per year.
However, two years of prior appropriations (FY22/23) for
capacity (to increase production rates from 100 per year to 200
per year) are largely sitting idle ($183M).
The prime contractor (Raytheon) is also struggling to
deliver on the current production contract, primarily due to a
shortfall of rocket motors.
Both issues should be addressed if Congress approves a
multi-year, but the Navy budget request is silent on both
issues.
Questions: 1. I note that your budget request includes
significant funding to add capacity for the Standard Missile-
Six weapon system--I support fielding increased quantities of
critical munitions like SM-6 and appreciate that inventories
are critically low relative to warfighter requirements. The
request proposes to increase annual production from 100 per
year to 300 per year by the end of the FYDP.
However, I understand that the Navy has yet to obligate two
years of prior year funding for capacity, nearly $200M. I'm
very concerned that we aren't moving with dispatch to
accelerate when funding is already in hand. When will the Navy
have that funding on contract to support the initial ramp to
200 missiles per year?
2. Deliveries on SM-6 are significantly late to contract,
in part, due to supply chain constraints for rocket motors.
What is the Navy plan, working with industry, to address these
rocket motor shortfalls and drive to a higher production rate?
3. The Department has signaled an intent to pursue
additional missile Multi-Years in FY2025--I know the Navy is in
the process of finalizing your budget request for next year.
Without speaking to pre-decisional issues, could you inform the
Committee how you are approaching future multi-years and
additional production capacity for critical munitions?
Admiral Gilday. Question/Request: I note that your budget
request includes significant funding to add capacity for the
Standard Missile- Six weapon system--I support fielding
increased quantities of critical munitions like SM-6 and
appreciate that inventories are critically low relative to
warfighter requirements. The request proposes to increase
annual production from 100 per year to 300 per year by the end
of the FYDP. However, I understand that the Navy has yet to
obligate two years of prior year funding for capacity, nearly
$200M.
I'm very concerned that we aren't moving with dispatch to
accelerate when funding is already in hand. When will the Navy
have that funding on contract to support the initial ramp to
200 missiles per year? Answer: The Navy received a total of
$183.6 Million ($105.0 Million in FY2022 and $78.7 Million in
FY2023) to Increase Production Capacity (IPC). In December
2022, approximately $94 Million of the FY2022 funds were
obligated on contact; the balance of $10.8 Million were
obligated on contract in May 2023. The full amount of the
FY2023 IPC funds ($78.7 Million) were obligated on contract in
May 2023. Question/Request: Deliveries on SM-6 are
significantly late to contract, in part, due to supply chain
constraints for rocket motors. What is the Navy plan, working
with industry, to address these rocket motor shortfalls and
drive to a higher production rate? Answer: Aerojet Rocketdyne
(AJ), the SM-6 rocket motor manufacturer, has delivered
sufficient rocket motors to support SM-6 deliveries.
Since January 2023, AJ has delivered 54 Dual Thrust Rocket
Motors (DTRM) which has alleviated the motor constraint on the
Standard Missile Program. AJ has the production capacity to
support the FY2019 to FY2023 MYP contract delivery rate. The
Navy, RMD, and AJ have identified the required test equipment,
tooling and facility modifications that will result in higher
production rate for SM-6. The $183.6 Million of funds placed on
contract between December 2022 and May 2023 is available for
RMD and AJ to make these improvements. The Navy is executing a
plan with RMD to get to a higher production rate by working
through CAPEX investments. These efforts will complete in time
to support the IPC as part of the FY2024 to FY2028 MYP.
Question/Request: The Department has signaled an intent to
pursue additional missile Multi-Years in FY2025--I know the
Navy is in the process of finalizing your budget request for
next year. Without speaking to pre-decisional issues, could you
inform the Committee how you are approaching future multi-years
and additional production capacity for critical munitions?
Answer: The Department of the Navy (DON) is pursuing a multi-
year contract for both SM-6 and Naval Strike Missile (NSM)
beginning in FY2024 through FY2028.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. JACKSON

Mr. Jackson. The INDOPACOM AOR is a logistical nightmare
due to distance and a lack of airfields.
The Navy's role in any conflict is going to be central, and
supplying our fleet is going to be a significant task.
The Navy recognized that the C-2 Greyhound's ability to
only land on aircraft carriers presented significant logistical
limitations, given that the resupply to other ships had to be
carried on by vertical lift assets possessing significantly
less payload capacity.
In response, the Navy fielded the CMV-22, which can match
or out-payload the C-2, has comparable range, and can cut the
aircraft carrier middleman out of the logistics chain by going
straight to the ship in need of supply.
With two operational deployments onboard Navy carriers, the
CMV-22 has achieved unparalleled success conducting the carrier
onboard delivery mission.
Further the CMV-22 has proven a valuable asset in
additional mission sets like medical evacuation, Naval Special
Warfare support, and search and rescue operations.
Admiral Gilday, given the significant logistical challenge
facing the Navy in any INDOPACOM conflict, could you speak to
how the CMV-22 has transformed fleet operations? Further, could
you speak to how the CMV-22 provides your fleet with the most
agile logistical options for resupply and how critical that
will be in the Indo-Pacific?
Admiral Gilday. The CMV-22B plays an important role as the
``last tactical mile'' in the logistics chain to our Carrier
Strike Groups. The 1,150 nm range and 6,000 lbs internal
payload, combined with the versatility of a tilt-rotor, provide
our operational commanders options for resupply in INDOPACOM.
We are working on increasing the throughput and capacity for
the aircraft with projects in work to increase and standardize
cargo loading, among other efforts to capitalize on the unique
opportunities afforded by the aircraft. The initial two CMV-22B
deployments were successful despite being impacted by COVID
restrictions. We see a great deal of potential in the aircraft,
such as the MEDEVAC ability, and day/night operations and
expect to wrap up a project sprint, the Concept of Employment
(CONEMP), in the next 12 months. This will inform adjustments
to resources, prioritization, and distribution. We are working
a longer term evaluation of how we can better optimize the
platform in a review of our Concept of Operations (CONOPS).
Mr. Jackson. Nothing lasts forever, not even an excellent
platform like the CMV- and MV-22.
At some point, the Navy and Marine Corps will need another
vertical lift option, but I think experience has taught us that
the tilt-rotor concept is invaluable in terms of providing
vertical lift with the added benefit of speed and range that
comes from more traditional fixed wing platforms.
While I know Services sometimes like designing new
platforms from the ground up, this can be a costly and time-
intensive endeavor, and frankly we don't have the resources or
time to start from scratch.
You don't always have to reinvent the wheel, and the Army
just recently selected the Bell V-280 as the backbone of its
future vertical lift needs.
Admiral Gilday and General Berger, have the Navy and Marine
Corps started looked to the future in terms of what you will
need for vertical lift options, where are you in the process if
you have, and have either of your Services considered looking
at the V-280 as a viable platform similar to how the CV, MV,
and CMV-22 is currently being used across the Services?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy is nearing the end of the Analysis
of Alternatives (AoA) process to replace its legacy fleet of
MH-60's and MQ-8C's with Future Vertical Lift (Maritime
Strike). Tiltrotor class of aircraft was studied as part of the
AoA. Regarding the Bell V-280, while smaller and lighter than
the CMV-22, that aircraft is both too large and too heavy to
fit on Navy Surface Combatants, which constitute the bulk of
the Navy's vertical lift requirements. However, the Navy is
still engaged with the Army to understand lessons learned and
to align on Open Systems Architectures and other cross service
collaborations in order to reduce the fiscal burden of any path
chosen.
Mr. Jackson. In the military, rank matters, and when it
comes to having your voice heard, the number of stars you wear
makes a difference, for better or for worse.
Both the Surgeon General of the Air Force and the Surgeon
General of the Army are lieutenant general or three-star
billets, while the Surgeon General of the Navy is a rear-
admiral upper, or a two-star billet.
For the Army and the Air Force, when the service chiefs
meet with their staff, the Surgeons General are peers with
other staff members, but that's not the case in the Navy.
Admiral Gilday, what is the Navy's rationale for
maintaining its surgeon general as a two-star billet while your
sister services rate the position as warranting a three-star
billet, and do you think it creates a negative optic to our
Sailors and Marines as far as medical being a priority?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy has had to make difficult choices
both at the 1-Star, 2-Star level and, in this case, at the 3-
Star level in order to ensure there is adequate leadership in
place to address emerging threats. We desire parity with the
other Services, but note that the Army is authorized ten 3-
Stars and sixty-nine General Officers above our authorization
while the Air Force has seven more 3-Stars and twenty-one
General Officers. Navy is also the only Service without a 3-
Star identified as the Director of the Staff. The downgrade of
the Surgeon General billet was necessitated by our current
constraints and was by no means a reflection of a negative view
of Navy Medicine or the position and responsibilities of the
Surgeon General. The Naval Force changing its concepts to
distributed and austere maritime missions requires Navy
Medicine to invest and modernize to develop new capabilities
and training. Therefore, Navy Medicine is at the critical
juncture of pivoting from both Military Medical Treatment
Facility-benefit delivery and operational support to a more
focused operational mission. This focus maintains our
requirement to provide health services at sea and ashore, as
well as continued staffing in Defense Health Agency facilities,
and necessitates significant oversight requirements from the
Surgeon General.
Mr. Jackson. The MV-22 is a workhorse for the Marine Corps
in a number of roles, but as with everything in life,
improvements can be made.
One of those advancements is the nacelle improvement effort
for the MV-22, which I know the Air Force successfully did with
their fleet of CV-22 aircraft.
In last year's NDAA, the House Armed Services Committee
directed the Marines to review its nacelle improvement program.
Further, it was this committee's assessment that the best
method for conducting nacelle improvement was to perform the
work at the original equipment manufacturer's final assembly
facility.
General Berger, can you provide us with an update on how
the Marine Corps is executing nacelle improvement for the MV-
22, what percentage of the fleet has received the nacelle
improvements, and how the Marine Corps intends to keep its MV-
22s in combat ready condition, especially as we continue to
ramp up in INDOPACOM?
General Berger. The Marine Corps MV-22 Program of Record
(POR) is 360; pursuing the Nacelle Improvement (NI) solution
taken by the Air Force would have resulted in completing
upgrades to the Marine Corps MV-22s fleet in the FY2045-2050
timeframe at the cost of over 2.5 billion dollars. Headquarters
Marine Corps (HQMC) identified Tailored Nacelle Improvements
(TNI) as a more efficient and effective approach. TNI focuses
on the highest maintenance hour drivers within the nacelles--
primarily correcting wiring discrepancies. Compared to NI, TNI
is estimated to produce approximately 60% of the NI end-state
annual maintenance hour reduction, at three times the
implementation speed (36 aircraft per year), at less than 10%
of the cost. TNI will provide the Marine Corps with a
significantly higher return and save the most significant
number of overall maintenance man-hours for the fleet. TNI kit
orders are planned to begin in FY25, to begin installations as
the Air Force completes their NI program and are targeting
completing at least 36 aircraft per year using multiple sites.
The downtime per aircraft will be less than one month for
incorporation. TNI incorporation, in conjunction with Common
Capability Configuration Relevant (CCCR) and MV Inventory
Management (MVIM) initiatives, will provide the Marine Corps
MV-22 fleet with increasingly common aircraft configurations
that will increase overall readiness and ensure squadrons are
capable of delivering vital mobility capability to the Marine
Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF), Joint Force, Joint Force
Maritime Component Commander (JFMCC) and Combatant Commanders
(COCOM) now and into the future.
Mr. Jackson. Nothing lasts forever, not even an excellent
platform like the CMV- and MV-22.
At some point, the Navy and Marine Corps will need another
vertical lift option, but I think experience has taught us that
the tilt-rotor concept is invaluable in terms of providing
vertical lift with the added benefit of speed and range that
comes from more traditional fixed wing platforms.
While I know Services sometimes like designing new
platforms from the ground up, this can be a costly and time-
intensive endeavor, and frankly we don't have the resources or
time to start from scratch.
You don't always have to reinvent the wheel, and the Army
just recently selected the Bell V-280 as the backbone of its
future vertical lift needs.
Admiral Gilday and General Berger, have the Navy and Marine
Corps started looked to the future in terms of what you will
need for vertical lift options, where are you in the process if
you have, and have either of your Services considered looking
at the V-280 as a viable platform similar to how the CV, MV,
and CMV-22 is currently being used across the Services?
General Berger. The Marine Corps began a holistic analysis
of its vertical lift inventory in 2021 to inform requirements
documents and to reconcile emerging vertical lift initiatives
with common attributes. Today, Headquarters Marine Corps (HQMC)
Combat Development & Integration (CD&I) and Aviation have
drafted an Initial Capabilities Document (ICD) that is in
staffing to address the Service's gaps in vertical lift. The
ICD is planned for a Summer FY23 Marine Requirement Oversight
Council (MROC) submittal.
Additionally, the Marine Corps is committed to executing
the CH-53K Program of Record (POR) to add lift capacity to our
vertical lift inventory. The ICD is designed to address our
future needs for vertical lift through the Vertical Take-off
and Landing (VTOL) Family of Systems (FoS). Within the VTOL
FoS, the Marine Corps is grouping future capabilities to
address priority capabilities to support Logistics, Attack/
Strike, and future Assault Support. Logistics is the priority
capability and will support the development of the Logistics
Connector, such as the Unmanned Logistics System-Air Large
(ULS-A Large) and logistics distribution to the Marine Air-
Ground Task Force (MAGTF).
The whole of the VTOL FoS will provide a suite of materiel
solutions capable of executing across diverse areas of
operations and mission sets, providing the flexibility needed
to meet and excel in the fight of 2030 and beyond. VTOL FoS
seeks to reconcile various initiatives and fill joint kill-
chain gaps with an interdependent and cooperative perspective
using systems approaches. The Marine Corps will continue to
stay engaged with the Army's development of its Future Long-
Range Assault Aircraft (FLRAA) program to identify areas for
collaboration. Marine Aviation has developed an initial
vertical lift roadmap to holistically manage our current
platforms and future capabilities. The roadmap takes into
consideration emerging technologies, such as FLRAA, as well as
iterative capability development focused on peer threats.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON

Mr. Fallon. We have received information from Naval MWR
facilities highlighting that there are ill-intended effects of
broad policy decisions regarding Sec. 889. We have come to
understand that Sec. 889 is being applied with a blanket policy
that is not within the intended intent of the law.
This law governed contracts with organizations made to
provide telecommunications services. It does not require a
blanket no-contract clause on contracts with organizations not
providing telecommunications services, in this context:
purchasing tickets to sporting events.
We are requesting a response to the following: o What are
your current policies regarding section 889 contracts? o What
exemptions exist for Sec 889 waivers in the event of contracts
with organizations NOT providing telecommunications services? o
What steps is the Navy taking to align policy with
Congressional intent regarding non-telecommunication related
services? o Is this strictly a Navy interpretation, or is this
Department of Defense-wide guidance for all services?
Secretary Del Toro. Question 1: What are your current
policies regarding section 889 contracts? Navy's procedures for
non-appropriated funds acquisition follow the Department of
Defense's (DoD) implementation of Section 889 contained in DoD
Directive-type Memorandum DTM-22-002--``Nonappropriated Fund
Procurement Implementation of Section 889 of the National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-
232)'' May 31, 2022, Incorporating Change 1, April 28, 2023.
Question 2: What exemptions exist for Sec 889 waivers in the
event of contracts with organizations NOT providing
telecommunications services? The DoD policy provides for the
two limited and structured opportunities for waivers contained
in Sec 889. Question 3: What steps is the Navy taking to align
policy with Congressional intent regarding non-
telecommunication related services? Navy complies with the DoD
policy contained in DTM-22-002. Question 4: Is this strictly a
Navy interpretation, or is this Department of Defense-wide
guidance for all services? This is Department of Defense-wide
guidance. Please reference attached: DTM-22-002 NAF Sec 889

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. MACE

Ms. Mace. I am concerned about the military housing options
at MCAS Beaufort. As you can imagine the cost of living in
Beaufort is expensive, and the housing options are limited.
Laurel Bay, the military housing community, however, has
continued to have problems with maintaining enough livable
housing for those Marines and Sailors stationed there.
Specifically, there are 1,140 units and only 960 homes are
occupied, the rest are either under some state of disrepair or
unlivable for any number of reasons. Most of the repair issues
at the houses are HVAC and roofing, causing both a shortage of
quality homes for the marines and sailors, and old homes with
subpar roofs and HVAC systems, leaving military families to
face the elements in coastal South Carolina. When my office
sent an inquiry into the Marine Corps, they confirmed what the
Military Housing Office had stated, the Atlantic Marine Corps
Communities LLC is responsible for all personnel, supervision,
and execution of the maintenance program for all privatized
family housing. And this maintenance backlog is caused by a
variety of issues include it decreased BAH, increased material
costs, and Hurricane Florence in 2018. What more can the Marine
Corps and Congress do to ensure those who have volunteered to
serve our country have adequate housing for themselves and
their families?
Secretary Del Toro. The Marine Corps recognizes that the
environment in which our Marines live impact their quality of
life, their ability to do their job, and our ability to recruit
and retain the force. We are committed to ensuring that our on-
base housing meets life, health, and safety requirements and
provides a quality living experience for military personnel and
their families. Marine Corps leaders remain focused on
improving the privatized housing experience for Marines and
their families. A great deal of hard work has occurred since
issues were raised in media reports and by Congress in February
2019. Although a lot of the oversight process has improved,
work remains. The long-term financial viability of each
agreement, especially the Atlantic Marine Corps Communities,
LLC (AMCC) agreement, remains a key focus area of the Marine
Corps, particularly in the current market environment. In
keeping with this commitment, the Marine Corps selected AMCC,
specifically Laurel Bay, as a recipient of NDAA sec 606(A)(2)
funds for CY2022. This will result in approximately $12M in
additional revenue annually, which can be used to address
challenges throughout the project.
Ms. Mace. Secretary Del Toro, The GAO study released just
two days ago shows a large gap in safety and implemented
lessons learned from fires aboard Navy ships. The Navy reported
more than $4 billion in estimated damages from fires onboard
ships undergoing maintenance from May 2008 through December
2022. The Navy also lost two ships to fires during this period,
including the USS Bonhomme Richard. The GAO study found the
Department of the Navy has no established collection data from
lessons learned after these fires during maintenance. It is
clear to me not studying and learning from our past accidents
and mistakes is costly to the Navy at a time when we cannot
afford to be reckless. Our Navy is one of our top assets as it
relates to our greatest pacing competitor. GAO came out with
many great recommendations in this study, and I'm wondering
Secretary Del Toro, which of these the Department of the Navy
is going to implement?
Secretary Del Toro. The Navy has reviewed the analysis the
GAO conducted and included in its report titled Navy Ship
Fires--Ongoing Effort to Improved Safety Should be Enhanced. We
concur with all three of their recommendations. The Navy is
working with the GAO to establish our corrective action plans
to implement appropriate changes. As you would expect, the Navy
takes the loss of two capital ships very seriously. As the GAO
identified, we have already implemented changes, such as the
establishment of the Learning to Action Board, led by the Under
Secretary and Vice Chief of Naval Operations, which regularly
conducts oversight of fire safety improvements, as well as
establishing a NAVSEA team of subject matter experts to improve
fire safety while our ships are in an industrial environment.
We view the GAO recommendations as means to continue to better
improve the Navy's overall posture.
Ms. Mace. I am concerned about the military housing options
at MCAS Beaufort. As you can imagine the cost of living in
Beaufort is expensive, and the housing options are limited.
Laurel Bay, the military housing community, however, has
continued to have problems with maintaining enough livable
housing for those Marines and Sailors stationed there.
Specifically, there are 1,140 units and only 960 homes are
occupied, the rest are either under some state of disrepair or
unlivable for any number of reasons. Most of the repair issues
at the houses are HVAC and roofing, causing both a shortage of
quality homes for the marines and sailors, and old homes with
subpar roofs and HVAC systems, leaving military families to
face the elements in coastal South Carolina. When my office
sent an inquiry into the Marine Corps, they confirmed what the
Military Housing Office had stated, the Atlantic Marine Corps
Communities LLC is responsible for all personnel, supervision,
and execution of the maintenance program for all privatized
family housing. And this maintenance backlog is caused by a
variety of issues include it decreased BAH, increased material
costs, and Hurricane Florence in 2018. What more can the Marine
Corps and Congress do to ensure those who have volunteered to
serve our country have adequate housing for themselves and
their families?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Ms. Mace. I am concerned about the military housing options
at MCAS Beaufort. As you can imagine the cost of living in
Beaufort is expensive, and the housing options are limited.
Laurel Bay, the military housing community, however, has
continued to have problems with maintaining enough livable
housing for those Marines and Sailors stationed there.
Specifically, there are 1,140 units and only 960 homes are
occupied, the rest are either under some state of disrepair or
unlivable for any number of reasons. Most of the repair issues
at the houses are HVAC and roofing, causing both a shortage of
quality homes for the marines and sailors, and old homes with
subpar roofs and HVAC systems, leaving military families to
face the elements in coastal South Carolina. When my office
sent an inquiry into the Marine Corps, they confirmed what the
Military Housing Office had stated, the Atlantic Marine Corps
Communities LLC is responsible for all personnel, supervision,
and execution of the maintenance program for all privatized
family housing. And this maintenance backlog is caused by a
variety of issues include it decreased BAH, increased material
costs, and Hurricane Florence in 2018. What more can the Marine
Corps and Congress do to ensure those who have volunteered to
serve our country have adequate housing for themselves and
their families?
General Berger. Quality of life for our Marines and their
families in terms of adequate family housing is critical to
operational readiness and manpower retention, and we are
working aggressively with our Public Private Venture (PPV)
partners, such as the Atlantic Marine Corps Communities (AMCC)
LLC, to improve the housing situation. This is particularly
evident with the Laurel Bay Housing Area at MCAS Beaufort.
Between 2015 to 2021, AMCC saw a declining trend in physical
and economic occupancy in the Laurel Bay Housing Area based on
several concurrent factors, to include a less-attractive on-
base family housing inventory, growth in private sector housing
development, and historic low interest rates. This led AMCC to
employ several large rent concessions to incentivize occupants
to recapitalize the inventory and then fund the necessary
repair and replacement of deteriorated appliances, HVAC
components, and roofs.
The compounding effect of low occupancy, large rent
concessions, and increased operating expenses significantly
decreased the ability for AMCC to maintain these family housing
units. The long-term financial viability of agreement with our
family housing PPV partners, including AMCC, remains a key
focus area of the Marine Corps, especially in the current
market environment. AMCC, the owner and operator of Laurel Bay
homes, was selected as a recipient of NDAA sec 606(A)(2) funds
for CY2022. This will result in approximately $12M in
additional revenue annually, which can be used to directly
address the challenges that our Marines and their families are
experiencing at Laurel Bay. Additionally, we have increased the
quantity of personnel within our base Military Housing Office
(MHO). These personnel are the advocates for our Marines and
their families on housing issues.
They are separate from the partner housing company. For
greater transparency of responsibilities between tenants, the
housing partner, and the MHO, we have also implemented a
``Tenant's Bill of Rights'' starting in 2020. This is similar
to a contract with an off-base housing company or landlord.
Tied to this Bill of Rights is the process for the Dispute
Resolution Process (DRP). It serves as a means for our Marines
to have concerns addressed in a timely manner by either the
privatized housing company or their miliary chain of command,
depending on the nature and scope of the disagreement. Each MHO
has information readily available about the DRP. The MHO has
counselors that focus on addressing issues, using formal and
informal options. The DRP can address and resolve issues
related to maintenance and repairs, rental payments,
displacement rights, lease termination, inspections fees and
charges, and other matters typically encountered in a tenant--
landlord arrangement. Every tenant is highly encouraged to use
the DRP, since this provides visibility of tenant satisfaction
and the responsiveness of our housing partners.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FINSTAD

Mr. Finstad. As you know, the Navy assessed that 138 P-8A
aircraft were a risk-informed warfighting requirement. However,
despite this assessment, the FY24 budget requests no funding
for aircraft procurement. Congress previously added nine
aircraft in 2021, which increased the aircraft procurement to a
total of 128 and the Navy has a validated requirement for 138.
Can you touch on the Navy's assessment and the importance of
this aircraft to meet the Navy's warfighting needs?
Secretary Del Toro. The P-8A is the nation's only Airborne
Wide-Area Anti-submarine Warfare asset; heavily involved in our
nation's Maritime strategy and plays a significant role in all
Joint Force Major Conflict Operations (MCO's) plans worldwide.
The P-8A is entering the final phase of its spiral development
with the incorporation of Increment Three, Block Two (INC3
BLK2) upgrades to its ASW, ASuW, and ISR capabilities. The P-8A
aircraft is a proven tactical and operational asset, with over
110,000 hours of wide area ASW coverage that will continue to
play an instrumental role in our Navy's overall Maritime
Strategy for the next 40+ years. The Navy's warfighting
requirement is 138 P-8A, with a current inventory of 118 of 128
(128 delivered by Q2FY25). In today's fiscal environment, the
Navy's FY24 budget request delivers combat-credible forces by
focusing on three priorities: Readiness, Capabilities, and
Capacity. For FY24, in the case of P-8A, the Navy must accept
risk in capacity so that our current platforms are ready and
able to deploy.
Mr. Finstad. As you know, the Navy assessed that 138 P-8A
aircraft were a risk-informed warfighting requirement. However,
despite this assessment, the FY24 budget requests no funding
for aircraft procurement. Congress previously added nine
aircraft in 2021, which increased the aircraft procurement to a
total of 128 and the Navy has a validated requirement for 138.
Can you touch on the Navy's assessment and the importance of
this aircraft to meet the Navy's warfighting needs?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LALOTA

Mr. LaLota. Lieutenant Ridge Alkonis was deployed to Japan
and in May of 2021, while returning from a family trip, fell
ill while driving and struck two parked vehicles resulting in
the death of two Japanese Nationals. The parties agree neither
drugs nor alcohol were involved. Nevertheless, the Japanese
Government arrested LT Alkonis, denied him access to counsel,
denied him access to a translator, confined him pre-trial,
deprived him of sleep, induced him to agree to personally pay
$800,000 in restitution, coerced him to confess to the charges
by reasonably believing that in exchange for doing so he would
not be jailed further. To the contrary, he was later tried,
convicted, and is now serving a three-year sentence in prison
under conditions reserved for the worst criminals. What are you
doing to bring Lt. Alkonis back to the U.S.? What if any
conversations have you had with ADM Aquilino, the State
Department or any of your colleagues on the current state of
his case? What impact do you think this tragedy is having on
mission accomplishment? Do you think some Sailors who would
have sought orders to Japan are no longer doing so? What impact
do you think this tragedy is having on troop welfare? Do you
think some Sailors are spending less time off base in Japan
and/or not bringing their families with them on their PCS
orders to Japan?
Secretary Del Toro. Q: What are you doing to bring Lt.
Alkonis back to the U.S.?
A: The Department of the Navy fully supports the Department
of State and Department of Justice efforts to negotiate with
the Government of Japan to have LT Alkonis transferred to US
custody. I have to defer to the DoS and DoJ for details on the
status of those negotiations.
Q: What if any conversations have you had with ADM
Aquilino, the State Department or any of your colleagues on the
current state of his case?
A: Members of the Department of the Navy and chain of
command have been in contact with Mrs. Alkonis and continue to
assist her and her family through this matter, to include
facilitating information between the various agencies and our
partners that have a stake in the process.
Q: What impact do you think this tragedy is having on
mission accomplishment?
A: There has been no adverse impact to mission
accomplishment as a result of LT Alkonis' case.
Q: Do you think some Sailors who would have sought orders
to Japan are no longer doing so?
A: No, we have not seen a change in the number of Sailors
applying for orders to Japan.
Q: What impact do you think this tragedy is having on troop
welfare?
A: There has been no adverse impact to troop welfare. Most
Sailors in Japan are not following this case and to the extent
that some are, reactions are mixed. Some Sailors support LT
Alkonis and believe he's wrongfully imprisoned; others believe
justice was appropriately administered and that he is receiving
special treatment because he is an officer (e.g. continued pay
while confined).
Q: Do you think some Sailors are spending less time off
base in Japan and/or not bringing their families with them on
their PCS orders to Japan?
A: There has been no adverse impact to the lives of our
Sailors and their families as a result of LT Alkonis' case nor
have we seen any increased tensions between our Sailors and the
local population. Our Sailors and their families continue to
enjoy traveling throughout Japan and experiencing what the
country has to offer.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. MCCORMICK

Dr. McCormick. Since coming to Congress, I've become aware
of serious issues in the medical separation process, the
Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES), administered by
the Defense Health Agency due to wounded warriors' lack of
access to their branch chain of command. At the Medical
Evaluation Board phase and elsewhere, wounded warriors are
unable to seek relief after instances of negligence and
malfeasance nor can they meaningfully appeal questionable or
erroneous decisions through their chain of command. Given all
of that, would you support returning authority for the morale,
welfare, and determinations of fitness for active duty for
servicemembers going through the medical separation process
back to the service branches?
Secretary Del Toro. The Department of Defense (DoD) and
Department of Veteran Affairs jointly developed the Integrated
Disability Evaluation System (IDES). However, the ultimate
responsibility for determining a Sailor's or Marine's fitness
for continued naval service, by statute, remains with the
Secretary of the Navy. The IDES process was intentionally
designed as a Service member centric DES and introduced several
features to ensure advocacy in support of the Service member.
As a result, the chain of command is a major stakeholder in
the DES process. There is no existing policy preventing a
Service member from accessing their chain of command at any
time during the DES process. At the initiation of the DES
process, each Service member is assigned DES legal counsel, per
DoDI 1332.18, to advise them on their rights and elections.
During the Medical Evaluation Board (MEB) Phase, the Service
member is afforded several avenues of due process should there
be questions raised to include a Rebuttal and/or an
Independent/Impartial Medical Review prior to submission of the
case to the Physical Evaluation Board (PEB) phase. The Service
member is also accorded the opportunity to submit a personal
impact statement and any other material evidence that enables
the individual to contribute to the record of evidence that is
considered by the PEB.
The PEB adjudicating panel is composed of Navy medical
officers, as well as line officers representing the Navy and
Marine Corps as appropriate. Fitness for duty determinations,
rendered by the informal PEB adjudicators, may be appealed.
With the assistance of an appointed uniformed JAG attorney, the
Service member may have their petition considered, as
necessary, by requesting a Formal PEB (FPEB). Should they not
accept the FPEB determination, they may then request an FPEB
appeal. Following such appeal, they may still, through the
assistance of their uniformed JAG attorney, avail themselves of
two separate Secretarial level reviews. Section 1073c of Title
10, United States Code gives the Defense Health Agency (DHA)
the responsibility to manage the military medical treatment
facilities (MTF). While DHA has management responsibilities of
some DES staff, DHA does not have authority over the DES
process.
Meaning, DHA also does not have authority or control over
Service members referred into the DES. In accordance with Title
10, United States Code, the Secretaries of the Military
Departments retain authority of the Service member and the DES
process. The DHA plays a supporting role in the DES process as
their healthcare providers provide the clinical expertise
necessary, during the MEB phase, to assist the Services in
providing a recommendation to the PEB so that they can make
fitness determinations. Each Military Department has its own
regulations regarding medical retention and DES processing in
accordance with DoD policies and the respective needs of the
Military Departments. The DoN has the authority to retain a
Sailor or Marine on active duty subject to the needs of the
Navy and Marine Corps and a personal request from the
individual.
Dr. McCormick. The 2022 NAVPLAN highlights recapitalizing
the Navy's C-130 fleet by 2030 to meet the challenge of
contested logistics in future conflicts. The aging C-130T
fleet, operated by the Navy Reserve, is the Navy's only
provider of intra-theater airlift. Unfortunately, the
president's budget request does not include any budgeted KC-
130J aircraft for the Navy and there are no KC-130J aircraft in
the FYDP. Is it still the intention of the Navy to complete C-
130 recapitalization by 2030 as stated in the 2022 NAVPLAN? If
so, how is that possible with no budgeted planes in the FYDP
and requesting one in the UPL? If not, what is the plan to
combat contested logistics with limited intra-theater airlift?
Admiral Gilday. The Navy's long-term plan is to transition
the fleet from the C/KC-130T to KC-130J. The Navy is continuing
to assess the intra-theater lift capabilities required to
support contested logistics and determine the most affordable
means to provide those capabilities by 2030. In the near-term,
several ongoing sustainment and modernization efforts are
funded with the intent of maintaining the current capability
provided by the C/KC-130Ts.
Dr. McCormick. Since coming to Congress, I've become aware
of serious issues in the medical separation process, the
Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES), administered by
the Defense Health Agency due to wounded warriors' lack of
access to their branch chain of command. At the Medical
Evaluation Board phase and elsewhere, wounded warriors are
unable to seek relief after instances of negligence and
malfeasance nor can they meaningfully appeal questionable or
erroneous decisions through their chain of command. Given all
of that, would you support returning authority for the morale,
welfare, and determinations of fitness for active duty for
servicemembers going through the medical separation process
back to the service branches?
Admiral Gilday. This question was asked of both Secretary
Del Toro and Admiral Gilday and the more senior leader will
provide the response. Please see Secretary Del Toro's response.
Dr. McCormick. I noticed on the Marine Corps' unfunded
priority list that you requested additional funding for DCGS
Allsource SCI Workstations. Of course, we're talking about a
system that you need a high-level clearance to even be in the
room with, but can you give us an idea of why this item is your
#5 unfunded request and how far this added funding would go in
pursuing your mission set?
General Berger. The Distributed Common Ground System--
Marine Corps (DCGS-MC) All Source Workstations upgrade is the
#5 request on the Unfunded Priority List (UPL) because it is
the Marine Corps' top Intelligence requirement above the FY24
budget submission. The DCGS-MC All Source Suite provides the
primary intelligence analytical toolset used by Fleet Marine
Force at all echelons. The suite facilitates global
collaboration with Marine and Joint analytical systems, enables
Marines to conduct multi-discipline intelligence fusion,
analysis, production, and dissemination of intelligence in
support of the Find, Fix, Track, Target (F2T2) and Assess
process by automating multiple intelligence functions and
processes. Capabilities include advanced decision support tools
that leverage data science and artificial intelligence for the
Tactical, Naval, and Joint Force.
Currently, the DCGS-MC All Source Workstations can only
operate at the Secret Level (SIPR) and are not engineered for
use/operations on the Joint Worldwide Intelligence
Communication System (JWICS), thereby preventing the program
from meeting the approved standing requirement to operate on
JWICS. Additionally, the Sensitive Compartmented Information
(SCI) Net program (JWICS) has transitioned its hardware to a
thin-client architecture, which lacks the necessary analytical
and processing capabilities to host DCGS All Source
capabilities. Therefore, to operate DCGS All Source at the
JWICS/SCI Level, the Marine Corps requires workstations that
are JWICS/SCI compliant. The FY24 Unfunded Priority List (UPL)
request of $5.1M, along with the funding requested in the
President's Budget submission, will fully fund the Marine Corps
DCGS-MC All Source requirement (546 workstations).
The funding enables the Marine Corps to procure and field
workstations (hardware and software) with all source computing
power and geospatial tools necessary to process the depth/
breadth of SCI operational requirements for use on the JWICS
security domain. Additionally, we believe the next war's
decisions and primary synchronization of effects will take
place at the SCI level. Today, advance battlespace awareness
and long-range targeting technologies are proliferating at the
JWICS/SCI level. These actions suggest the USMC's value
proposition to the Joint Force must include a robust SCI
architecture capability and capacity to integrate organic
sensing with theater and national sensing, make sense of the
same, as well as communicating the outputs for decision
advantage and action. Simultaneously, this requirement helps
support our current estimates for tactical SCI Facilities
resident within the Marine Corps' Stand-in Forces.
Dr. McCormick. I noticed how highly KC130J aircraft and
initial spares procurement ranked very highly on your UPL.
Could you also explain the added capability this expanded
tanker fleet would give USMC? And why do you think the base
budget did not meet USMC's need?
General Berger. The procurement of these KC-130J aircraft
directly supports the activation of the fourth Active Component
squadron per Force Design (FD) and current strategic guidance
to support the Indo-Pacific Command (INDOPACOM) Area of
Responsibility (AOR), by increasing the number of KC-130J
squadrons assigned to Marine Forces, Pacific from two to three.
This fourth Active Component squadron will be collocated with
two MV-22 squadrons operating from Marine Corps Base Hawaii,
providing the Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) with an
organic state-of-the-art, multi-mission, tactical air-to-air
refueling, and fixed-wing assault support asset to support
missions around the globe. The Marine Corps is modernizing its
logistics capabilities to operate from and alongside naval
platforms and bases to sustain the naval forces in contested
spaces. Vital assets such as the KC-130J, MV-22B, CH-53K,
Medium Landing Ships (LSMs), and our Amphibious Warfare Ships
are crucial capabilities that enable the Marine Corps to
execute Expeditionary Advanced Base Operations (EABO), the
Stand-in Force (SIF) and to sustain the distributed naval
forces. The KC-130J aircraft and initial spares listed served
as an accelerant to support the FD modernization efforts that
have expanded, optimized and enhanced Marine Aviation's ability
to provide vital capabilities to the MAGTF, Joint Force, Joint
Force Maritime Component Commander (JFMCC) and Combatant
Commanders (COCOM) now and into the future.
Dr. McCormick. Since coming to Congress, I've become aware
of serious issues in the medical separation process, the
Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES), administered by
the Defense Health Agency due to wounded warriors' lack of
access to their branch chain of command. At the Medical
Evaluation Board phase and elsewhere, wounded warriors are
unable to seek relief after instances of negligence and
malfeasance nor can they meaningfully appeal questionable or
erroneous decisions through their chain of command. Given all
of that, would you support returning authority for the morale,
welfare, and determinations of fitness for active duty for
servicemembers going through the medical separation process
back to the service branches?
General Berger. The Department of Defense and Department of
Veteran Affairs jointly developed the Integrated Disability
Evaluation System (IDES); however, the ultimate responsibility
for determining a Marine's fitness for continued naval service,
by statute, remains with the Secretary of the Navy. The IDES
process was intentionally designed as a service member centric
disability evaluation system and introduced several features to
ensure advocacy in support of the member. During the Medical
Evaluation Board phase, a regionally based disability
evaluation system attorney is available to all referred
Marines; an Independent Medical Board Review may be requested,
and the member may appeal the decision of the medical
evaluation board convening authority before their case is
advanced. The member is also accorded the opportunity to submit
a personal impact statement and any other material evidence
that enables the individual to contribute to the record of
evidence that is considered by the DON Physical Evaluation
Board (PEB). The PEB adjudicating panel is composed of Navy
medical officers, as well as line officers representing the
Navy and Marine Corps. Fitness for duty determinations,
rendered by the informal physical evaluation board
adjudicators, may be appealed. With the assistance of an
appointed uniformed JAG attorney, the Marine may have their
petition considered, as necessary, by two separate Secretarial
level reviews. The service has the authority to retain a Marine
on active duty subject to the needs of the Marine Corps and a
personal request from the individual. There are sufficient
procedures and practices in place to ensure Marines are
properly represented and provided opportunities to express
their concerns with the DON Disability Evaluation System
process.
