- F-35 ACQUISITION PROGRAM UPDATE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-49]

F-35 ACQUISITION PROGRAM UPDATE

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL
AIR AND LAND FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD

DECEMBER 12, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

-------

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-026                   WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman

MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
DON BACON, Nebraska                  SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
PAT FALLON, Texas                    PATRICK RYAN, New York
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
NICK LaLOTA, New York                STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia

Heath Bope, Professional Staff Member
Jay Vallario, Professional Staff Member
Brooke Alred, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Norcross, Hon. Donald, a Representative from New Jersey, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...........     2
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces.........     1

WITNESSES

LaPlante, Hon. William A., Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition and Sustainment, Office of the Secretary of Defense     4
Ludwigson, Jon, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, U.S. Government Accountability Office............     7
Schmidt, Lt Gen Michael J., USAF, Program Executive Officer and
Director for the F-35 Lightning II Program, Department of
Defense........................................................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

LaPlante, Hon. William A.....................................    31
Ludwigson, Jon...............................................    63
Schmidt, Lt Gen Michael J....................................    41

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Courtney.................................................    81

F-35 ACQUISITION PROGRAM UPDATE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, December 12, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:40 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert J.
Wittman (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES

Mr. Wittman. I call the Subcommittee on Tactical Air and
Land Forces to order. I would like to welcome everybody to our
last subcommittee hearing of the year to receive an update on
the F-35 program.
Given that we started the 118th Congress with our first
hearing on tactical fighter aircraft, it is very fitting that
we finish this first session of the 118th Congress discussing
what the Department notes as the cornerstone of its future
tactical fighter aircraft fleet, the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter.
I thank our witnesses today for testifying this afternoon
and look forward to your testimony. As I stated throughout this
year, the National Defense Strategy is clear in its focus on
China as our Nation's pacing threat.
And given the continuing provocative actions of the Chinese
that we've all witnessed in the Pacific theater this year, it
is critically important that we continue to evaluate our
military capabilities to ensure we are postured for robust
deterrence and, when necessary, prosecute combat operations to
overwhelmingly prevail against any aggressor that tests our
Nation's military resolve.
As I emphasized this past spring while reviewing the
tactical fighter aircraft plans for each of our military
services, two common threads were evident. First, our fighter
force structure continues on the decrease. And second, we are
not able to deliver replacement aircraft at affordable prices
to achieve similar quantities going forward.
Meanwhile, our adversaries continue to outpace us, building
and fielding their own lethal fighter aircraft capacities and
capability.
As it relates to the F-35 program, this subcommittee has
made clear our expectations in the oversight of key areas of
this program.
Technical Refresh 3, better known as TR-3, hardware
upgrades and Block 4 software capability development, air
system and propulsion modernization, depot standup, and supply
chain maturations, operations and sustainment cost reduction,
and increasing the full mission capability rates above what the
F-35 fleet has demonstrated today are all critical elements of
what must be addressed in this program going forward.
While program challenges and setbacks always seem to
dominate the discussion, I would be remiss if I didn't
acknowledge some of the F-35 program's successes from the past
year.
With the nearly $1 billion in additional investment last
year, propulsion system mission capability rates have
increased, and the non-mission capable rates of the aircraft
due to power module removals has decreased.
The program has brought on new foreign military sales
customers, expanding the worldwide capability and commonality
for operations with our partners and allies.
And most recently the F-35 Joint Program Office has moved
at a breakneck speed to support our closest partner and ally in
the Middle East, Israel.
They have done this by accelerating F-35 weapons
capabilities and increasing spare part supply rates in their
fight against the atrocities committed by Hamas.
And now as I pivot to reviewing some of the program's
continuing challenges, I want to unequivocally state upfront
that the F-35 will be the most advanced tactical fighter
aircraft that the U.S. has ever built.
But our patience with the program development is wearing
thin. Once again, we're going to talk about the prior planned
schedules that have slipped and costs that have unexpectedly
grown.
I want to focus on four issues today. First, TR-3
development and fielding challenges, Second, propulsion and
thermal management system modernization and requirements.
Third, sustainment strategy planning, given the recent setback
regarding the performance-based logistic supply contract. And
fourth, potential strategies related to the development and
testing of software and mission capabilities, both now and in
the future.
My friends, the F-35 is a technological marvel, but the
delays in fielding required capabilities are disturbing. As the
Department of Defense's largest acquisition program, I am
committed to providing rigorous oversight to deliver required
capability at a reasonable cost.
With that, I turn to my good friend from New Jersey, and
distinguished ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Norcross.

STATEMENT OF HON. DONALD NORCROSS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW
JERSEY, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES

Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman, and I would like to
welcome our witnesses. This subcommittee's last F-35 oversight
hearing was 2\1/2\ years ago. Given the fact that it is the
DOD's [Department of Defense's] largest weapon program, I think
this public hearing is long overdue, and I look forward to our
government witnesses updating Congress and the public on the F-
35.
The F-35 is one of [the], if not the, most capable fighters
on the planet. When I speak to military leaders around the
world, I always hear how much they enjoy the flying F-35, how
impressed they are with its performance. And I don't want that
to be lost in today's hearing. It is a very impressive fighter.
But what's important is that we continue to deliver future
capabilities to operational forces as soon as possible and at a
cost that the Department can afford. That's what this hearing
is about, oversight, the execution of development, production,
sustainment of this key weapon.
Two months ago marked the 22nd anniversary of the start of
the F-35 development. Today, the program continues to suffer
unforeseen cost overruns and schedule delay. Much needed
Technical Refresh 3, or TR-3, will ultimately deliver Block 4
capabilities, and it's not ready. And the government ceased to
accept deliveries of this new aircraft until TR-3 testing is
complete.
Moreover, the Department notified the committee a few
months ago of another scheduled delay that pushes delivery of
TR-3 to mid-2024. Assuming this schedule holds, and that's a
big assumption, that would result in an almost an 18-month
delay and almost $1 billion of cost overrun.
I hope our witnesses today will explain the root causes of
these delays and update us on executing the new schedule.
We need to deliver Block 4 capabilities to the operational
forces ASAP [as soon as possible], and TR-3 is the hardware
that supports future capabilities.
The F-35 program is also in early development stages of the
future engine necessary to sustain the aircraft through the F-
35's life cycle. This issue is broader than just a discussion
on an engine. It encompasses propulsion, system cooling,
electrical power generation, and electrical distribution. We
want this system and its air system subprogram to meet its
cost, schedule, and performance metrics. We want it to be on
time and on budget. And we want it to meet the requirements.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses regarding this
development effort and hope that they will clearly identify
critical paths to success and any mitigating efforts to drive
out or minimize the execution risk.
Turning to sustainment, fiscal year 2022 NDAA [National
Defense Authorization Act] prohibited the Department from
entering into a multiyear performance-based logistic and
sustainment contract unless and until the Secretary of Defense
certified to Congress that this contract would either reduce
sustainment costs or increase readiness.
I understand the Department recently ceased negotiations
with Lockheed Martin regarding a potential sustainment and
indicated the primary reasons is they could not meet the
congressionally mandated certification requirements.
I find it puzzling that a multiyear sustainment contract as
compared to the annual sustainment contract could not either
deliver and drive down costs or increase readiness.
Ultimately, sustainment costs will determine whether the
Department can afford to procure its objective fleet of 1,763
aircraft for the Air Force, 420 for the Marines, and 273 for
the Navy. I think it would be helpful for our witnesses to
update the subcommittee on the sustainment strategy and explain
how the strategy will deliver the readiness we need at an
affordable cost.
And finally, to our GAO [U.S. Government Accountability
Office] witness, Mr. Ludwigson, we are very interested in your
perspective on many of these thorny issues. This subcommittee
relies heavily on the GAO to provide independent objective
analysis of the program execution. And your testimony here
today will help the subcommittee determine where to best focus
our attention as we go forward.
In closing, Tactical Air and Land Forces Subcommittee
remains supportive of this program. But the Department must
continue to work to drive out schedule delays and avoid those
cost overruns. And I would like to thank our witnesses for
their appearance today, and I look forward to their testimony.
And I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. I'd like to thank Mr. Norcross, our ranking
member, and now I would like to introduce our witnesses.
We have today with us the Honorable William LaPlante, Under
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, and the
Milestone Decision Authority for the F-35 program; Lieutenant
General Michael Schmidt, F-35 Program Executive Officer; and
Mr. Jon Ludwigson, director of the Contracting and National
Security Acquisition team for the Government Accounting
Offices.
Gentlemen, with that, I will go to your testimony. Dr.
LaPlante.

STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM A. LaPLANTE, UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION AND SUSTAINMENT, OFFICE OF THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Dr. LaPlante. Thank you, Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member
Norcross, and thanks to the committee for your key role in the
oversight. And I think just already in the opening statements,
you show a balanced view of both the accomplishments of F-35
but the real challenges. And I'm going to address some of those
one by one in this opening and then hopefully lead later on
with my colleagues with more and back and forth to your
questions.
The F-35 delivers the most lethal and survivable tactical
fighter to U.S. allies and partners. I think it is in the world
actually the most lethal. We have still work to do because of
the changing threat and the rapidly changing threat.
We are now up to--I have to remind ourselves--nine FMS
[foreign military sales] partners. We have seven partners in
the partnership. In addition to that, nine FMS partners with
two more on the way. So we are doing something there that
obviously partners and allies are seeing the benefit of this.
And so with that happening, and we have nearly 1,000 of
these airplanes around the world, including our partners and
allies, we have these challenges. And I'm going to go through
and kind of address each one at a high level, but then later we
can get to it. And I will try to follow the format of the
chairman on his four items.
A reminder that we are also approaching a full-rate
production decision now that we're done with the joint
simulation environment mission trials.
This would--right now if it's on track, it's going to be in
March of this next year. It's important to do that. It's
important to close that out. And this is subject to the IOT&E
[initial operational test and evaluation] and independent costs
estimates.
Technology Refresh 3. The chairman and the ranking member
correctly identified this as the top modernization issue right
now in the program. A reminder again is that TR-3 is the
hardware upgrade from TR-2, which as I remember I was putting
that back in when I was the Air Force acquisition executive in
2013. But then the software that goes with it, and as the
committee knows, and we will be able to talk to, while there
has been significant progress, the software maturity is not
such that it runs on the hardware in a manner that we are yet
to be satisfied with, and hence that's the issue of the delay
that was mentioned.
So that's point number one. Point number two, I will just
cover the propulsion. There has been a lot of work, and this
committee, I know, has been very interested in the Engine Core
Upgrade work that's been done as well as to extend the engine
life of the F135 engine. But also the cooling and thermal
management requirements to get to some future power
requirements that these new systems we need for the threat have
to deliver. So there is a lot of work that has been done there
in getting that started.
And, of course, the related, I would call it adjacent
issue, of the technology of the AETP [Adaptive Engine
Transition Program] program, which we have been tracking like
for 10 years and where that goes. We can talk about all of
that.
Mentioned the sustainment. And the core of that, of course,
was to get to a good and effective performance-based logistics
[PBL] contract at the system level. And we took very seriously
the NDAA guidance about having it certified both for
performance and cost.
And simply put, in the negotiations we have gone through
with the industry, up until about a month ago, it was clear we
were not going to get a satisfied cost proposal with
performance that we would feel comfortable with and that we had
to take the team that was very busy working on that and put
them on essentially extending where we are now and then come
back to the PBL. And simply, we were not going to approve a PBL
that did not perform well and didn't get the cost savings.
And for the ranking member and how you expressed your
question about how could we not have a better price and
performance, I completely agree with you. That almost took the
words out of my mouth when we made this decision. So we have
not given up on it, but we have got a lot more to do there with
industry.
The other piece on sustainment that I will be happy to talk
about in the last year, and this is, I would say, a positive
thing, is that we have been doing sustainment tabletop
exercises assuming a contested environment, particularly one in
the Indo-Pacific, and we are learning a lot. So we have done
that there.
And finally, what is central to this discussion on PBL, and
frankly has been essential to the program since I have been
with the program, has been the data itself, and the quality of
the data, and the ownership of inventories and understanding
the inventories. It impacts lots of things, including our
ability to pass an audit.
This has also been a factor in the PBL negotiations is
making sure that the data that we are getting from industry is
something that we can rely on. So we are going to continue to
push on that.
The legislation of 356 that allowed us to get data from the
contractor has been very helpful, and we look forward to
working with you further on that.
I will close my testimony. I look forward to your
questions. Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Dr. LaPlante can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Dr. LaPlante. We will now go to
Lieutenant General Schmidt.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN MICHAEL J. SCHMIDT, USAF, PROGRAM EXECUTIVE
OFFICER AND DIRECTOR FOR THE F-35 LIGHTNING II PROGRAM,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

General Schmidt. Sir, thank you. Chairman Wittman, Ranking
Member Norcross, and distinguished members of the subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to provide an update on F-35
development and production plans and progress as well as
strategies to maximize readiness and reduce sustainment costs.
I am grateful that topics such as Tech Refresh 3, engine
power and cooling modernization, test infrastructure, and
sustainment are priorities for this subcommittee. And I assure
you they are also top priorities of mine.
Today, our Lightning Sustainment Center is delivering
global support to U.S. services, F-35 partners, and foreign
military sales customers around the world.
We are executing an F-35 war on readiness, war on cost, and
war on cyber to get after key program challenges. We are
placing strategic focus on depot stand-up, organic warehousing
and transportation, and logistics information system
modernization.
Meanwhile, organic pathfinder initiatives are driving cost-
effectiveness as we de-layer our F-35 supply chain. It is clear
there is no shortage of innovation and progress being achieved
across this enterprise. And there is undoubtedly much work to
be done.
While maximizing readiness is at the forefront of my mind
today, our program-wide focus on TR-3 stability and Block 4
delivery aims to ensure this air system is ready and able to
win tomorrow's advanced fight if called upon.
We are pursuing game-changing modeling and simulation
efforts to minimize requirements for costly real-world flight
tests and training. We are combating challenges associated with
concurrency to deliver the necessary capabilities on relevant
timelines in future lots. And we are closing in on Milestone C
in a full-rate production decision.
I look forward to the opportunity to update you on progress
and plans associated with these and other efforts today.
Since I last testified before this subcommittee, the F-35
program has overcome significant challenges and made tremendous
progress. Many recent operational and programmatic
accomplishments are detailed in my written testimony.
Since March, the F-35 program has stood up capability at
four new bases and on one new ship. To date, F-35 users have
logged over 750,000 flight hours and 450,000 sorties around the
globe. F-35 capability and international collaboration are
increasing every single day.
Within 10 years, there will be over 600 F-35s operating in
the European theater alone, and fewer than 60 of them will be
U.S. owned. The F-35 partnership's shared commitment and
mission brings game-changing value not only for coalition
combat, but for our taxpayers as well.
I am tremendously proud of our multinational F-35 JPO
[Joint Program Office] team members who deliver, innovate, and
grow every single day. Together, we are leaning into this
''dig-in'' mentality as we enable fifth-generation capability
and pursue readiness and excellence across the F-35 fleet.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to join Dr.
LaPlante and Mr. Ludwigson as we discuss F-35 progress,
challenges, and opportunities.
This subcommittee's support and oversight are essential to
the success of this program.
[The prepared statement of General Schmidt can be found in
the Appendix on page 41.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Lieutenant General Schmidt. And now
we will go to Mr. Ludwigson.

STATEMENT OF JON LUDWIGSON, DIRECTOR, CONTRACTING AND NATIONAL
SECURITY ACQUISITIONS, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Ludwigson. Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member Norcross,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work examining the
F-35.
The F-35 remains critical to U.S. national security and to
that of our international partners and allies. After years of
development and the completion of testing, the baseline program
is poised to move out of the acquisition phase.
Completing baseline development is good news, but the work
to keep the F-35 ahead of our potential adversaries continues.
The program is committed to modernize the aircraft through the
Block 4 and TR-3 efforts aimed at providing enhanced
capabilities to keep ahead of evolving threats.
The program also plans to upgrade the cooling system,
engine, and related systems intending to reduce wear on the
engine and reduce costs while enhancing the foundation of the
F-35 to receive advancements developed through Block 4 and
potentially beyond. Both of these modernization efforts are
critical to the future of the F-35.
Over the past several years, we have reported multiple
concerns about Block 4 and TR-3 and made recommendations aimed
at improving them. In particular, we have reported that the
program was struggling to develop and field Block 4
capabilities and made numerous recommendations, including
updating the schedule to better reflect actual development
timeframes and to use better tools for monitoring software
development.
Earlier this year, we reported that the limited
availability of test aircraft posed a risk to the Block 4 test
schedule and noted the program was planning on increasing the
number of test aircraft to address this.
Over the years, we have also raised higher level concerns
about how Block 4 is organized. Originally, Block 4 was
comprised of 66 capabilities, expected to be completed for
$10.6 billion by 2026.
In 2016, at the inception of Block 4, we recommended that
DOD take steps to manage Block 4 as a separate program and that
Congress consider directing DOD to do so. We believe this would
provide more visibility and the foundation to hold the program
accountable for meeting cost, schedule, and performance goals.
The program did not implement our recommendation, but
Congress took steps to require enhanced reporting for Block 4.
However, we reported that the program has routinely made
changes to Block 4. And last year we reported the most recent
data indicated Block 4 had grown to 80 capabilities and grown
to $16.5 billion and wasn't expected to be completed until
2029.
This evolving picture has made it difficult to identify
whether cost and schedule increases are a result of increasing
scope, developmental challenges, contractor challenges, or
something else.
Despite enhanced reporting, we continue to face challenges
tracking costs for Block 4 capabilities. In our report earlier
this year, we recommended that the program take steps to
improve how it reports Block 4 costs for individual
capabilities.
With our impending transition out of acquisition, the
concerns we raised are increased in importance. And we continue
to believe that the effort would benefit from enhanced
oversight as a separate program as we recommended.
More recently, the program has taken steps to address
longstanding problems with the aircraft cooling system, the
engine, and related systems.
The original requirements for cooling proved to be
incorrect and accelerated wear and higher maintenance costs
were the result.
Over the past year, the program examined options for
addressing this. Earlier this year, we reported that the
analysis done to examine these issues lacked some key
information. We identified five recommendations aimed at
enhancing the basis for proceeding with this modernization
effort.
For example, we recommended the program office define its
estimated future cooling needs, conduct an independent
technology readiness assessment, and obtain independent cost
estimates.
Similar to our Block 4 concerns, we also reported that
modernization of the cooling system, engine, and related
systems would benefit from enhanced oversight. We recommended
that the program take steps to manage these efforts as a
separate program and raised a matter for Congress to consider
requiring the Department to do so.
As the program transitions out of acquisition, it could be
difficult to oversee these efforts without traditional
acquisition management tools.
Much has been accomplished in the development of the F-35,
but the modernization efforts appear costly, complex, and
critical to staying ahead of our potential adversaries. As
such, we believe providing sufficient visibility into these
efforts will be important for timely and impactful
congressional oversight.
Our past recommendations could help Congress oversee these
efforts as the baseline program transitions out of the
acquisition phase.
Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member Norcross, this concludes
my statement. I would be happy to answer any questions the
subcommittee members may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ludwigson can be found in
the Appendix on page 63.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Ludwigson. I want to thank our
witnesses. And General Schmidt, I will begin with you. We had
you all here last spring. You said the delivery date for TR-3
upgrade would be between December and April. Now it looks like
it's April to June.
I want to drill down and get from you, what are the
specific areas that the contractors are having difficulty in
delivering the TR-3 upgrade? And I want to ask specifically
about what are they doing in trying to replicate the aircraft's
operational systems in the laboratory?
And it seems like to me that this ought to be a fairly
simple paradigm because contractors have done it for other
platforms. They've done it for Arleigh Burke destroyers with
Aegis systems. They have done it for Virginia-class submarines.
So it is not like this is an unknown.
Can you give me some drill down about why there is a
failure there to deliver this? Is there something in the
laboratories? Is there something there that is not connecting
in how this TR-3 upgrade is being pursued?
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. That is a great question. You
know, as I discussed previously, sir, you are absolutely
correct. Our labs are not properly representing the flight
environment, and there is way too much discovery happening in
flight test.
Dr. LaPlante directed a tech baseline review that started
last summer that they are just wrapping up. And we will get the
results.
Just in summary, sir, we have seen way too much discovery
in flight tests. Also I would say in this program concurrency
has been an issue. But especially when we introduce concurrency
in the form of hardware in this program, we have a history in
this program of not being able to, in a timely manner, deliver
hardware fully integrated from a software program, software
aspect into the program.
We are better on the tactical application side, but when we
introduce hardware into a lot in this program and not have the
full engineering rigor required to identify what the work scope
is required to deliver in that specific lot, we run into
problems in this program.
And I am happy to discuss, sir, what we are doing going
forward if you would like me to do that?
Mr. Wittman. Yeah, I would. I would like to know what the
course of action to correct this, to be able to get back on
track. Because this doesn't only affect TR-3, but it also
affects Block 4. And as we have aircraft back up and we are
looking at what are the capabilities of these aircraft once
they get the TR-3 upgrade, are they going to be as capable as
TR-2 aircraft? I think that question, too, comes up. So I
wanted to get your specifics about that situation.
General Schmidt. In the near term, sir, relative to the
stability issues that we are seeing, we are working through
them. I wish, I wish I had all of the solutions in place that
proved to me that when I do something in the lab, it is going
to show up that way in the air.
We have a number of fixes addressing the stability
challenges. We will get to a stable, capable, maintainable
airplane here. The data tells me it will be in the middle of
spring. But I would have had a more positive answer 6 months
ago of when I thought it would be. So I don't have a super
solid I can guarantee you this date.
I will tell you that going forward--by the way, the
competition in the labs and the limited capacity in the labs
between the latest TR-2 software that has great capabilities
that will go out to the field early next year, it will be good
to get it out of the lab.
We are competing right now between the first version of TR-
3 hardware and software and the next version, which takes that
combat capability in the field that we're about to deliver
early in the year and puts it into a TR-3 version. So we are
trying to create capacity in the labs to do that.
I will say that for all Block 4 capabilities going forward
the team has done, I think, a very good job of taking the many
contracts we had across all of the Block 4 capabilities and
putting rigorous capability decision points with rigorous
system engineering processes so that we don't get ourselves
into a situation where we commit hardware or software--but
specifically hardware--to a specific lot without all the rigors
required to say I can put that into that lot and have that
contractually binding with Lockheed or Pratt & Whitney,
depending on which it may be.
Mr. Wittman. I think this also begs the question about the
enterprise on advance systems, especially F-35. It has taken
now, we are at year 18 if you count every minute of when it
started from concept to where we are now, and then making sure
this platform is operational. It really begs the question, if
we are going to do things quickly at the speed of relevance,
software needs to inform hardware. That is the way things need
to go.
Listen, a great hardware platform, but it can't do the
things that we need for it to do if it is not software enabled.
So we want to make sure that that is the baseline.
Let me go to performance-based logistics. Dr. LaPlante, I
wanted to get your mindset on this.
We looked at a performance-based logistics contract to be
able to reduce cost, to have more certainty in the supply of
spare parts, mission capability metrics. As you know, the non-
mission capable rates due to lack of parts is currently at 42.5
percent, absolutely unacceptable.
We looked at what you are proposing, and now you seem to be
moving away from performance-based logistics because you say it
is going to be more expensive than doing sort of one-off, one
aircraft mission capable maintenance and mission capability
performance efforts.
Can you explain where negotiations have led you to come to
that point now and why a performance-based logistics contract
is not the way to go forward?
Dr. LaPlante. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, to be
clear, we have not made the decision to walk away from
performance-based logistics overall at the system level. We had
to pause just because of the manpower we had that was doing
negotiation to extend the current contract. We have not walked
away from the system-level performance-based logistics.
Where we were--to do the pause, as I mentioned earlier, is
in the proposals that we had received from industry at that
time, they were at not sufficient cost savings, if any, and not
performance savings. And so we knew we wanted to wrap up the
negotiations by about February to be able to switch to the new
contract and just didn't have the time.
So we put pause on the PBL to focus on extending the
current contracting. But I say overall, this is the way we
understand it. The key thing is, you know, with performance-
based logistics is, number one, picking the right metric----
Mr. Wittman. Yeah.
General Schmidt [continuing]. To measure the contractor
with. And you also want to do it of some period of time, 5
years, even longer.
Sometimes at the system level, a performance-based
logistics is very hard to do, and I'll explain an example why.
If the contractor themselves or the program office doesn't have
control over the metric. I was talking to one of my colleagues
in another country who had one system-level performance-based
logistics that was actually not working for him because the
metric was in there. It was things like flying hours. And he
didn't have control of it nor did the contractor. So sometimes
you have to get the right metric.
Where we have been in the metrics with this discussion is
something called the gross issue effectiveness rate
requirements. With the percentage of total demands filled at
the base with onsite inventory divided by total number of
demands and supply response time.
We think those are good metrics. But for us to get a good
idea on whether we will meet the metrics, that data has to be
something that is reliable. And that was part of the issue, but
we haven't given up on it.
The other piece, and this may be the case, is there is
something called in the sustainment community market basket
approaches where you decide maybe for subsystems or what we
might call systems to do a PBL, but not have one single PBL for
the entire plane. So we are looking at all of that.
And actually, we were looking at this as part of section
142, because section 142 that you all helped us with really
directed us to begin really standing up the organic government
management of sustainment. And to do that, the government has
to know what it's going to do itself organically and what it's
going to contract to do.
And so a market basket approach may be there. It's just we
were not going to wrap up the negotiation on this one in the
time we needed. And I wouldn't have been able to satisfy the
requirement to have it certified for the price savings. But we
are not walking away from it overall.
Mr. Wittman. I think you hit the nail on the head as far as
metrics. I would encourage you to look at other organizations
out there that do performance-based logistics. When you go to
the airport, the airlines make sure they keep their aircraft in
the air. They are pretty aggressive about making sure that when
that aircraft is at the gate--now some of us had experiences
where the aircraft gets rolled away from the gate, but their
operational availability is pretty impressive. So they don't
make money if they're not in the air. So I would argue there
are a lot of things that could be learned from that. Obviously
tactical aircraft is different than those passenger aircraft,
but I think some of the concepts are probably the same.
With that, I will go to our ranking member, Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Ludwigson, in your
hearing statement, you referenced Block 4 development effort in
2016. Baseline was at 66 capabilities at a cost of $10.6
billion to be delivered in 2026, that baseline.
Presently, Block 4 is comprised of 80 capabilities at a
cost of $16-1/2 billion to be delivered 3 years late, 2029.
Help us understand. You talked briefly about some of the
suggestions that you have made and some of the issues, but the
root causes for this, drill down a little bit more. Help us
understand what those delays, the cost overruns for delivery,
how do we address them given the history as a lesson for us?
Mr. Ludwigson. Yes, sir. That is a great question. Block 4
when it was conceived, I think, was this longitudinal idea that
you would just continually add new capabilities as the threat
evolved.
Unfortunately, that's hard to do in a public sector space
where you have got--the Congress has to decide to provide the
money and provide the other support necessary to proceed. And
it was that--and I should say that 66 capabilities number, that
is something that was difficult for us to get our hands around
from the beginning. But the original----
Mr. Norcross. The original requirement of 66?
Mr. Ludwigson. The original 66 capabilities is not
something that I think the program wanted to sort of carry
forward. They wanted this to be rather an evolving situation.
And that is what happened because it wasn't bounded with a
specific set of requirements, a specific limitation in terms of
this is what it is going to be in terms of composition, cost,
and schedule.
It didn't have those baseline sort of documents that you
would have for a traditional acquisition. And people added
capabilities or capabilities were unpacked and some may have
been dropped. And eventually you got to what we report as the
most recent as 80 capabilities, $16.5 billion, to be completed
in 2029.
I think when you get to the root cause, some of the
challenges that have emerged is because they didn't have
requirements, they didn't necessarily have a firm sense of what
was technically achievable. They didn't have a strong basis for
understanding how long these things were going to take.
It became a bit of a journey of discovery and took time for
them to figure out it's actually going to take longer. Software
development is difficult. And I think they certainly had their
fair share of difficulties. But some of it was not setting
realistic expectations for the time that they would deliver it
and then not executing to meet those or not staffing to meet
those.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. General Schmidt, TR-3 hardware, we
talked about this at our last hearing as being the major issue
in trying to get this going. It seems that that now is in
place. But my question has more to do with not only the rate of
our current line that is running, but for backfeeding those
other ones.
Are we near where we need to be in terms of ramping up for
those units to be produced so we can not only fill our line
going forward but also backfill?
General Schmidt. Thank you, sir. Relative to the TR-3
hardware itself, the TR-3 hardware is coming up a ramp that is
not where it needs to be. It is not meeting our contractual
requirements. And there is really a couple of components within
the TR-3 hardware that is driving that, but you need all the
components to make a TR-3 kit.
The next-generation DAS [Distributed Aperture System],
which isn't technically part of the TR-3 kit but it is very
much a part of this lot of capability that's going forward,
that next-generation DAS hardware is coming pretty well. But
there are a couple components in TR-3 that needs to come up the
curve very quickly in order to meet our production and really
our retrofit requirements after TR-3 is delivered here.
Mr. Norcross. So just let me understand, it's not where you
said it contractually should be. So do we have enough to fill
the line going forward now? And we're missing retrofitting?
Where are we in that scale?
General Schmidt. Currently, we do not have enough. There
were 52 airplanes contractually if TR-3 was fully ready would
have been delivered by the end of December. Twenty-one of those
airplanes are--let's say crossed the last stage in the
production line. The rest of the airplanes are being held in
general for moving TR-3 hardware around.
But maybe that gives you the scope of where we're at.
Again, if we can get these two components to come up, we will
catch up quickly. But that's where we're at, sir.
Mr. Norcross. So, we are missing any retrofits, but we are
not even keeping up moving forward.
General Schmidt. Well, the retrofits, sir, would start
later, but when you add production and retrofit, so that
requires your ramp to go up higher.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
General Schmidt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Dr. LaPlante, 3 years ago the government
prime contractor, Lockheed Martin--speaking of benefits, this
is getting back to the PBL. And just to understand this,
negotiations have ceased, at least temporarily. You mentioned
you didn't have the manpower. Drill down that because, you
know, manpower is extremely important but it falls off the
table the amount of money for that versus a logistics contract.
Dr. LaPlante. Thank you for the question, and I appreciate
the question. Let me--it is basically the team that General
Schmidt has to do the negotiations and what they focus on. We
could have surged manpower, that's exactly right, but we talked
and thought about that. But it was probably not practical. And
General Schmidt, it is your team. You can maybe talk about
that.
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. Happy to. So there is a manpower
challenge, sir, but part of it is that the people that
understand and have been in--this has been years of negotiation
moving forward. Whether it is the PBL or the annual sustainment
contract, that team of people is rather limited.
And to include at Lockheed. You know, these are huge
contracts with quotes from all the suppliers that come in. And
we definitely got to the point where we had to pivot to
something. I had to either show Dr. LaPlante that I had a
closure plan that would get us there by right now or pivot to
extending our current contracts, otherwise we would be at risk
of sustaining our fleet.
I am proud of the team who has been working this 7 days a
week for a long time. They have closed with Lockheed on a full
handshake for the first extension, if you will, to March. We
are quickly closing on the extension to June.
And as soon as I get that done here in the next, I hope,
few weeks, we will pivot to me getting back to Dr. LaPlante
with a plan on how we are going to get back to whatever the
broader acquisition strategy that in my opinion must be
incentive-based in order to drive the proper industry behaviors
and commitments going forward, sir.
Mr. Norcross. We will pursue that a little bit later on,
but I want to give the others a chance. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Norcross. We will
now go to Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman. Thanks to our witnesses
for being here today. I represent the First Congressional
District of New York, the eastern end of Long Island. And Long
Island is the proud supplier of about 50 different F-35
components. And it is the reason for about 535 jobs. Our folks
on Long Island make everything from avionics to the landing
gear of Air Industries in Bay Shore, the town where I grew up.
I want to talk about supply chain issues. And my first
question is for Dr. LaPlante.
Post pandemic, and now with real-world requirements in
Israel and Ukraine, this committee has spent significant
resources in an effort to improve our defense industrial supply
chain.
Subcommittees like this have brought in experts like
yourself to gain some lessons learned to improve our
warfighting capabilities.
With those lessons learned in mind, can you please tell the
committee what steps the DOD acquisition folks are taking to
ensure America's defense industrial base is meeting important
programs like the F-35?
Dr. LaPlante. Thank you for the question. Number one, we
are imminently going to release for the first time ever a
national defense industrial strategy that has four elements to
it, also with an action plan following. That's going to be
released any day now. And one of the four items is all about
supply chain.
We have, under the auspices of the supplementals for
Ukraine, but also under the regular budgetary process, pumped
billions of dollars into the industrial base and building back
in key areas.
For example, Defense Production Act on five key components
across the industrial base. We have used, I think, up to $800
million there, whether it's for rare earth batteries, solid
rocket motors, et cetera. So it is what we do every day. And,
yes, COVID threw us all for a loop.
The other piece of this that I would like the committee to
think about because it is what we are sort of dealing with in
munitions. Is one of the reasons that you do--one of the
reasons to do multiyears or block buy, depending on what you
want to do, is not just the savings in cost. You should get
savings in cost. But to the stabilization of the supply chain,
the sub-tier suppliers. Because if they see that they can get
longer term contracts, it stabilizes them, and it makes them
less certain.
To do that, a lot of times you have to put in what's called
economic order quantity, which think of it as buying bulk, some
of the parts, the first 1 or 2 years. And that's something
that--that is what industry does in the commercial world. They
don't buy things 1 year at a time. And those are things that we
believe done right will really help with the supply chain,
including on F-35.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you and you kind of beat me to my next
question for Mr. Ludwigson. What can Congress do better to help
strengthen the supply chain?
I hear demand signals. We have heard that before. Both
Chairman Rogers and Chairman Wittman are trying to get us to be
in a better position with the power of Congress' purse to give
the industry better demand signals. What else can Congress do
to help on this issue? Are there issues of regulations or
whatnot where Congress should endeavor to help strengthen our
supply chain, Mr. Ludwigson?
Mr. Ludwigson. I think the progress that has been made with
getting the baseline program through testing so that it can be
approved for full-rate production through Milestone C, provides
a greater degree of certainty. I would defer to General Schmidt
and Dr. LaPlante to provide comments on that.
But my impression is that with greater understanding that
this is--the program has achieved this goal. It is in a better
position to enter into longer term arrangements, get a better
understanding of that ramp rate and what the actual production
rates are going to be as it relates for F-35. That would be one
of the things that I think is going to be very important is
that move and the ability to reach those economic order
quantities that makes sense for the program with a known
production rate and known experience with maintaining the
aircraft in the field.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks. And with the minute I have left
remaining, I want to switch gears a little bit, get back into
the field, and look at Israel. Lieutenant General Schmidt, how
have the F-35s performed in Israel?
General Schmidt. Sir, in here, I will say absolutely
outstanding. Their mission capable rates are high. Their full
mission capable rates are high. As the chairman mentioned, we
have added some capabilities to that airplane in a very short
period of time. And our team is doing everything we can to
continue to move the ball forward there, sir.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks so much. Chairman, I am almost out of
time, but Dr. LaPlante, I look forward to reading your report,
sir. I yield.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. LaLota. We will now go to Mr.
Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can share with Mr.
LaLota that I actually did get a sneak preview of the report,
the industrial base strategy report and, again, I really
compliment Dr. LaPlante for really doing it really for the
first time or the first time in many, many years. And, you
know, it answers the question that frankly every service branch
is really--needs to get answered.
So we are about 2\1/2\ months into the fiscal year, 2024
fiscal year. It doesn't look great that we are going to have a
budget passed or an appropriations bill passed before
Christmas. And, you know, then obviously the next cliff is fast
approaching in January.
You know, when we talk about the F-35 engine issue and the
ECU [Engine Core Upgrade] upgrade, again, your budget, just to
go back to last February or March when it was released, called
for increasing the ECU line from $75 billion to over--sorry $75
million to over $400 million was, again, the budget request.
And the two defense appropriations committee are sort of
roughly in that ballpark that is there.
I mean, if, and look at, there has been some other talk
about it all year--CR [continuing resolution]. I mean, given,
again, the disparity between those two numbers, that doesn't
sound pretty in terms of just, you know, moving this program
along. So I was wondering if you could comment in terms of just
where would that leave us?
Dr. LaPlante. Yeah. Well, we all hope it doesn't happen.
But if we end up there, we may have to relook, and I will defer
to General Schmidt, at the strategy for funding the engines and
that work.
In some ways, the F-35 program is, believe it or not,
faring a little bit better in CR than other programs because we
already are in production. I could put a pitch here too. I
really believe the key to supply chains is also production. And
the F-35, for all the justified concerns we all have had over
its program, is doing hot production. It's one of the few
programs we have that is doing hot production, and it helps
with the supply chains.
But, yeah, I would be concerned about the engine. I am also
concerned about--we are talking about the industrial base,
about the adaptive engine technology. We mentioned the AETP. I
have been with that program on and off in the government for
about 10 years and its predecessors. It has done more or less
what we have asked it to do. It has gotten 30 percent savings
in efficiency.
We just, we are not able, the Department was not able, to
fund a full-scale development program of that. I hope that
that, at least that technology keeps going as well. But I also
defer to General Schmidt to talk about the budgetary
implications for the engine work.
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. There are about 600 people at
Pratt & Whitney that are honestly doing a great job. I was just
up there a few weeks ago. It is very impressive what they are
doing to try to quickly go down the road to an Engine Core
Upgrade program. We need an appropriation to keep that program
moving forward.
I also need an appropriation because the power and thermal
management system part of that, that I think Ranking Member
Norcross discussed, that program really needs to get started.
And I really need that funding to have Lockheed and the
suppliers for a power and thermal management system really work
through the engineering and all of that. So those are the
implications. If we don't get an appropriation, I am at a rough
spot here in a couple of months, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you. I mean, I think that's
obviously very helpful. So speaking of the power thermal
management, actually your office put out an RFI [request for
information] fairly recently, right, for my notes here. It's a
new PTMS [power and thermal management system] requirement, a
62-kilowatt threshold and an 80-kilowatt objective of cooling.
Can you sort of explain what that is sort of in the context of,
you know, where the program is moving right now, clarify?
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. Well, those would be the
requirements, if you will, that we are trying to make sure that
this airplane can deliver that kind of electrical power to
support all future upgrades to this aircraft.
To truly understand what it takes to get to those things, I
first need to be able to have Lockheed do a full assessment of
the airplane to understand. So there's the actual power in the
requirements and then there is how much can every part of this
airplane handle to include the electrical power system, the
fuel thermal management system, all of those things that we
need to get going forward on.
There are a number of great suppliers of power and thermal
management systems out there that I want to be in this
discussion and will be in this discussion. But I got to do some
really good engineering work first to try to bring all of that
together.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. We will now go to Mr.
Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to be
focusing in on the engine and the engine upgrades. We seem to
be talking a lot about power and management and cooling and all
that. But the one thing that I see that is missing from our
dialogue or conversation is performance. And that is what
matters to the pilot, to be honest with you.
And so is it correct that this engine that we currently
have on the F-35 was built around a platform that was supposed
to be 30 percent lighter and 13 percent smaller than the
current platform?
General Schmidt. Sir, I don't know if those numbers are
correct or not. You might be----
Mr. Gimenez. Well, there is obviously something wrong
because the engine is overheating. And because of the increased
demands on cooling, et cetera, that the life span of this
engine is going to be shorter than what we thought. And so
where are we going? Are we moving on the EEP [Enhanced Engine
Package] program or are we looking at the AETP program, the new
engines, or are we looking just to upgrade the engines that we
have?
Dr. LaPlante. Yeah. I will hopefully help with the question
here. We are going with the core, the life extension of the
core, the 135, as well as the cooling for that engine.
Let me just say this, not knowing the history that you
know, so I defer to you. What I have seen in the time I have
been in this job, and this gets into the requirements issue
that GAO mentioned, the requirements have changed in thermal
and power because the threat has changed and the systems that
have been added to the airplane, even decided to be added in
the last 5 years, were something we didn't envision 10, 15
years ago. That's simply true.
And so, now, you could argue that we--that is an argument
for a much more modular architecture so you can upgrade when
the threat changes. But it has changed. The systems that are
now on the jet or are planning to be on the jet were not
planned even 10 years ago.
Mr. Gimenez. I understand that. Now, again, are we looking
just to upgrade or putting some kind of an add-on to the
engines that we currently have to manage the problem or are we
looking at an entirely new engine with new capabilities? And if
we are not, could you answer why? Because apparently the new
engine with entirely different capabilities are going to give
you 30 percent greater range and will give you 20 percent more
acceleration. And if we're looking at the INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-
Pacific Command] theater, range is going to be a premium. So
what are we looking at? Where are you guys heading?
General Schmidt. Sir, so I absolutely understand the
question. We did a business case analysis last year. We went
out--our requirement was to address the life of the engine.
We're running the engine too hot. Significant costs over the
life of the engine. And we needed to solve that problem.
Additionally, we needed power and cooling, additional power
and cooling capabilities. There was also the Advanced Engine
Technology Program, which is a very, very promising program,
sir, from a performance perspective.
One of the challenges in this program, with the AETP
program, as we did the business case analysis, is that it is an
option for the A model and maybe for the C model and doesn't
work for the B model.
So if I was going to address all of the requirements of the
program from a get the life back in the program perspective,
only the Engine Core Upgrade to the current engine fit that.
Mr. Gimenez. Could I--I only got so much time.
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. Sorry.
Mr. Gimenez. I need to cut you off a second. In terms of
the numbers of aircraft, A and C versus B, what is the
percentage on that?
General Schmidt. The A is significantly higher, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. And the C?
General Schmidt. The A is significantly higher, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. But you said that the--a new engine could fit
on the A, maybe the C, okay, but not the B. And so we are going
to say, okay, because we want the--we are going to choose the
least capable engine of all because of the B, which happens to
be the smallest number of planes that we have.
Dr. LaPlante. That was--yeah, what went into the business
case was lots of things. It also----
Mr. Gimenez. With all due respect, I am losing time.
Dr. LaPlante. Okay. Sorry.
Mr. Gimenez. Okay. So if I am in the jet, and I am the
fighter pilot, I want the engine that takes me faster and takes
me longer. And I know about your business thing. And now maybe
that business argument maybe it should be brought to us and say
what is it because there has got to be a tradeoff? Is there a
cost benefit to that upgrade?
And so, again, we need to delve into this a little bit
deeper, Mr. Chairman, because I am not convinced that this is
just a business decision. This is a performance issue, too. And
for the life of our pilots and the capability of this airplane,
especially in a theater which we may be finding ourselves in
conflict is going to need this enhanced capability in the
future. And thank you. I guess I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Gimenez. We will now
go to Dr. McCormick.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is for both
Lieutenant General Schmidt and Dr. LaPlante. Obviously, we have
seen the aircraft perform very well in Israel. I think they
were pretty satisfied with its ability to do precision
munitions exactly where we want it and how we want it.
This goes back to what they have learned in their
sustainment side of their aircraft though as they have deployed
it more than they probably deployed it in recent years, just
how they are feeling about their sustainment portion of their
aircraft right now.
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. I had the opportunity to talk
with their chief of staff just yesterday. I would say that we
have a lot--that we are going to learn a lot. They are very
satisfied with what their performance from a sustainment
enterprise is giving them.
I think we could learn a lot from them in terms of the
quickness with which they are turning airplanes, all of the
things we are learning ourselves with moving parts around the
world in support of a conflict.
So we are committed to--and I am looking forward to, and
right now, collecting a lot of lessons learned for us, as we
posture ourselves globally for our--the worldwide F-35
enterprise sustainment.
Dr. McCormick. So on that note, actually related note, how
is that when we scale that out to like an INDOPACOM, you know,
how do we see that? Or do we have that sustainability
capability for--we have a lot of things going on right now in a
lot of different theaters that could blow up very quickly. Do
we have that capability to ramp up as needed?
Dr. LaPlante. Yeah, I would add something, and it applies
to Indo-Pacific and what we are learning from the current
conflicts. One of the--the chairman talked about software and
turning software fast. One of the good-news stories in F-35,
it's still not where it needs to be on these mission data
files.
What General Schmidt and his team did in about a week, week
and a half, is turned around these mission data files. That is
the brick that goes into the airplane. And that, I think, the
lessons learned on how you did that can apply all the way
around the world.
The other piece, and I mentioned earlier, is that we are
doing tabletop exercises on sustainment in the Indo-Pacific.
And what we are learning, not surprisingly, is that we have to
be able to surge, and this gets back to the PBL. We want the
PBL to be of something we can surge. So there are a lot of
lessons that we are learning that may well affect that as well.
Dr. McCormick. Okay. And with that also, I'm just going to
go to another related topic, what about critical base shortages
of impact, like the industrial base, like, materials? Do we
have materials shortages that could affect, especially
strategically different countries that control those sort of
shortages?
Dr. LaPlante. I would say overall this is just the
situation in the world right now. Energetics, energetics are a
key issue around the world right now, whether it is solid
rocket motors or other TNT [trinitrotoluene] or TNT-like
things. And I think we are seeing that--we knew we were seeing
that with 155 and the issue in Ukraine. But that is an issue we
see everywhere in all the scenarios.
Dr. McCormick. So are we able to--is there something that
Congress can do to address that specific--to protect those
assets?
Dr. LaPlante. Well, I think helping us with the Defense
Production Act. We've already used the Defense Production Act
to fund solid rocket motors and energetics. We need more of
that. I think we also--then more companies will go into that
business. So that is where Congress can help us. Thank you.
Dr. McCormick. I see, secure those raw materials then.
Okay. Very good. Lieutenant General Schmidt, specific to the
importance of technological development, can you talk how the
Engine Core Upgrade currently underway is leveraging
investments made by the Navy's fuel burn reduction program and
other advanced development programs?
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. The fuel burn reduction program
was very much a precursor to the Engine Core Upgrade program.
Pratt & Whitney has modeled the entire Engine Core Upgrade
program. And it is my understanding that very much, sir, the
fuel reduction program was a significant starter, if you will,
to help move forward with the Engine Core Upgrade program.
Dr. McCormick. Okay. I don't think I have enough time for
another question. But thanks for your time, gentlemen.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Dr. McCormick. I want to pursue
another round of questioning and then we will head from there
if folks have questions that need to be answered in the
classified setting.
I spoke a little bit earlier about how the enterprise today
across the Pentagon needs to be a software informed process.
Obviously, the F-35 is going to be with us for years. We are
in--essentially from a blank sheet of paper and nearly 22 years
now from the beginning.
Gentlemen, can you tell me, and I will start with Dr.
LaPlante, can you tell me how you plan to pursue the enterprise
of continued production and maintenance and upgrade of the F-35
in the current structure where we seem to be hardware driven
and software is an afterthought. Is there any plan to reverse
that to make this a software-informed enterprise?
Are there any plans to use digital twin technology where we
can immediately test aircraft, download the information and
make software updates and do that at the speed of relevance?
Because obviously what's happening with TR-3 is not at the
speed of relevance with these continued delays. Something has
to change with the paradigm as to how we operate within this
particular realm.
We know that programs like CCA [Collaborative Combat
Aircraft] are going to be software-informed programs. So can
you give us some insight as to how you see us changing the
paradigm for the F-35?
Dr. LaPlante. Yes. Thank you for the question. It is an
extremely important question. I co-chaired the Defense Science
Board study on software acquisition in 2018 that motivated
going to the new software acquisition pathway where the old
waterfall techniques that the Department had across everywhere
needed to be changed to a modern DevSecOps [development,
security, and operations] iterative with 8 weeks sprints and
dropping to a minimal viable product.
One of the first programs that we looked at on the Defense
Science Board study, with General Schmidt's predecessor, was F-
35. And one of the questions we asked ourselves was could you
go to modern DevSecOps on the mission software for F-35?
The challenge that we saw was the architecture. The
architecture goes back to 2002. It is highly coupled and
integrated. And it would be--you could do it in portions of it.
But it was going to be hard to fundamentally do it unless you
changed the architecture.
What I am very interested in is Aegis because I grew up at
Johns Hopkins APL [Applied Physics Laboratory], and we were in
the Aegis mafia as we called ourselves. And we were very
frustrated in the other parts of Johns Hopkins that Aegis did
not go open.
Well, finally Aegis has gone to an open system. And so I
have not given up hope that we can go to some degree of open
system.
I will also say this, and I will turn it over to General
Schmidt, on the digital twin. We designed the acquisition
strategy for B-21 in the wake of the Nunn-McCurdy breach of F-
35. We made sure that that architecture was open. And getting
to the changes in the threat, the changes to the requirements,
with an open architecture, you can drop changes very quickly.
And you can do it by software.
It is not that F-35 doesn't have software. It has got 30
million lines of code. It has just got it in a highly
integrated way. I will turn it over to General Schmidt.
General Schmidt. Sir, I would only add, and we are just
getting going here from my perspective. So we do have a digital
twin, for instance, of the integrated core processor, which has
helped us out significantly in TR-3. I should have it for the
entire TR-3 program.
As we move forward, we are requiring digital models of each
capability in the Block 4 as part of those capability decision
points going forward.
Your point about the architecture and kind of the closed
software environment that we have and Dr. LaPlante's points, we
need to eventually get to an open systems architecture. And
along the way, for sure, we need to figure out how to make sure
we are taking advantage of, for instance, our services software
engineering groups to have not only Lockheed working the
software in this program but the government organic software
developers who are outstanding.
Mr. Wittman. Are there additional ways that we can
encourage the contractors and their mission system suppliers to
adopt and implement new methodologies to be able to do
development, testing, and implementation of their changes in
upgrades to software?
It just seems like to me that we are in a very archaic and
antiquated test, failure, retry, test, failure, retry mode
instead of changing the whole paradigm that has us operating at
the speed of relevance.
The technology is there in all these other areas. It just
seems like for whatever reason, we are still stuck in this
archaic trap with F-35, and TR-3 unfortunately is the example
of that.
I also understand, too, there may be other things we need
to do to accelerate that. It seems like to me the test beds now
are aging. Maybe we look at more modern test beds and make sure
the test beds are aircraft that are dedicated to rigorous
testing.
It seems like to me, too, that we have more up-to-date
technology where we could immediately take streams of data from
the aircraft, send it directly to programmers on the ground
that in a digital twin technology can essentially be put into a
simultaneously run model.
That information can really be put into the model. And you
could fly that aircraft this afternoon in some cases and say
let's try out these software modifications instead of what we
have today, which is trying this in the lab. It fails in the
lab. You put it in the aircraft. It crashes in the aircraft.
You bring it back to the ground and say we have got to do it
again.
The trial and error methodology ain't working. And the
technology is out there all around us to do things differently.
Can you assure me that we are aggressively pursuing these
paradigms going forward with how we are doing upgrades to the
aircraft?
General Schmidt. Well, first, sir, I would say I thank you
for the support for replacing our aging flight test aircraft
themselves because that is very important to include the things
we put on it to make the data flow better and all of the
things.
Relative to our labs, ourlabs--we have a number of
recommendations that are coming forth as part of the tech
baseline review. And our teams are working through what kinds
of investments we should be making in our labs to make them
more realistic and relevant relative to the flight test
environment.
Specifically, it appears to me that Lockheed is making
significant investments in their future programs that are doing
a lot of what you described there, sir.
Dr. LaPlante's Aegis example is another great example. How
are we making sure? And I wish I had a good answer for you
because all those things need to be in this program, sir.
Dr. LaPlante. I will just note that in 2014, when we put
the RFP [request for proposals] out for what is now the B-21,
and we said in the RFP you had to have an OMS [open mission
systems] standard open system, all of the companies, there were
three of them, two of them were teamed together, that were
competing for it started putting out press releases on how they
could do open systems.
So when you put it in the RFP and you make it part of the
source selection, it motivates different behavior. The question
on F-35 given where we are in the program, that is why Aegis is
so interesting.
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
Dr. LaPlante. We can look at that. The other piece I will
just add is the other thing we said in the study about--the
software study, it's not just the architecture but something
called a software factor. And we defined what it was. That is
where that testing, Mr. Chairman, was done. It was called
fuzzing. We bombard the code with cloud overnight, and you find
all these errors, exactly what you said.
Mr. Wittman. Yeah.
Dr. LaPlante. They should have a software factory at
Lockheed Martin.
Mr. Wittman. No. I think software factory paradigm is
great. Listen, this isn't a secret how to do this; as you
pointed out, Aegis has done it for years. The prime contractor
is the lead on that so it is not like this is a secret sauce
somewhere that's underneath a pillow that we have to resurrect
and put back out there.
This is a known entity. It is done on submarines. It is
done on surface ships. No reason why it can't be done for F-35.
So with that, I will turn it over to Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. General, just to drill down a
little bit on your statement that up at Pratt & Whitney there
are 600 people working, yet you are talking about the CR. Those
600 aren't working on the ECU for the future or 600 dedicated
people for the ECU upgrade?
General Schmidt. The ECU for the future, the ECU upgrade.
Mr. Norcross. Okay.
General Schmidt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Norcross. So if they are currently working, and we have
a CR, how does that impact that other than ramping up?
General Schmidt. Yes, sir. We are limited to last year's
funding----
Mr. Norcross. Right.
General Schmidt [continuing]. Under the CR. And we are good
through about February-ish. But at that point, if I don't have
the funding to keep--and we are supposed to be ramping up
significantly this year in terms of, you know, investment in
that program per our plan. So we are capped at the level and
then we are actually at risk of it running out if we don't have
an appropriation, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Nobody wants a CR. But at least we'll
continue and hopefully get that. And that is what I wanted to
talk about. And Joe has a question concerning the Defense Act.
But for this program, we made a decision. We can't fund two
engines. Agree with it, disagree with it. This is where we are
heading. Talk to me about some of the technical risks that are
facing the ECU and how you are addressing that so that we don't
run into a problem like we are with the TR-3 upgrade.
General Schmidt. For the program as a whole, I mentioned
what I think are some of the technical risks is ensuring that
the--so one of the requirements I have, sir, is that this
engine program is retrofittable. So we have those power
requirements, but at the same time our nations and our services
have said this must be retrofittable.
So I need to do all the work on the airplane side and the
power and thermal management system side because if I do run
into a fuel thermal management system or wiring gauge that
would require me to completely, you know, tear the airplane
apart to retrofit the engine, that would drive me to go back to
the requirements community and say, hey, we got to figure out
the right balance here on the, you know----
Mr. Norcross. Are you suggesting that we need those answers
for both the temperature management and the electrical
management? That if they don't come in in an area that you can
accommodate on the existing that we might have to go back to
the decision we made?
General Schmidt. Sir, the engine requirements that they are
designing to are to the worst case requirements of the worst
case, is what we have directed them to design the engine to.
And if it turns out that we end up having a power and
thermal management system that doesn't get to that, it allows
us to go back, and Pratt & Whitney to go back, and adjust
because there are changes that they can make in the engine to
direct power in the gear box that we are going to go towards
running that to additional performance out of the engine. But
for right now, we are designing to the most stringent case from
an aircraft side, sir.
Mr. Norcross. Okay. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. I go to Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And real quick, Dr.
LaPlante, the exchange that you had a moment ago with Dr.
McCormick about what can Congress do to sort of deal with the
issue of these, you know, energetics and critical minerals.
When we were in California recently, we talked about one
thing that Congress hopefully is in the process of doing is
passing the NDAA which has the AUKUS authorization language,
which will extend the Defense Production Act authorities to
Australia and the U.K. [United Kingdom] as domestic sources,
similar to what Canada enjoys today. And actually that is
really a huge opportunity, particularly with Western Australia
and the mineral resources that are there. So maybe you can just
sort of talk about that for a second.
Dr. LaPlante. Yeah. Thank you, Congressman. It turns out,
tomorrow, I am meeting with the head of strategic industry of
Australia, they're in town. And specifically, we are going to
talk about the provision that is in the NDAA on Defense
Production Act with Australia. So I think they are very excited
about it.
Actually, the national--the industrial strategy that you
read, we are finding the partners are really interested in
that, too, because they are looking at things that we have that
they may want to do.
We are also getting the same interest from our European
allies, from NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], about a
Defense Production Act like thing for them.
So a lot of folks are watching us. I think they see what
this Congress has done and authorities. And I think they have
seen the effectiveness of it. So I would just thank again,
thank you all for what you are doing. And I know the
Australians are very eager to talk to us.
Mr. Courtney. Again, hopefully we have got about 48 to, you
know, 72 hours to wrap this up. So with that, I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney. Mr. Norcross, any
other questions? Okay. Very good. Well, I think we are finished
with our line of questioning. Gentlemen, thank you all so much.
We are--well, before we close, Mr. Ludwigson, I know that you
had a comment that you were looking to make there on Mr.
Norcross' question. So I'm going to yield the floor to you.
Mr. Ludwigson. Sure. Thank you very much. I think General
Schmidt did a great job talking about the interconnections
between the pieces of the puzzle in the power and thermal
management and engine upgrade question. What we have been
concerned about is that the program not repeat the mistake that
got them here, which is that they underestimated the cooling
requirements.
Mr. Wittman. Yeah.
Mr. Ludwigson. Those proved to be wrong. Then they had to
steal from the engine and that caused them to have to get
creative. And creativity got expensive in terms of the wear and
tear on the engine and all of those sort of cascade of events
that we are here talking about.
So we think that is why when you look at this, we prefer
you think about this as an integrated package of changes that
need to be done, not singularly looking at each piece of the
puzzle because when you put them together, integration ends up
being one of the biggest, most difficult pieces of the puzzle.
Just how do you put it all back together.
Mr. Wittman. Listen, I think you are spot on. Power,
thermal management, electrical system, all the different
elements there of what you do, you know, you can put a larger
engine in there that generates more power and cooling, but the
question is is, you know, what other changes may be needed on
the aircraft itself in order to sustain that?
And then the big question, I think you all have pointed
this out, is that what is the end state of the power and
cooling requirements of the aircraft? So where does it need to
be before its ESL [extended service life] is expired?
So there is no use to say, well, you know, we are going to
build an engine that can do 62 kilowatts and then you go, well,
gosh, we really needed 80 kilowatts with future upgrades for
the aircraft because this aircraft is at a price point where we
cannot afford to go through another engine upgrade.
If you are going to do it, you want to do it one time. You
want to determine what are the total costs, as you said, over
the life cycle of the aircraft. Look at the number of hours
that you get out of that engine, which obviously we aren't
getting out of the current engine configuration, because you
are going to have to do that in order to substantiate the cost
that it is going to take essentially over a long window of
time.
So I think those things are incredibly important questions
that need to be asked before you take any next step in the
final engine decision-making.
Mr. Ludwigson. I think when you face a difficult question,
the carpenter's analogy springs to mind: measure twice and cut
once. A pretty useful way to think of it.
Mr. Wittman. That is exactly right. So any other witnesses
want to make any additional comments?
Dr. LaPlante. No. I think you just described to my GAO
colleague, the fundamental systems engineering challenge is you
have to get the system engineering right because the coupling
between subsystems and the effect on that is something that
often needs attention. And really good systems engineers are
hard to find as well.
Mr. Wittman. Yeah. I think it's a matter, too, as you said,
good systems engineering, good look at, you know, the whole
element to a performance-based logistics. What do we do over
the remaining life cycle of this aircraft? We ought to take
every lesson learned in the first 22 years of this program and
apply those lessons learned going forward.
There is no reason why we should have any of these hiccups
going forward. Goodness knows, we probably experienced every
one of them that you could in the current history of the
aircraft. Let's make sure we get it right going forward so.
Gentleman, thank you all so much. I don't think that there
is any need for us to go to the SCIF [sensitive compartmented
information facility]. I think everybody has had their
questions answered here in this open forum, and the others that
needed to be answered have been answered previously in the
SCIF.
So I want to thank you all so much for joining us. And if
there is anything that you need from our subcommittee, we stand
by ready, willing, and able to help. And with that, the
subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:58 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

December 12, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

December 12, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

December 12, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. COURTNEY

Mr. Courtney. As we discuss other upgrades needed for the F-35, can
you confirm that ECU is being designed for any PTMS configuration to
allow for the current schedule to stay on target?
Dr. LaPlante and General Schmidt. Yes, the ECU is being designed to
integrate with all F-35 PTMS configuration concepts currently being
considered.
Mr. Courtney. With the RFI released for new PTMS requirements, when
do you intend to integrate a new PTMS to support the aicraft?
Dr. LaPlante and General Schmidt. The F-35 acquisition program
intends to begin the development of an upgraded Power Thermal
Management System (PTMS) in FY24, with system qualification by 2032 and
production line cut-in beginning in 2033. Schedule milestones will be
refined as the PTMS acquisition solution matures.
Mr. Courtney. Can you explain the PTMU modernization plan and
timing?
Dr. LaPlante and General Schmidt. The JPO's near-term priority is
to fully validate that all PTMU technical requirements can be met with
a materiel solution, which also supports direction included in the FY24
NDAA, SEC. 226. F-35 PROPULSION AND THERMAL MANAGEMENT MODERNIZATION
PROGRAM. The concept development contract is planned to commence this
summer and will begin competitive PTMU design activities.
Mr. Courtney. What is the current PTMS cooling capacity requirement
for Block 4? Has the definition changed? And what is the maximum PTMS
capacity need over the lifetime of the platform?
Dr. LaPlante and General Schmidt. The F-35 Lightning II Joint
Program Office will provide a CUI response directly to the House Armed
Services Committee.

[all]
