[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-14]

U.S. AND ADVERSARY HYPERSONIC PROGRAMS

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 10, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-352                    WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California,
DON BACON, Nebraska                  RO KHANNA, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              MARC VEASEY, Texas

Ryan Tully, Professional Staff Member
Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Zachary Calderon, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1
Moulton, Hon. Seth, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     2

WITNESSES

Freisthler, Paul F., Chief Scientist, Directorate for Analysis,
Defense Intelligence Agency....................................    11
Horowitz, Michael C., Director, Emerging Capabilities Policy
Office, U.S. Department of Defense.............................     4
Rasch, LTG Robert A., Jr., USA, Director of Hypersonics, Directed
Energy, Space and Rapid Acquisition, U.S. Army.................     7
Shipton, Lt Gen Donna D., USAF, Military Deputy, Office of the
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition,
Technology and Logistics, U.S. Air Force.......................    10
White, Michael E., Principal Director for Hypersonics, Office of
the Director of Defense Research and Engineering
(Modernization), U.S. Department of Defense....................     5
Wolfe, VADM Johnny R., Jr., USN, Director, Strategic Systems
Programs, U.S. Navy............................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Freisthler, Paul F...........................................    70
Horowitz, Michael C..........................................    33
Rasch, LTG Robert A., Jr.....................................    49
Shipton, Lt Gen Donna D......................................    64
White, Michael E.............................................    38
Wolfe, VADM Johnny R., Jr....................................    56

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[The information was not available at the time of printing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Banks....................................................    77
Mr. Norcross.................................................    78

U.S. AND ADVERSARY HYPERSONIC PROGRAMS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Friday, March 10, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
COLORADO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Lamborn. Today's hearing will come to order. The
Strategic Forces Subcommittee meets today to review U.S. and
adversary hypersonic capabilities. Good morning to our
witnesses, Mr. White, Mr. Horowitz, Lieutenant General Rasch,
Vice Admiral Wolfe, Lieutenant General Shipton, and Mr.
Freisthler.
And Mr. White, we understand you will be leaving this role
soon and this will be your last appearance before Congress. We
want to thank you for your years of service and express our
appreciation for all that you have done.
Mr. White. Thank you very much. It's been a pleasure and an
honor.
Mr. Lamborn. This is the first time this subcommittee has
conducted a hearing on hypersonic capabilities. Given the
magnitude of the threats posed by China and Russia and our
relatively slow pace of development, I think this is far
overdue. With that in mind, we appreciate all of you being with
us here today to share your expertise to address these
challenges.
Before we begin, I believe it is useful to revisit the
history of hypersonic weapons development. Despite leading the
development of this technology in the 1970s and 1980s, the U.S.
foolishly decided not to pursue hypersonic weapons. Russia and
China made the opposite decision.
Instead of mimicking our restraint as we hoped, they
developed and deployed increasingly sophisticated and numerous
hypersonic capabilities of various types, including nuclear-
capable and orbital hypersonic weapons. As a result, our
adversaries have the advantage. Their hypersonic capabilities
provide them novel ways to hold our homeland and our deployed
forces at risk.
This is not just about them having a capability that we do
not. There are inherent and compelling advantages that
hypersonic systems have that could bolster our military plans
and capabilities. Retired General John Hyten said once that
hypersonic weapons enable, quote, ``responsive, long-range
strike options against distant, defended, and/or time critical
threats when other forces are unavailable, denied access, or
not preferred,'' unquote.
We are behind, and I am concerned we are not doing enough
to close the gap as our adversaries continue to test and
develop new capabilities at a much faster rate. This is an
instructive lesson, and it reminds all of us about the risks
that come with giving up the advantage as well as the
difficulty that comes with trying to recover it. So we have our
work cut out for it.
But we have taken steps in the right direction.
Particularly over the last 2 years, Congress has provided
additional resources to accelerate the development of
hypersonic capabilities and upgrade the necessary test
infrastructure. We have worked with the Department of Defense
to formalize initiatives that we included in the NDAA [National
Defense Authorization Act] such as the National Hypersonics
Initiative and Hypersonic Asymmetric Defeat Strategy. We look
forward to receiving these documents from the Department.
The President's decision last week to authorize the Defense
Production Act to invest in our hypersonics industrial base was
a welcome step. I do have questions as to how it will be used
and on what specific technologies and components. Hopefully,
our witnesses will provide some clarity. Perhaps some of this
will come in the closed session that we will have after our
votes which will be after our open session this morning.
Despite this positive development, there is a lot more that
must be done. And I intend for this subcommittee to play a key
role in this effort starting with today's hearing. Welcome
again to our witnesses. We look forward to hearing from you
about your efforts to develop these capabilities and how this
subcommittee can be helpful. I now recognize Ranking Member
Moulton for his opening comments.

STATEMENT OF HON. SETH MOULTON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn. I also want to
extend a welcome to our distinguished panel of witnesses here
with us this morning. I am thankful we are holding this hearing
on hypersonics, not only to understand our adversaries'
capabilities and intentions when it comes to these weapons but
also to gain a better understanding of how the Department
envisions the employment of our own hypersonics in a future
conflict.
In 2020, I chaired the House Armed Services Committee
Future of Defense Task Force. In our many discussions with
Department officials, academia, industry, and various think
tanks, we learned that hypersonics were a capability both
Russia and the People's Republic of China had prioritized in
their modernization efforts, mainly due to their asymmetric
capability to avoid detection by existing U.S. air and missile
defense systems. As Dr. Freisthler's testimony starkly lays
out, those investments have resulted in at least four different
types of hypersonic weapon systems being fielded today that can
reach targets anywhere on the globe.
While our adversaries have been developing these weapon
systems for years, ever since we built an anti-ballistic
missile system, the Department has watched and done little to
negate their asymmetric advantages over our systems and
capabilities, especially our domain awareness. Congress has had
to come in repeatedly to address this problem, authorizing in
the fiscal year 2019 NDAA and then appropriating the Hypersonic
Ballistic Missile Tracking Space Center. Launches of the
operational satellites are still 2 years away.
Despite General VanHerck's consistent warnings of his
inability to detect and track these types of threats, it took a
high-altitude balloon from the PRC [People's Republic of China]
for many to fully understanding the severity of our gaps in
domain awareness. One of the top conclusions of our Future of
Defense Task Force was that it is not enough for the Department
to pursue technology for technology's sake. We need to develop
the operational concepts for how that technology will actually
be employed.
Indeed, the operational concepts should come first and then
we should develop whatever technology is needed to best address
the need. Otherwise, you can waste a lot of money and time
developing technology you don't need or technology that is not
best suited to what we need to do. Seen through this lens, U.S.
hypersonic weapons development is troubling.
We restarted hypersonic weapons development because our
adversaries were developing them without having a clear
operational concept ourselves for how they will be employed.
Last year, I asked this simple question of Department
officials: How will you use these weapons that are costing
taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars? I was met with blank
stares.
This week I asked the question again. Why are we developing
them and how will they be employed? The answer I received was
that we are developing them because our adversaries have them.
Again, exactly the wrong answer. There are plenty of
weapons our adversaries are developing that we are not such as
the Russian nuclear-powered missile that blew up and killed its
own test crew not long ago. What matters is how we will use
them, not chasing after what our adversaries have just because
they have it.
But there is an even deeper level at which our development
of hypersonics is troubling, and that is that they may well be
fundamentally destabilizing weapons. Since after years of
development, the Department can't even make a clear case to our
committee for how these weapons will be employed, we also have
not seriously examined the results of whatever that employment
might be. Many theorists believe hypersonics will be
fundamentally destabilizing to our national security and indeed
perhaps to humanity.
This is in stark contrast to the other legs of our triad
that have helped keep the peace between superpowers for
decades. If a nation cannot tell whether an inbound hypersonic
missile is a strategic nuclear weapon or not, or simply where
it is aimed, that nation could feel compelled to launch a full
nuclear response and nuclear holocaust could be the result.
During a hearing this week, there was a clear disagreement
among the four-stars on that panel about whether these weapons
are stabilizing or destabilizing. That is troubling not just
for the American taxpayer but for humanity itself.
The bottom line is that we have a lot of work to do. And I
have not even mentioned the successive technical failures in
our programs to date as we chase our adversaries' more advanced
programs. I hope that the hearing this morning will for the
first time help answer some of these fundamental questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. We now turn to our witnesses. Your prepared
remarks will be made part of the record. Since we have a full
panel today, I would ask that you each limit your opening
comments to 5 minutes. And Dr. Horowitz, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL C. HOROWITZ, DIRECTOR, EMERGING
CAPABILITIES POLICY OFFICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Horowitz. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member
Moulton, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you today. I'm honored to be here.
Today I want to lay out the Department's view of hypersonic
weapons, both offensive and defensive, and how they contribute
to Department of Defense objectives in the context of the 2022
National Defense Strategy. The central premise of the National
Defense Strategy is the urgent need for the Department to
sustain and strengthen integrated deterrence. The NDS is clear-
eyed in its assessment of the range of threats posed to the
United States by a number of adversaries.
In particular, it notes that the People's Republic of China
is the only competitor with both the intent and increasingly
with the capability to systematically challenge the United
States across the board, militarily, economically,
technologically, and diplomatically. The Department of
Defense's efforts to mature, develop, and field hypersonic
technologies contribute to our objectives in the context of
implementing the National Defense Strategy. They're key to
support vital U.S. national interests, to contribute to a
stable and open international system, and to maintain and
strengthen our defense commitments to U.S. allies and
international partners.
We see offensive hypersonics as a logical and necessary
addition to the mix of capabilities that the joint force
employs to deter, if necessary prevail, in future conflicts. To
help meet the broad challenges outlined by the NDS and to
transform the foundation of the force, Secretary Austin and
Deputy Secretary Hicks have pushed the Department to invest in
innovation to ensure that U.S. military capabilities go beyond
the cutting edge. And with the support of Congress, which we're
grateful for, the Department's fiscal year 2023 budget
contained our largest ever commitment to developing and
deploying the breakthrough technologies required to deter
future conflict.
DOD [Department of Defense] investments in hypersonics are
growing and accelerating, but it's not enough to simply spend
and produce more. Deterrence today and tomorrow requires
integrating capabilities into new operational concepts through
a dedicated campaign of learning. And the Department is
exploring creative concepts that expand U.S. options and
constrain those of potential adversaries.
Put another way, it is not just about building hypersonics.
Rather, the Department is focused on building and deploying
these systems and defending against them in a way that
maximizes the effective implementation of the National Defense
Strategy. In concert with select allies, DOD is pursuing
multiple hypersonic-based capability solutions as complements
to the existing suite of diverse warfighting capabilities.
You'll hear today about specific hypersonic programmatic
efforts from the military services and from my research and
engineering colleagues.
For offensive strike weapons, the Department will take
advantage of the opportunities presented by employment of
regional hypersonic systems in its global planning
considerations. And across these capabilities, DOD is
purposefully generating a diverse array of options to launch
hypersonics from different platforms, across different
distances, and based in different technological approaches.
Delivering these capabilities will ensure that the Department
of Defense maintains the ability to deter potential adversaries
and to defeat aggression if necessary. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Horowitz can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. White.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL E. WHITE, PRINCIPAL DIRECTOR FOR
HYPERSONICS, OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF DEFENSE RESEARCH AND
ENGINEERING (MODERNIZATION), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. White. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member
Moulton, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify on the state of
hypersonics, and I'm honored to be here with key Department
leadership to discuss the progress that we made and still
what's left to be done. Hypersonic systems travel for a
significant portion of their trajectory in the upper reaches of
the atmosphere at sustained speeds at or above Mach 5, or five
times the speed of sound, which is approximately 3,700 mph.
Their combination of speed, maneuverability, long range,
and high altitude provide clear and distinct operational
advantages, enabling highly survivable and responsive defeat of
time critical, heavily defended, and high-value threats from
outside an adversary's defensive perimeter. Offensive
hypersonic systems will be especially critical on a battlefield
where the adversary has deployed high-end defensive and anti-
access systems designed to limit the effectiveness of
traditional U.S. weapons in time scales needed to avoid a
military, diplomatic, or political fait accompli.
Like any military technology, hypersonic systems are not a
be all and end all. However, as the battlefield environment
becomes increasingly more contested, hypersonic systems will be
a critical tool to deliver highly responsive, survivable, and
long-range effects to supplement and sometimes enable our more
traditional capabilities. We are moving with urgency to put
advanced technologies and new concepts--new operating concepts,
including hypersonic strike and defensive capabilities, in the
hands of the joint force to ensure we have the right mix of
capabilities to deter potential adversaries and if necessary
defeat aggression.
The accelerated delivery of transformational warfighting
capability based on hypersonic systems is a key contributor to
the overall superiority as it directly contributes to the three
pillars of the Department's National Defense Strategy:
integrated deterrence, campaigning, and building enduring
advantages. Our peer adversaries are developing high-end
systems designed to create a highly contested environment and
challenge U.S. battlefield dominance in space, in the air, on
land, and at sea. The primary mission driver for the
development of U.S. strike--hypersonic strike capability is to
hold at risk these systems by leveraging the unique combination
of speed, range, lethality, and survivability.
It is important to note that the United States is not
engaged in an arms race, but instead hypersonic strike systems
are needed to preserve deterrence because they offer a critical
regional advanced strike capability that will complement
existing joint force strike options such as cruise missiles,
tactical aircraft, and bombers. In addition to developing
offensive hypersonic weapons, we are developing a comprehensive
layered defeat capability to defend against adversary
hypersonic systems. And we are evaluating the military utility
and technology requirements for reusable hypersonic aircraft.
These systems are essential to ensure that we maintain the
ability to deter potential adversaries and if necessary, defeat
aggression in a time scale of relevance on the future
battlefield. Over the past year or so, we have made significant
progress building partly on the knowledge gained in overcoming
challenges faced in our early flight tests. We have
significantly increased the pace of flight testing across the
hypersonics portfolio from once every 2 years just a couple of
years ago to over a dozen flights per year last year and this
year.
The Air Force Air-Launched Rapid Response Weapon, or ARRW
program, completed two successful booster test flights last
year, followed in December by the first test of the--their full
prototype operational missile launched from a B-52 aircraft.
The ARRW hypersonic glide body was developed under the DARPA
[Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency]/Air Force Tactical
Boost Glide program and is the most sophisticated air-launched
hypersonic glide body in the world. The DARPA Air Force
Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept or HAWC program
demonstrated in flight two distinct hypersonic cruise missile
concepts, one of which has been chosen as the basis for the Air
Force Hypersonic Attack Cruise Missile program, HACM.
The Air Force and Navy demonstrated on the ground and then
in flight the common tactical rocket motor that will launch the
already demonstrated common hypersonic glide body for the Army
Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon and Navy Conventional Strike--
Conventional Prompt Strike weapon systems. The Navy and Army
and MDA [Missile Defense Agency] worked together to conduct two
High Operational Tempo for Hypersonics H4H flight test
campaigns to enhance future hypersonic systems with a total of
five flights and over 50 technology experiments. Despite this
progress, there remains much to do to deliver hypersonic
systems with the capabilities and at the capacity necessary to
meet warfighting needs and to continue on a path of accelerated
development of next-generation and leap-ahead systems.
Under the next phase of the Department's strategic
approach, we must first leverage commercial production
practices and design for production approaches to achieve
affordable capacity in our industrial base and enable the
fielding of capability in quantities necessary to defeat an
increasingly capable adversary. Second, we must identify and
develop next-generation and leap-ahead hypersonic capabilities
and technologies to maintain battlefield dominance well into
the future. And third, we must significantly improve the
throughput of our testing infrastructure and improve our
modeling and simulation capability to further accelerate
learning and development.
On behalf of the Department, I appreciate the continued
interest and support we receive from Congress for accelerating
the delivery of transformational warfighting capability based
on hypersonic systems. And I look forward to your continued
support as we begin to field hypersonic offensive and defensive
capabilities.
Thank you for this opportunity. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. White can be found in the
Appendix on page 38.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Lieutenant General Rasch.

STATEMENT OF LTG ROBERT A. RASCH, JR., USA, DIRECTOR OF
HYPERSONICS, DIRECTED ENERGY, SPACE AND RAPID ACQUISITION, U.S.
ARMY

General Rasch. Hey, good morning, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking
Member Moulton, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for allowing me to be here today to represent the
Army for this hearing on hypersonics alongside my colleagues in
the other services as well as the Office of the Secretary of
Defense. As part of the Army's modernization strategy, we have
prioritized the development of the long-range precision
portfolio in order to provide an array of complementary
capabilities to the combatant commanders at a multitude of
ranges.
Within that portfolio, the Army's Long-Range Hypersonic
Weapons, or LRHW program, is designed to be the longest range
asset to hold heavily defended high-value targets at bay,
especially targets in anti-access/[area] denial environments.
The LRHW is designed to be a road-mobile and C-17 transportable
ground-based hypersonic weapon system with a first prototype
battery being delivered in fiscal year 2023. The development of
a ground-based hypersonic capability is crucial to support the
Army's role in multi-domain operations and as part of the joint
fight.
I am here today to discuss the Army's LRHW effort. But the
success of this system is also reliant upon the great
relationship we share with Vice Admiral Wolfe's team in the
United States Navy. The Army and the Navy are partnered in
hypersonic development and resourcing as the Army's LRHW and
the Navy's Conventional Prompt Strike programs share key
components such as a common missile booster stack also known as
the All-Up Round and Canister and the use of a common
hypersonic boost glide vehicle known as the common hypersonic
glide body.
We also share joint testing opportunities at the
subcomponent and component level, all the way up to full system
flight test and have received significant support from Mr.
White and OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] in the
execution of this testing. The commonalities between the
services helps incentivize the emerging industrial base. It
creates economies of scale and maintains aggressive development
and fielding schedules for our hypersonic weapons.
We are also reliant on the relationships amongst our
industry partners as no single entity can build a hypersonic
weapon capability alone, especially since so much of this
valuable technology was initially solely developed within the
government labs. In September of 2021, the Army fielded its
ground support equipment to the first hypersonic unit, the
battery unit, located at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, a battery
unit that is also part of the Army's first multi-domain task
force. Since the initial fielding, the soldiers have
successfully completed their new equipment training and have
participated in multiple joint test events in which they have
displayed and demonstrated full employment of the system in a
combat-like environment.
As many of you are likely aware, we recently prepared to
conduct a hypersonic test on 5 March from Cape Canaveral Space
Force Station. And as a result of the preflight checks during
that event, the test did not occur. We are still in the process
of processing and analyzing the data we received at that event.
But Vice Admiral Wolfe and I will field as many of your
questions as possible this morning, especially in the closed
session. Above all, I am confident, however, in our team and we
will persevere together to get this system capable and safe for
fielding to our soldiers. I sincerely appreciate Congress'
steadfast and consistent support of our efforts to develop
hypersonic weapons as we would not be here today without the
relationship that we share with you all.
And I'm so incredibly proud to be a part of this team, this
joint team. And am especially grateful for all the countless
hours the Army, the Navy, and the industry teams puts in day in
and day out to support this mission. Thank you again for having
me today as the Army's witness, and I look forward to answering
your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Rasch can be found in
the Appendix on page 49.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Vice Admiral Wolfe.

STATEMENT OF VADM JOHNNY R. WOLFE, JR., USN, DIRECTOR,
STRATEGIC SYSTEMS PROGRAMS, U.S. NAVY

Admiral Wolfe. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to discuss the Navy Strategic Systems Programs'
Conventional Prompt Strike hypersonic weapon known as CPS. I'm
proud to be here alongside this panel of witnesses who are
working tirelessly to deliver a portfolio of hypersonic
capabilities to the warfighter. In particular, I'm pleased to
be here with Lieutenant General Rasch who I am partnered with
to deliver the common hypersonic missile to the Army as the
Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon, LRHW, before then delivering CPS
as a sea-based capability to the Navy.
The support we receive from Mr. White and the Office of the
Secretary of Defense has been essential as we continue on the
path to rapidly field these capabilities. The Navy and the Army
are partnered to execute the CPS and LRHW programs through the
use of a common hypersonic missile, which consists of a two-
stage missile booster designed, developed, and produced by the
Navy as well as a common hypersonic glide body designed and
developed by the Navy and produced by the Army. By leveraging
joint developmental test opportunities, the programs have
marked significant testing milestones at a consistent pace.
Our March 2020 flight test demonstrated that the common
hypersonic glide body technology is mature. Multiple static
fire tests and a 2022 flight test provided vital data on the
performance of our newly developed missile booster. In
partnership with the Missile Defense Agency, the Navy and Army
have completed two sounding rocket campaigns to inform the
future development of the common hypersonic capability.
During a recently planned flight test, automated preflight
checks identified that a battery did not activate, which
resulted in not conducting the test. We are aggressively
investigating the cause of the no test and will continue to
move forward with our development and additional testing in
support of Army fielding as soon as the cause is identified and
corrected. The services are making great progress transitioning
hypersonic capabilities out of government laboratories and into
commercial production.
And in the spring of 2022, we celebrated the delivery of
the first industry-produced common hypersonic glide body.
Hypersonic industry partners are working diligently with the
government national team to facilitate a rapid transition to
production, platform integration, and delivery to the
warfighter. In order to deliver this capability at the speed of
relevance, the Army and Navy teams will continue to work
closely with industry partners, OSD, and Congress to identify
supply chain issues and put mitigation plans in place.
The Navy is diligently preparing for the fielding of CPS on
both the Zumwalt-class destroyers and the Block V Virginia
Payload Module equipped submarines. Making a critical
development milestone, testing at our In-Air Launch test
facility has validated the cold-gas launch approach the Navy
will use to launch the common hypersonic missile from both of
our sea-based platforms. The CPS fielding on Zumwalt-class
destroyers will mark the first use of this cold-gas launch
approach on a service ship platform. The program is continuing
construction and outfitting of the underwater test facility
that will allow the program to test how the CPS missile
transits through the water using the newly developed CPS
launcher.
We have begun a series of exercises that allow sailors to
execute scenarios in an operationally representative
environment and will soon be deploying a weapon system
prototype and a missile simulator on a Zumwalt-class destroyer.
The ship will take the equipment to sea and demonstrate
employment concepts and command and control with USSTRATCOM
[U.S. Strategic Command] and INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command]. I remain confident that the CPS program will be ready
to fill the hypersonic weapon system upon the availability of
the Navy platforms.
I'd like to thank Congress for the support you have shown
our program and the important focus that you have placed on
this essential capability. As the 14th director, it is my honor
to represent the men and women of SSP's [Strategic Systems
Programs'] CPS program. One of my top priorities is to ensure
that these dedicated Americans are poised to execute the
Conventional Prompt Strike mission with the same level of
success, passion, and rigor as we have since SSP was founded.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of
the team that will provide our Nation with a credible and
reliable intermediate-range hypersonic strike capability. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Wolfe can be found in
the Appendix on page 56.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Lieutenant General Shipton.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN DONNA D. SHIPTON, USAF, MILITARY DEPUTY,
OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE FOR
ACQUISITION, TECHNOLOGY AND LOGISTICS, U.S. AIR FORCE

General Shipton. Good morning, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking
Member Moulton, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you very much for the opportunity today to provide
testimony on the Department of the Air Force's hypersonic
programs. Our continued efforts to develop and field an
operational hypersonic air-launched weapon will enable us to
hold high-value time-sensitive targets at risk in contested
environments from standoff distances.
A hypersonic weapon in concert with a wider weapons force
mix is key to providing a war-winning Air Force. The Air
Force's hypersonic portfolio consists of three major thrusts:
the air-launched boost-glide missiles, air-launched air-
breathing cruise missiles, and the foundational science and
technology hypersonics portfolio. Our boost-glide missile is
the Air-Launched Rapid Response Weapon, also known as ARRW.
In fiscal year 2023, the Air Force will continue the
development of ARRW. To this date, we have successfully
completed the booster test flight series in July of 2022 and
the first All-Up Round test flight, ATF 1, in December on the
B-52. ATF 1 represents the Air Force's first successful test of
an end-to-end operationally representative air-launched
hypersonic weapon. ATF 2 is scheduled to take place by the end
of this month, and we are planning for two additional All-Up
Round test flights prior to program completion.
Our air-breathing cruise missile is the Hypersonic Attack
Cruise Missile, also known as HACM. It is an air-launched, air-
breathing weapon that can be integrated on current and future
fighters as well as provide expanded capacity on bombers. The
Air Force awarded the HACM contract in September of 2022 and is
developing the weapon using middle tier of acquisition rapid
prototyping authority. We are working to mature HACM to
critical design along with other development activities in
order to enable the flight test program to begin in fiscal year
2025.
For our S&T [science and technology] efforts, in
collaboration with the wider hypersonics community you see
seated here today, our foundational science and technology
hypersonics portfolio is executed by the Air Force's Research
Laboratory, AFRL. AFRL has made many enduring contributions to
the field of hypersonics.
They have achieved recent successes with their completed
High Speed Strike Weapon Technology Maturation, or TechMat,
program. This program transitioned over 30 technologies to
various DOD hypersonic programs ranging from advanced materials
to propulsion technologies to air vehicle designs. Based on
these successes, we look forward to the launch of TechMat 2
this year to further develop and transition technologies for
next-generation hypersonic capabilities.
Lastly, AFRL will continue technology development efforts
this year towards expendable hypersonic, multi-mission,
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, or ISR, and
strike capabilities for larger, long-range, multi-mission
hypersonic platforms. Thank you again for the opportunity to
testify and to provide additional details in the closed
session. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Shipton can be found in
the Appendix on page 64.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Freisthler.

STATEMENT OF PAUL F. FREISTHLER, CHIEF SCIENTIST, DIRECTORATE
FOR ANALYSIS, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Mr. Freisthler. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the invitation to provide the Defense Intelligence Agency's
assessment of China and Russia's hypersonic weapon systems.
Amid the backdrop of strategic competition, the events of the
past several years demonstrate in no uncertain terms that our
competitors are developing capabilities aimed to hold the U.S.
homeland at risk. Hypersonic weapons designed to evade U.S.
sensors and defensive systems pose an increasing and complex
threat due to the availability of both nuclear and conventional
capabilities, challenging flight profiles and maneuverability.
These weapons include air, ground, and naval launched variants
as hypersonic glide vehicles, hypersonic cruise missiles, and
aero-ballistic missiles.
Unlike ballistic missiles, these hypersonic weapons, which
fly at speeds at least Mach 5 for a significant portion of
their flight, do not follow a ballistic trajectory and can
maneuver en route to their destination. While both China and
Russia have conducted numerous successful tests of hypersonic
weapons and have likely fielded operational systems, China is
leading Russia in both supporting infrastructure and numbers of
systems.
Over the past two decades, China has dramatically advanced
its development of conventional and nuclear armed hypersonic
missile technologies and capabilities through intense and
focused investment, development, testing, and deployments.
China has a robust research and development infrastructure
devoted to the development of hypersonic weapons. For example,
the China Aerodynamic Research and Development Center claims to
have 18 wind tunnels and the China Academy of Aerospace
Aerodynamics claims to operate at least 3 hypersonic wind
tunnels capable of operating at speeds of Mach 8, Mach 10, and
Mach 12.
China has conducted a number of successful tests of
hypersonic weapon systems, including the DF-17, which is a
medium-range ballistic missile with a hypersonic glide vehicle
payload. It is estimated to have a range of at least 1,000
miles enabling it to reach U.S. military forces in Western
Pacific and may have been fielded in 2020. China is also
pursuing an intercontinental-range ballistic missile with
hypersonic glide vehicle payload and has conducted several
flight tests since 2014, including a test in July of 2021 that
circumnavigated the globe.
China also is actively pursuing high-speed engine or
``scramjet'' technologies which have applications in hypersonic
cruise missiles and has used their Mach 6+ scramjet testbed to
research thermal resistant components and hypersonic cruise
missile technologies which would further expand its hypersonic
weapons capabilities.
Russia has performed research on hypersonic weapons
technologies since at least the 1980s. Russia reportedly
conducts hypersonic wind tests--wind tunnel testing at the
Central Aero-Hydrodynamic Institute and the Khristianovich
Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics and has
performed hypersonic weapons testing at several locations
across the country.
Russia currently has three deployed hypersonic weapon
systems. In 2018, President Vladimir Putin mentioned the first,
the Kinzhal air-launched ballistic missile, claiming it has a
top speed of Mach 10 with a range of over 1,200 miles. The
second system, the SS-19 Mod 4, achieved initial operational
capability in 2019 and is the world's only deployed strategic-
range hypersonic glide vehicle.
Russian government officials claim the hypersonic glide
vehicle is capable of flying at speeds over Mach 20 with a
range of approximately 6,500 miles. The third system, the
Tsirkon, is a ship-launched hypersonic missile that travels at
speeds up to Mach 8 with a maximum range of approximately 600
miles. Russia has also declared its intentions to expand its
strategic hypersonic weapons inventory in the coming years by
eventually placing multiple hypersonic glide vehicles on the
developmental intercontinental ballistic missile, known as the
Sarmat, and developing another air-launched hypersonic long-
range missile called the Kh-95.
My goal in this hearing is to help Congress and the Nation
better understand the threats we face as a nation. DIA aims to
support this committee in identifying opportunities to respond
to these challenges. Thank you for your continued confidence,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Freisthler can be found in
the Appendix on page 70.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you all for your statements and for
being here. We have one vote that will occur at 10:00 to 10:15.
My hope is that we can get the opening hearing done before the
vote. Then we will go vote and all of us reconvene up in room
2337 in the SCIF [Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility]
for the classified session. I would ask members and witnesses
to keep our questions and answers as succinct as possible so we
can get to more members.
President Biden's decision last week to authorize the
Defense Production Act to invest in hypersonic--hypersonics was
welcome. This move demonstrates a recent and serious
realization more and more of us are having of the need for
hypersonics. So General Rasch and Vice Admiral Wolfe, do
hypersonics meet a need not otherwise met by our existing
weapons and forces? In other words, are we developing this just
to be copying potential adversaries? Or do hypersonics meet a
need that if not met, puts us at an unacceptable risk? General
Rasch, start with you.
General Rasch. Thank you, Chairman, for the question. So,
as a materiel developer, I'm not necessarily involved in the
policy decisions regarding the implementation and usage of
those. But from an Army perspective, as part of the joint
fight, when we did the long-range fire study across the Army
portfolio looking at the capabilities we had and the ranges we
had and the allocation or apportionment of targets that we as
part of the joint fight were supposed to address, it was
determined at that point in time that hypersonics--the Long-
Range Hypersonic Weapon system was needed. If you need more
information, I can absolutely get that report that lays out
that additional information.
Mr. Lamborn. Vice Admiral Wolfe or Mr. White, can you--or
Dr. Horowitz, can you add to that?
Admiral Wolfe. So, from a Navy perspective, I too--like
General Rasch, I'm a materiel provider. But I would tell you
the Navy's view is this does fill a need for the United States
Navy. It's not just because of parity with what the adversary
or our strategic competitors are doing. But again, like General
Rasch, if you'd want more detail on that, it would have to go
to the classified session.
Dr. Horowitz. Thanks so much. I think we believe in the
Department that hypersonics are a critical part of the mix of
capabilities that we need. They expand the range of options
available to senior decision makers. And as Mr. White said,
their speed, maneuverability, and range give them novel
capabilities that will be helpful from the perspective of the
joint force.
That's why the National Defense Strategy calls them out as
priority capabilities from the perspective of--from the
perspective of development. And so I think there are--there are
reasons why the Department needs to develop hypersonics clearly
laid out in the National Defense Strategy that are aside from
whatever Russia and China are doing.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. White, do you have anything to add?
Mr. White. I think that pretty much covers it.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Very good. Very good. And Mr. White
continuing with you. Last year, I worked with the Department to
formalize the National Hypersonics Initiative and had it
included in the fiscal year 2023 NDAA. This provision directed
the Department to provide a report on options to enhance
hypersonic development efforts through the establishment of a
National Hypersonics Initiative. Can you give us an update on
that and preview what will be in the report? And will we need
any more legislation in the 2024 bill?
Mr. White. Thank you for the question. The National
Hypersonics Initiative really is a descriptive term for the
next phase of our hypersonic strategy that moves us from the
initial prototyping phase of development to operational
fielding with affordable capacity. So the key elements of that
next phase of our strategy have to do with affordable capacity
and getting industry and the industrial base designs capable
for--of being built affordably and at high rate to meet the
needs of the warfighter as well as continuing to evolve our
technology.
So the two key pillars of that next-generation strategy is
affordable capacity and next-generation leap-ahead
technologies. In addition, we want to make sure we enhance the
technology base and the workforce providing the capabilities
and currently and for the future in hypersonics as well as the
T&E, test and evaluation, infrastructure necessary. So those
are the key elements of the strategy. The report has been
completed and is in review and it should be out in about a
month.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. White. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. And hurrying right along. Mr. Freisthler, your
opening statement mentioned the Chinese hypersonic fractional
orbital bombardment system, or FOB, that circumnavigated the
globe. Some people call this a Sputnik moment. Can you explain
why China is pursuing this technology and when can we expect it
to reach initial operational capability if it hasn't already?
Mr. Freisthler. Thank you for the question. In order to
provide you a full and robust response, I would like to defer
that to the closed session if I may.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. We will address that in closed session.
And let's see, at this point, I am going to hand it off to
Representative Moulton and we will try to do as much as
possible. But when votes are called, we will adjourn here and
reconvene after votes in the SCIF.
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. So in my
opening remarks, I commented on how we need to have operational
concepts before we just pursue technology for technology's sake
or just because our adversaries have it. And the chairman
addressed this in his first question, but I have to say I was
struck by how vague your answers were.
I mean, two of you essentially said, hey, I am just
developing this, but the policy people are figuring out how to
use it. Others talked about vague things like options that it
provides our warfighters. There is not a weapon system on Earth
that doesn't provide our warfighters new options. But we have
to be smart about what we invest in. We cancel weapon systems
all the time that provide options to our warfighters, but we
decide are not a top priority.
Now in your testimony, Mr. White, you said mission planning
work is well underway for Air Force, Army, and Navy
capabilities and the United States Strategic Command has been
developing a concept of operations for support of the Army's
first fully operational weapons. Has been developing, is
working on, doesn't sound like we have an operational concept
first for which we are developing a technology. You also said
earlier in your testimony, we are moving with urgency to put
advanced technologies and new operating concepts, including
hypersonic strike and defensive capabilities, into the hands of
the joint force. Again, this doesn't sound like we have this
figured out. It sounds like we are trying to just catch up with
our adversaries.
Now I asked this question in the earlier hearing this week
of General Cotton and his answer was essentially we need them
because China and Russia have them. I then asked if he thinks
they are stabilizing or destabilizing weapons and he said that
they will be stabilizing if we reach parity. That sounds like
we are just trying to get to parity with our adversaries.
He didn't give us an operational concept for how they are
going to be used. Just a few minutes later, General VanHerck
described an operational concept in which Russia or China
attacks us with a hypersonic weapon and we can't tell where it
is going. And he said very explicitly that is destabilizing.
But let's just take General Cotton's line of reasoning for
a minute and argue that we need them because the other guys
have them. And once we get to parity, they will be stabilizing.
But, Dr. Freisthler, in your testimony, you made it very clear
that Russia and China are developing hypersonic capabilities
that we have no intention of developing. Do we have intention
of developing nuclear hypersonics? Does anyone on the panel
think that we are?
No. So we are not even going to reach parity in that sense.
It is not like we have ICBMs [intercontinental ballistic
missiles] and they have ICBMs. So we know that we don't want
anybody to fire an ICBM because that is what they are going to
get back. So on the one hand, people come before us all the
time arguing as you have that we need these capabilities
because our adversaries have them.
And you have the commander of STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic
Command] saying that once we reach parity with our adversaries,
then these will be stabilizing weapons, good for our national
security across the board. And yet you don't even have a plan
to reach parity because we are not developing the same type of
hypersonic weapons as they are.
So it seems to me that there is a fundamental disconnect
here. Not only that, it does seem like we are quite far behind.
Mr. White, you said that we are not in an arms race. How would
you define an arms race?
Mr. White. I define an arms race in the traditional sense
of numerical parity. They have 47 widgets, so we need 50.
Mr. Moulton. Which is exactly what General Cotton said is
our path.
Mr. White. I would disagree with that. I don't believe I
interpreted what he said in that--in that vein. But that is not
what we're doing. Our development of our hypersonic
capabilities for offensive strike is dictated by the target set
and the mission capabilities needed to complement our existing
and other types of weapons so that we can perform our
operational missions successfully and deter preferably.
Mr. Moulton. Well, I would highly encourage you as I have
in years past to accelerate the development of these
operational concepts so you can come before us and before the
American people who are footing the billions and billions of
dollars to develop these weapons just so that your STRATCOM
commander can tell us we can reach parity with our adversaries
even though we don't even really have a plan to do so. Now, let
me ask one other question. Oh, I am sorry. Lieutenant General
Rasch.
General Rasch. Sir, I was just going to add from an
operational employment perspective separating that from how we
execute. We do exercise from General Cotton's team at STRATCOM
through the combatant command and did actually this last week
that full chain of events. Obviously, decision authority is not
something that the materiel developer is necessarily focused
on. But the ability to employ that--deploy and/or employ that
when we conduct that first unit of issue later this year is
something that we are exercising from the top all the way--all
the way to the bottom. So when it is capable and ready and the
leaders decide that we need to--to execute it, we have a system
that can execute that mission.
Mr. Moulton. I appreciate that very much. Do you think that
these are strategic weapons, Lieutenant General Rasch?
General Rasch. I would actually rather defer that to policy
if I could please.
Dr. Horowitz. These are conventional weapons that can have
strategic effects. And we think that because of their speed,
maneuverability, and range that they offer something
potentially unique to the joint force.
Mr. Moulton. Well, as I said from the very beginning, I
don't doubt that they offer something unique, but let's figure
out how that is actually going to be used. And fundamentally
whether at the end of the day it contributes to our national
security or makes the world a more dangerous place, not only
for us but for everybody else.
Dr. Freisthler, what is your assessment on Chinese and
Russian capability to track U.S. hypersonic weapons? Do they
have the same limitations that we obviously do when it comes to
tracking them in flight?
Mr. Freisthler. Thank you very much for the question. So
the physics is the same across the universe. So I would say
they definitely have similar struggles that the U.S. may have
to attack. I'm not saying we have a struggle with the
capability. But looking at it from a physics perspective, as
you travel through the air at that velocity, there becomes
challenges with onboard sensors, but also then with
capabilities from ground and space to detect and track
vehicles.
Mr. Moulton. Dr. Horowitz, when the strategic deterrence
that we have and have had for decades between the U.S., Soviet
Union, U.S. and Russia relies not only on the fact that we have
a lot of ICBMs on the ground, but that we have detection
capabilities so we can tell when they launch. What is our
policy if Russia were to take out our detection capabilities?
How would we treat that?
Dr. Horowitz. I think we view the--we view our capabilities
in this area as robust. And we'd be happy to talk about it more
in a closed----
Mr. Moulton. No, no, that is not my question. My question
is what is our policy if Russia takes out our capability to
detect nuclear launches from Russia?
Dr. Horowitz. I don't think we--I think the--I think we'd
need to talk about that in a closed session.
Mr. Moulton. I think that is intimately related to the
question that I just asked. So I look forward to that
discussion. And I hope you can resolve the pretty obvious
logical discrepancy here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Doug Lamborn, and thank you
also Ranking Member Seth Moulton. It is so refreshing as you
see the bipartisan working together, concern for the American
people. And then thank goodness we have such capable people as
you are here today.
And a gruesome reminder of how important and what you are
doing was the hypersonic attack last night yesterday across
Ukraine. The people of Ukraine were given no warning. There is
no tracking.
There is not a capability of providing air siren
capabilities so people to go to shelters. There is the whole
situation of evading. The courageous people of Ukraine have
been so successful in blocking, by their missile defense
systems, the war criminal Putin's attacks on the people of
Ukraine.
But this yesterday was just horrific, again, to see
civilian targets intentionally to create the mass slaughter of
civilians. And it is just so critical that we have a capability
hopefully to deter war criminal Putin. But yesterday was such a
reminder of how critical what is today and I am concerned too.
It may have been a response by war criminal Putin to the
actions by President Biden last week that his message is that,
hey, we shall proceed and the global conflict that we have
between democracies rule of law with authoritarians rule of
gun. And so I believe that we are sadly obviously in an arms
race. We are in a competition.
And the good news is we have been through competition like
this before called the Cold War where we had no chance of
victory, but we did. So what you are doing is so critical. I
want to point out to General Shipton. First of all, we are so
thrilled to have a distinguished graduate of Clemson University
School of Engineering.
And so since I have a grandson there and I have had a son
follow you. So, hey, we appreciate what you have done. General,
the senior Air Force leaders have discussed the need to
determine the optimal weapons mix for hypersonic capabilities
conventional munitions to make production decisions. How is the
Air Force resolving these concerns?
General Shipton. Thank you for the question, sir. And go
Tigers.
Mr. Wilson. Hear, hear.
General Shipton. So, sir, yes, the Air Force is proceeding
with understanding what our operational weapons mix will look
like incorporating hypersonics into that discussion. We do see
that it is a probably high-value but low-volume addition to our
wider weapons mix. We do believe that we will be adding this
capability to our--especially with our future fighter force
that our wargaming and analysis has shown, especially with
HACM, that it will provide a superior capability to our current
inventory. And we are looking forward to bringing that in the
inventory as I mentioned in 2027.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you very much. And indeed, go
Tigers. And I am so grateful to be with you. And Dr.
Freisthler, again Russia--Putin developing his capabilities,
the Chinese Communist Party developing their capabilities, the
collusion with Tehran, with the intent of Tehran to vaporize
the people of Israel, to vaporize the people of America.
We know of their capabilities. With those capabilities, is
there evidence of cooperation between Russia, China, and any
other, here we go with DPRK too, North Korea--does this ever
end--in weapons development. And what is their industrial
production capability?
Mr. Freisthler. Thank you very much for the question. If I
may tackle that slightly in reverse order. So production, the
costs remain a barrier for everyone that is pursuing
development of hypersonic weapons. You know, China, Russia, as
well as France, India, Austria, North Korea, Japan, and others,
as you mentioned, they are all looking at the technologies that
are in this and working to overcome them. So from an industrial
base perspective, we do see some collaboration. Beyond that, I
would have to defer to the closed session, sir.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. And I hope we collaborate with other
countries, i.e., India and Japan. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. I would like to thank
the panel for being here today. And I don't want to go point
for point on the line of questioning that my colleague had. I
want to take it one step down, the assumptions that technically
we are getting to where we need to be, although nowhere near
the timeframe, but operationally still a huge question.
The Defense Production Act typically is there for when
there is not an industrial base to support it. There is no
doubt in anybody's mind up here is we have been throwing
billions of dollars at this. Why at this time the Defense
Production Act being deployed by the President, what need is it
because you usually do that when, A, it is not there, B,
industry is unwilling to do this.
I am not sure which one of you are in a position to answer
this question. But why now is that being invoked? Where is
industry not answering the call? I know you are all dying to
answer this question.
Dr. Horowitz. Thank you for the question. The--I think
the--I think that we're pleased and excited that the President
is allowing us the opportunity to act on behalf of the Nation
to accelerate the advancement of hypersonics capabilities in
the U.S. These investments we think will lead to new training
and job opportunities for American citizens.
Mr. Norcross. No, I got that. Why? What is the defense--why
does that need to be employed instead of industry just
answering the call? Because this is to force industry's hand.
Where is that not being addressed?
Dr. Horowitz. The administration has made a determination
that invoking it is necessary given where industry is now. But
I would also have to take this for the record given that our
colleagues from acquisition and sustainment are not represented
on this panel and could bring more to bear on the specific
question of the decision on the timing.
Mr. Norcross. I hear you. Let me shift gears here a little
bit. The CBO [Congressional Budget Office] recently released
the U.S. Hypersonic Weapons and Alternatives Report--I assume
everybody has seen this--and came to some takeaways that are
extremely concerning to many of us up here that the ballistic
missiles in many ways be well suited to address these.
Second of all, that probably hypersonics would not be more
survivable than ballistic missiles. Third, the cost,
considerably less. So my question is, given those challenges,
what are we getting with a hypersonic missile that we are not
getting with the ballistic that is going to address it in light
of this report? Dr. Horowitz, if you could start.
Dr. Horowitz. Thanks for the question. The Department
believes that the intersection of the speed, maneuverability,
and range of hypersonics provides capabilities that are not
simply provided by ballistic missiles. But we also believe
hypersonics are not a one-size-fits-all solution. That's why
they're important as part of the mix of capabilities that the
joint force is--that the joint force is planning to operate in
the future, and why my colleagues in uniform have talked about
some of the plans we have concerning different quantities of
hypersonics that we think might be useful in different
scenarios.
Mr. Norcross. So let me interject. What are we getting from
a hypersonic that we are not getting? Speed is obvious.
Maneuverability is questionable that we are getting that
additionally. What is it? That timeframe cuts down from 6
minutes to 3 minutes that makes an operational difference?
Admiral Wolfe. Rep. Norcross, if I could just weigh in
here. So I'd be happy to answer that question, but we really
need to be in the classified discussion for me to give you an
example of exactly where this is useful.
Mr. Norcross. I yield back and we will address it in the
closed session.
Dr. DesJarlais [presiding]. I thank the gentleman. I will
now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Mr. White, I would like to
start by thanking you for the work that you have done in the
Department through your briefings on the Hill to raise
awareness of the state of our hypersonic test infrastructure.
It is not a flashy topic, but it is critical.
Because of your persistent work shedding light on the dire
state of our T&E infrastructure, we have seen tremendous
support built on this committee for necessary investments. So I
really appreciate your efforts. But I would like to ask you
where we are now. As you know, my district is home to Arnold
Engineering Development Complex, and we have seen significant
funds dedicated to Arnold over the past few years.
I am curious to know how you would assess the state of our
ground test infrastructure presently. Are we dedicating
sufficient resources? Are there additional construction or
hiring authorities that we could provide you all to help with
these modernization efforts? So in short, what do you need from
this committee to continue the progress we have made in our
modernization of our ground test infrastructure?
Mr. White. Thank you for that question. And let me first
start off by saying that we greatly appreciate the support
we've gotten from this committee and Congress in general for
our T&E infrastructure improvements and the tremendous amount
of funding that's been added by Congress for T&E
infrastructure. The Arnold Engineering Development Center
really is the crown jewel in our hypersonics T&E capability,
and our facilities in Tennessee provide critical capabilities
for testing of high-temperature materials for thermal
protection systems and air-breathing propulsion systems for
hypersonic cruise missiles.
Right now, we have worked to increase the capability of the
current facility infrastructure to improve the throughput by a
factor of two over the last couple of years. But the
investments that we're being able to make with the additional
funding is allowing us to dramatically improve that throughput
and capability by building new facilities, both for air-
breathing propulsion and for high-temperature materials testing
in Tennessee.
So we look forward to bringing those systems online over
the next couple of years to dramatically improve our ground
test capability. In addition to those investments, the
additional funding and support we've gotten from Congress has
allowed us to make investments across the board with our
industry partners as well as our government laboratories
elsewhere to enhance our facility needs for ground testing, and
so we really appreciate that. And the investments are going to
universities, industry elements in Minnesota and New York in
particular, and government facilities outside of Tennessee, for
example, the Holloman sled track in New Mexico. So quite a lot
of investment and it will dramatically improve the robustness
of our ground test facility.
Beyond that, the investments are allowing us to improve the
capability and throughput of our flight test infrastructure. As
I mentioned in my opening remarks, we've gone from testing
about once every 2 years to over a dozen times per year. And
that's put a demand signal on our flight test infrastructure.
That's being enabled by advanced capabilities being pursued
for moving our range instrumentation to airborne platforms from
maritime platforms, a dramatic improvement in flexibility and
agility for our range assets. So there's a lot of investment
going on across the T&E infrastructure enabled by robust
funding approved in the recent Congress in particular.
Dr. DesJarlais. One other thing, something General Thurgood
raised on a trip to Huntsville last August was utilizing some
of these small-scale facilities of our academic institutions to
help alleviate some of the testing shortfalls. To what extent
is the Department utilizing these facilities and are there
additional opportunities? And I think you kind of answered
that, but specifically like the UT [University of Tennessee]
Space center in Tennessee.
Mr. White. Yeah, the university ecosystem is an important
part of our strategy moving forward. The University Consortium
in Applied Hypersonics [UCAH] is allowing not only investments
in the students, but in the infrastructure in the universities.
We've made numerous investments in universities like Purdue and
Notre Dame for quiet hypersonic wind tunnels.
We're making additional investments in the University of
Illinois for their hypersonic facility. And then in Texas,
we're making a number of investments. So we are through the
UCAH and additional investments through the Test Resources
Management Center energizing our university ecosystem for
testing and evaluation.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you. And again appreciate your
efforts and thanks for all you have done.
Mr. White. Thank you.
Dr. DesJarlais. And I will now recognize Mr. Carbajal from
California.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to all the
witnesses. Hypersonics are an innovative technology. They have
a lot of potential. They have the potential to be the next
generation of weapon system that increases our capabilities and
they also have the potential to cost taxpayers a whole lot of
money.
We need more clarity on where supersonics will fit in with
our National Defense Strategy and what the plan and metrics are
for future research, development, testing, and evaluation. I
must say I associate myself with the comments and statement of
Ranking Member Moulton and Mr. Norcross. In my district Cal
Poly San Luis Obispo in partnership with the Air Force Research
Laboratory is in the process of building a Ludwig tube wind
tunnel capable of Mach 6 to conduct hypersonic research and
workforce development opportunities for students. Mr. White and
General Shipton, can you speak to the benefits of partnerships
between the university and the Department like we have with Cal
Poly and the Air Force Research Laboratory in advancing the
research of technologies like hypersonics?
Mr. White. Thank you for the question. I'll start. As I
just mentioned, the University Consortium in Applied
Hypersonics is a major initiative that we established with the
Joint Hypersonic Transition Office.
Started largely due to congressional support and funding in
earlier bills. And we've really energized that community. We
have over 100 universities involved in that university
consortium to not only develop future technologies and build
facilities that allow that research, but really to train that
next-generation workforce so that we can make sure the
country's capability and future is robust in delivering this
capability to our warfighter.
I just want to re--or emphasize that I don't view my job as
being hypersonic technology development. I view my job as
developing transformational capability and delivering that
transformational capability to the warfighter based on
hypersonic systems. So our emphasis really is getting the
capabilities and the weapon systems in the hands of the
warfighter so they can make sure that we can perform what we
need to do on the battlefield and accomplish our mission
objectives should deterrence fail.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
General Shipton. Thank you for the question, sir. And I
would just add that I agree completely with Mr. White's
comments earlier. I would just say that I think adding any
additional capability is going to allow us to do increased
testing at a faster rate. Just very basic simple math. And so I
think these efforts with the university are certainly going to
be helpful in allowing us to do more tests more quickly and
bring that capability sooner. So that's all I have, sir.
Mr. Carbajal. Great. Thank you. Dr. Horowitz, I think it is
clear that the PRC and Russia are ahead of us in hypersonic
weapon deployment. Can you walk me through current discussions
taking place or strategies that will allow us to keep pace
while keeping in mind the cost of this technology? And can you
give specific examples of how President Biden's announcement
last week regarding DPA [Defense Production Act] Title III will
allow the Department to field technology sooner?
Obviously, within this setting.
Dr. Horowitz. Thanks so much for your question. The--I
think the question of the intersection between our hypersonic
development and what China and Russia are doing is interesting.
But the most important question is, is the--is the joint force
developing the capabilities it needs to fight and win the
Nation's wars?
And we think hypersonics are a critical part of that for
some of the reasons that I've stated before, for their speed,
for their maneuverability, the intersection of their speed,
maneuverability, and range, which is why we think they
complement subsonic missiles and supersonic non-hypersonic
missiles as part of the package of capabilities that the joint
force--that the joint force needs. And that's our overall
development of capabilities is paced to the challenge posed by
the PRC. But as my colleague Mr. White said, we're not seeking
to one to one develop hypersonics just because China's
developing them.
We seek to develop them, and my colleagues have given you
several examples of capabilities, you know, HACM, LRHW, CPS,
that we think are necessary for the joint force to implement
the National Defense Strategy. The DPA we believe will be
helpful in accelerating the development of these capabilities
in that they--they'll help the market fill the demand that we
have for development of--for fielding of hypersonic
technologies in the timeframes that we need given the
production challenges. But, again, as I said before, I think
our colleagues from acquisition and sustainment would be much
better poised to answer specific details of those--of how it
will make a difference.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Dr. DesJarlais. Gentleman yields back. Chair now recognizes
Representative Khanna from California.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chair. My understanding, Dr.
Horowitz, and correct me if I am mistaken, is that once we
developed the precision strike capability to possibly strike
the nuclear capability that China has prior to their launch
that this in part incentivized them to develop hypersonics to
be able to do that to us. Of course, we have the second strike
capability through our submarines and so that would deter them
from doing that. I guess my question is what additional
deterrent value would the hypersonics provide that we don't
already have with the triad?
Dr. Horowitz. That's a really great question. Obviously
strategic deterrence is fundamentally based in the--in the
triad. And my colleague, Assistant Secretary Plum, spoke about
this a few--a few days ago. And I would defer to him actually
on all things. But the--I think in this specific case, we see
offensive hypersonics as providing another rung of conventional
capabilities that can help deter conflict and deter--and
potentially deter escalation.
And that hypersonics because they have the potential to
have strategic effects because of the intersection of that
speed, maneuverability, and range give not just capabilities
for their own sake, but capabilities that potentially can make
a difference for the joint force and in potentially avoiding
escalation. They give senior decision makers more options.
Mr. Khanna. Are they needed to do the precision strike
force that President Bush started? I forget the exact name of
that which can allow us to have a preemptive strike on nuclear
facilities. Or do we have that capability without it?
Dr. Horowitz. I think we'd want to talk about that question
in a closed session.
Mr. Khanna. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn [presiding]. Representative Vasquez.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all the
witnesses here today taking the time to be here with us this
morning. Over the last several years, hypersonics have become
an increasingly important strategic tool for the world's
largest militaries to project power.
While we have made progress in testing and development of
hypersonics, we should continue to do more to make sure we are
outpacing and outcompeting our adversaries. It is imperative
that the United States military has the necessary capabilities
to defend ourselves and our allies. Built and designed
correctly, hypersonic weapons can be valuable non-nuclear
deterrent that will allow the United States to keep our
adversaries at bay without threatening the outbreak of a
nuclear conflict.
In my district, the Second District of New Mexico, White
Sands Missile Range and Holloman Air Force Base are leaders in
testing and developing hypersonic weapons. Congress should
ensure that our brave service members, researchers, support
workers, and others have the resources they need to accomplish
their mission, including the bases in my district.
So I thank you for today's discussion. My first question is
to Lieutenant General Rasch, Lieutenant General Shipton. Could
you explain the role that White Sands Missile Range and
Holloman Air Force Base play in the testing and development of
the future of hypersonic weapons?
General Rasch. First, Congressman, thank you for the
question. And I've spent a lot of time at White Sands Missile
Range in my previous job testing many munitions for the United
States Army. And today still we use White Sands Missile Range
and have used it for our program activities to date in
sensitive munitions testing on several fronts as well as
utilizing the processes that have been established by the great
professionals out of that workforce for several decades.
With regards to larger scale hypersonic weapons testing, I
think that actually would go to OSD R&E [Research and
Engineering] for discussion as it gets to the bigger discussion
of test range development over a longer period of time. But we
certainly use White Sands at every opportunity we can, given
the great workforce in that area. Over.
General Shipton. Sir, thank you for the question, but I'll
have to take it for the record. My apologies.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Vasquez. No problem. Thank you.
General Shipton. Thank you.
Mr. Vasquez. My next question here is since White Sands,
Holloman Air Force Base, and other military installations in
New Mexico are so necessary for the continued development
research of hypersonics. My question is what additional
resources does the military need to utilize a place like White
Sands Missile Range and Holloman Air Force to achieve this next
level of competitiveness and to make sure that the development
is adequate for the future of these weapons? And I will give
that question to anybody on the panel.
Admiral Wolfe. Yes, sir. So, here I would say, first of
all, thank you for the support that you've given us in this
area. In the fiscal year 2023 plus-up that we were given, we've
started a program called Multi-Service Advanced Capabilities
for Hypersonics Test Bed. As we've talked about test
infrastructures, we've talked about, you know, our need to get
these technologies developed quicker.
That money is being used for just what you're asking about.
We're looking at a whole portion of industry where historically
we would not have engaged to help us understand. And certainly
some of those capabilities, what we're looking at that we'll
leverage, they actually use White Sands as kind of their home
base. There's others across other ranges. So we are opening up
our aperture and with the support of Congress and the plus-up
that you've given us, that's exactly what we're doing to make
sure we grow the base to be able to get after this problem.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Mr.----
Mr. White. I would just add that one of the key investments
being made by the Test Resources Management Center is in the
Holloman sled track to look at high-speed testing at the
Holloman sled track to enhance our ability to learn more about
endgame performance of hypersonic weapons and the way they
perform against various threats. So it's a very critical part
of understanding the capability actually delivered by these
weapons when they're fielded.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you both. I look forward to working with
you all to bring those investments home to those two bases into
our district. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you so much for the chance to talk to
you all. I served in advanced plans and programs in the Air
Force as a young person decades ago and have the background as
an engineer and wondering if I might be able to use my open
time to talk a little bit about the things that we have been
focusing on in my office, which are specifically supply chain
related and critical minerals and rare earth elements,
composites, chips, alloys, those kinds of things which are very
essential, not just in domestic products, but also in what we
are talking about here today, hypersonic missiles.
And so Mr. White, if you wouldn't mind speaking a little
bit about if you have any concerns about our access to or
supply of critical minerals that we might need to produce these
sorts of weapons or any other materials that you are worried
about in terms of composites or chips or alloys. I notice, of
course, that the President has implemented the Defense
Production Act. Are you concerned about our access domestically
to any of these particular products?
Mr. White. Thank you for the question. I think it's really
important as we field all of our future capabilities that we've
described today that we ensure we've got domestic supplies for
that capability. And we're not sourcing our supply chain from
foreign sources, especially those who are potential
adversaries.
The Defense Production Act that--and the Presidential
determination recently really enables us to incentivize and
invest in industry to accelerate their ability to deliver these
capabilities. General Rasch mentioned that we have technologies
that really are coming out of the laboratories, largely
government laboratories, that we're transitioning to industry.
And so the real purpose for that there's--that Presidential
determination for hypersonics is to really accelerate the pace
at which industry can respond to our supply chain needs. And
there also was a Defense Production Act that was supply chain
focused for kinetic weapons, and that also is applicable to
hypersonics.
So when we look at high-temperature materials, when we look
at advanced microprocessors, we look at air-breathing
propulsion, all those technologies and capabilities are
enablers. And we have to make sure we have a robust supply
chain, and even beyond that, a supply chain that can deliver
capacity affordably. So as we move out of the laboratory
environment and into a production environment, we have to make
sure we're pulling in even nontraditional and commercial-based
industry practices and procedures to deliver affordable
capacity moving forward.
Ms. Houlahan. And would anyone else like to contribute to
that first question? My second question is can you speak to any
advantage that China or Russia might have in this area given
they do in fact control mines in Africa, South America and even
in their own countries? Mr. White.
Mr. White. Can we save that for the closed session?
Ms. Houlahan. Of course. Of course. And my other question--
--
Dr. Horowitz. I defer to my DIA colleague on that in a
closed session.
Ms. Houlahan. Okay. My other question is for the closed
environment. And so thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Strong, did you want
to ask any questions or do you want to wait till closed
session? Okay. And we are going into closed session almost
immediately. I will just clarify one thing. I said this in my
opening statement. I quoted former Vice Chairman of the Chiefs
of Staff, General John Hyten, who said that hypersonic weapons
enable, quote, ``responsive, long-range strike options against
distant defended and or time critical threats when other forces
are unavailable, denied access, or not preferred,'' showing
that this fills a serious gap in our capabilities.
Does anyone disagree with what General Hyten said? If so
please raise your hand and I will give you a moment. I am
taking it that you agree with General Hyten on this quote.
Okay. Thank you so much. We will now be----
Mr. Bacon. Too late?
Mr. Lamborn. Oh, no, just in time. Representative--
Representative Bacon, you didn't have enough stars to--
Representative Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. First question for Dr. Horowitz or Mr. White. Is
there a need for a hypersonic weapon that can be fired from the
United States that could have the range to hit Russia or China?
Dr. Horowitz. The Department is currently planning to
develop conventionally armed, regionally based hypersonic
weapons. We think the state of our nuclear deterrent is strong.
And from a policy perspective, I'd defer to Assistant Secretary
Plum's comments a few days ago to this committee.
Mr. Bacon. Yeah, I think I might also say for the record, I
think it is more destabilizing to have Russia and China have
these weapons and us not have them. I don't think that helps us
out at all by not fielding them. So I just wanted to point that
out. I have a question here for Mr. White too. This relates to
the current limitations in hypersonic flight test capacity.
Last week, the President announced the Defense Production
Act authority for the hypersonic industrial base, but it is not
clear to many of us how these individual hypersonic components
technologies can be tested in flight at sufficient tempo to
catch up with the pace China has right now given our
limitations.
So is our national industrial base capable of performing
flight tests for hypersonic components and technologies? And do
you believe these new Defense Production Act authorities can or
should be applied to help create a robust and healthy
industrial base for hypersonic flight test?
Mr. White. I think the answer to that question is yes and
yes. I think industry can step up, but I think it's really
critical that we as a government incentivize and accelerate
their ability to do that. And we're doing that not only through
Defense Production Act investments, but as well as ManTech
[Manufacturing Technology program] investments, IBAS
[Industrial Base Analysis and Sustainment program] investments.
And our Test Resources Management Center is making considerable
investments in the T&E infrastructure to enable all of that.
I mentioned earlier the next phase of our strategy and the
importance of T&E in that next phase of our strategy. And I've
given the team the charge of being able to do flight test once
a week. And that's quite a quite a stretch from just a couple
of years ago when we were testing once every 2 years.
We're at about once a month now, a little bit better than
once a month. So we're on a good trajectory. And Admiral Wolfe
mentioned the MACH-TB [Multi-Service Advanced Capability
Hypersonic Test Bed] program where we're pulling in
nontraditional methods and means and partners really in
industry and government to try to develop the tools and
techniques to achieve that rapid flight test pace to accelerate
our learning moving forward.
Mr. Bacon. Well, we look forward to that. That is great.
General Rasch, I can see the need for ground-based hypersonics
in Europe and Middle East. I don't understand how we are going
to do it in the Far East or in the Pacific theater given there
is very little basing options that make sense.
I understand the sea-launched or the air-launched, but can
you explain a little more? Do you think we will have the
ability to field these weapons that are within range? How do we
do this?
General Rasch. Congressman, thank you for your question.
And unfortunately, as the materiel developer, I don't
necessarily get to make the stationing decisions for that. But
given the quantities that the Army is currently prepared to
procure for a total of three batteries supporting our multi-
domain task force, those stationing decisions are ahead of us
in the Army. But we can take a question for record and get back
a more formal Army position on that.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Bacon. Appreciate it. Thank you. Mr. Freisthler, am I
saying your name right? What is the best way to say that?
Mr. Freisthler. Freisthler.
Mr. Bacon. Okay. Freisthler. I apologize. Are there plans
to use hypersonic weapons to identify gaps and develop tactics,
techniques, and procedures to keep the United States safe
against hypersonic weapons?
Mr. Freisthler. I would defer to my esteemed colleagues to
my right to look at U.S. systems, capabilities, tactics, et
cetera.
Mr. Bacon. I will just close with a comment. I see a need
for hypersonic weapons, but I'm really concerned that China and
Russia has them because they are destabilizing and we can't
detect them. They are going to put--it appears they are going
to put nuclear warheads on there. And from my vantage point, we
could be targeted with weapons with like 15-minute warning
times or less.
And this all comes back to nuclear command and control
survivability for me. How do we ensure that we have a
survivable command and control capability? And that is not a
question for you all here, but that's--I think that is the
number one thing we need to work on, on the Armed Services
Committee, is ensuring that we have nuclear survivable C3
[command, control, and communications]. But thank you very
much.
Mr. Lamborn. We will now reconvene in 5 minutes up in room
2337 for our closed session. Thank you all for being here.
[Whereupon, at 10:26 a.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 10, 2023

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 10, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 10, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BANKS

Mr. Banks. In recent years, the DOD hypersonics strategy to rapidly
develop and field hypersonic weapons has been fast-paced and
challenging. Mr. White: Is there any concern that the demands of
getting baseline weapon systems deployed on rapid schedules might
result in crowding out potential advancements in these capabilities?
Mr. White: Will our hypersonics arsenal have enough capacity and
capability to prevail in a conflict with China? Mr. White: Last year
Congress called for the Department to leverage more affordable and
reliable booster systems from commercial systems. I was glad to see the
rapid establishment of the Multi Service Advance Capabilities for
Hypersonics Test managed by Naval Surface Warfare Center, Crane in
Indiana. Mr. White: Can you expand on the importance of Multi Service
Advance Capability Hypersonics Test Bed (MACH TB) and how it will help
acceleration technology development and transition to our weapons
systems?
Mr. White. Thank you for your insightful questions, and I
appreciate your support for the development of the nation's hypersonics
capabilities. If I may address your questions in the order they are
posed:

Baseline vis-a-vis Advanced Hypersonic Capabilities. As
you know, the United States has been the world leader in advanced
hypersonics technologies for decades. With our decisions in recent
years to operationalize and produce hypersonic capabilities in
meaningful quantities, our first and foremost priority is meeting
urgent warfighting needs, including in response to high-end defensive
and anti-access systems our competitors are developing and deploying.
The Department is utilizing Middle Tier of Acquisition (MTA) pathways
to develop and soon field operational prototype hypersonic capabilities
on timescales of relevance. We have done so deliberately and with plans
to upgrade those capabilities over time as well as develop new concepts
to maintain battlefield dominance into the future.

Planned Capacity and Capability. We are in active
discussions with the Joint Staff, Combatant Commands, and Services to
align the numbers and types of hypersonic weapons the nation is
developing and producing with warfighting and deterrence needs--both in
the near term and well into the future. To be clear, no conflict will
be fought only with a hypersonic arsenal. Our deterrence of aggression,
and our ability to prevail if deterrence fails, relies on hypersonics,
the capabilities that hypersonics enable the United States to bring to
bear, and the totality of all other U.S. capabilities.

MACH-TB. The Multi-Service Advanced Capability
Hypersonics Test Bed (MACH-TB) program is a critical component of our
strategy to increase the operational tempo for hypersonic system and
technology test and evaluation. MACH-TB manages a portfolio of DoD,
commercial, and innovative launch vehicle options to execute high-
cadence flight testing of hypersonic technologies in relevant flight
environments. MACH-TB is managed and resourced by the OUSD(R&E) Test
Resource Management Center and executed by the Naval Surface Warfare
Center in Crane, Indiana. It provides affordable--and importantly,
frequent--flight test research opportunities for DoD programs, national
labs, academia, industry, and other government agencies.
Mr. Banks. How does the Department plan to leverage hypersonic
systems in a near term conflict? What role and benefit would a reusable
system play? How is the Department prioritizing development or reusable
hypersonic multi-mission systems in the hypersonic portfolio? What role
does the Department assume DARPA will play in the development of
hypersonic systems, especially reusable systems? What is the
Departments approach to expanding hypersonic testing capabilities? What
steps is the Department taking to enable flight test of hypersonic
system, especially with reusable systems? Does the Department envision
transitioning or leveraging reusable hypersonic test assets for other
use cases?
Mr. White. [The information provided is classified and retained in
the committee files.]
Mr. Banks. How important is it that we continue to invest the
Conventional Prompt Strike program?
Admiral Wolfe. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. NORCROSS
Mr. Norcross. The Defense Production Act typically is there for
when there is not an industrial base to support it. There is no doubt
in anybody's mind up here is we have been throwing billions of dollars
at this. Why at this time the Defense Production Act being deployed by
the President, what need is it because you usually do that when, A, it
is not there, B, industry is unwilling to do this.
I am not sure which one you are in a position to answer this
question. But why now is that being invoked? Where is the industry not
answering the call?
Mr. White. [The information provided is classified and retained in
the committee files.]

[all]
