- FY24 REQUEST FOR NUCLEAR FORCES AND ATOMIC ENERGY DEFENSE ACTIVITIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-18]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED
PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES HEARING

ON

FY24 REQUEST FOR NUCLEAR FORCES
AND ATOMIC ENERGY DEFENSE ACTIVITY
__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 28, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-391                    WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California,
DON BACON, Nebraska                  RO KHANNA, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              MARC VEASEY, Texas

Peter Schirtzinger, Professional Staff Member
Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Zachary Calderon, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1
Moulton, Hon. Seth, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     2

WITNESSES

Bussiere, Gen Thomas A., Commander, Air Force Global Strike
Command, USAF..................................................     9
Hruby, Jill, Under Secretary for Nuclear Security and
Administrator of the National Nuclear Security Administration,
DOE............................................................     7
Plumb, Dr. John F., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
Policy, DOD....................................................     4
Rosenblum, Deborah G., Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs, DOD........     6
Wolfe, Jr., VADM Johnny R., Director, Strategic Systems Programs,
USN............................................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Gen Bussiere.................................................    80
Ms. Hruby....................................................    55
Mr. Plumb....................................................    35
Ms. Rosenblum................................................    45
VADM Wolfe...................................................    95

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Lamborn..................................................   111

FY24 REQUEST FOR NUCLEAR FORCES AND ATOMIC
ENERGY DEFENSE ACTIVITIES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, March 28, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM COLORADO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

The Chairman. Today's hearing will come to order.
I ask unanimous consent that the chair be authorized to
declare a recess at any time. Without objection, so ordered.
The Strategic Forces Subcommittee meets today to review the
fiscal year 2024 budget request for U.S. nuclear forces.
Good morning to our witnesses--Secretary Plumb, Secretary
Rosenblum, Administrator Hruby, General Bussiere, and Vice
Admiral Wolfe.
I'm glad that we can have this hearing as informed by
President Biden's budget request. My priorities as we put
together the fiscal year 2024 budget are that we keep the
current nuclear modernization program of record on track.
Where there are delays or bottlenecks we should identify
ways to fix or circumvent them, and we will begin to examine
new capabilities outside the current program of record.
We need to be thinking about the key infrastructure
investments and capabilities we'll need in a decade and start
planning and budgeting for them now.
We are in a precarious time during our nuclear
modernization program. Simultaneously modernizing the ground,
air, and sea legs of our triad was never going to be easy and
we are past the point of no return to ensure new capabilities
come online as old capabilities age out.
I intend to be deeply involved in the schedules for the
Columbia, Sentinel, and B-21 Raider programs, as well as those
for the associated warhead and missile systems.
And this isn't even to mention the Russian--excuse me, the
Chinese nuclear breakout that we see taking place, which was
never contemplated when New START [Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty] treaty was negotiated.
There are three specific concerns that I would like to
highlight today.
On the Sentinel ICBM [Intercontinental Ballistic Missile]
program there have been some press statements that global
macroeconomic issues like supply chain are causing delays to
the program. I would like to thank Under Secretary Bill
LaPlante for quickly reaching out to schedule a briefing on
these challenges and happy that he will be here tomorrow to
brief Ranking Member Moulton and myself.
Once we get that briefing tomorrow we'll be sure to get an
update in the works for members of the subcommittee as well.
Secretary Rosenblum and General Bussiere, to the degree you
can say anything about these delays today it would be
appreciated, and I'll let everyone know we will have a
classified portion of this hearing immediately upon recessing
from this open hearing.
I'm also incredibly worried about the National Nuclear
Security Administration's ability to recruit and retain people
and how this is leading to delays in key projects.
Administrative Hruby, we are obviously very concerned about the
delays in plutonium pit production but we're also tracking
delays to the Tritium finishing facility in South Carolina and
the Pantex high explosive facility in Texas.
My understanding is that these programs are delayed so I'm
hoping you will explain why the Tritium and high explosive
projects didn't receive any funding in the budget request.
Finally, I have some questions about AUKUS [Australia,
United Kingdom, United States]. There is broad bipartisan
support across the aisle for this framework. I would like to
understand how AUKUS is going to impact U.S. highly-enriched
uranium requirements.
Specifically, I would like to know if we need to begin
thinking about and budgeting for a DOD [Department of Defense]-
specific program to sustain our requirements.
With that, I'd like to, again, welcome our witnesses. We
look forward to hearing from you and about your efforts to
develop these critical nuclear capabilities and how this
subcommittee can be helpful.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Moulton for
his opening comments.

STATEMENT OF HON. SETH MOULTON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC
FORCES

Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn. It's an honor to
work with you on such important issues and I want to welcome
our panel of distinguished witnesses.
As we sit in this hearing room this morning Putin continues
to threaten the use of nuclear weapons in Ukraine and is
talking about moving nuclear weapons into Belarus.
North Korea is undoubtedly readying for their next
ballistic missile launch. IAEA [International Atomic Energy
Agency] inspectors are raising flags regarding Iran's ability
to enrich uranium to the point of producing a nuclear weapon,
and the Chinese Communist Party is conducting a nuclear
expansion at a rate that aims to reach parity with the United
States within a decade.
The jurisdiction of this subcommittee remains one of the
most consequential of any in Congress and our nuclear forces
are at the core of our national security--the bedrock, the
foundation.
I believe that humanity would be safer if we eliminated
nuclear weapons. The sheer number of close calls with
accidental launches we have had in the past 7 decades should
concern anyone who understands nuclear holocaust and a few
shreds of statistical theory.
I hope we never lose sight of what should be a shared goal
of all nations. But until we get there we know only two
fundamental ways to prevent nuclear weapons from ever being
used.
The first is reducing the number we all have through arms
control and the second is instilling confidence in our
adversaries that the weapons we have are safe, secure,
reliable, and can be employed to devastating effect.
There's broad bipartisan support for the nuclear triad and
ensuring that our systems remain safe, secure, and reliable. In
fact, it was Secretary Mattis, who, after publicly expressing
concern regarding the land leg of the triad, ordered a review
as to whether all three legs are still necessary and the
conclusion was yes.
Our systems must check those three boxes safe, secure, and
reliable to provide a credible deterrent as we face a dynamic
this country has never previously confronted, two nuclear peer
adversaries.
This is an area in which the chairman and I very much see
eye to eye. This means making the significant investments
across the Department of Defense and the National Nuclear
Security Administration--the NNSA to produce new platforms such
as the B-21 and Columbia class SSBNs [Ballistic Missile
Submarines], modernize delivery systems such as the Sentinel
ICBM, long-range standoff weapon and the next Trident D-5 life
extension variant, as well as updating aging NNSA
infrastructure across the national labs and production
facilities so that they can deliver nuclear warheads on time
and on schedule to the services.
The chairman and I also firmly agree that a strong U.S.
nuclear deterrent is at the core of strategic stability in
today's world. This is true not just with our adversaries but
because of the umbrella it provides to our allies and partners
as well.
Amidst Putin's nuclear saber rattling over Ukraine, U.S.
contributions to the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]
alliance have proven to be a stabilizing force.
With regards to the INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command]
region, President Biden has been crystal clear, the U.S. has
an, quote, ``ironclad and unwavering commitment'' to draw on
the full range of its military capabilities, including nuclear,
to provide extended deterrence for the Republic of Korea in the
face of an increasingly antagonistic Pyongyang.
Without a reliable U.S. nuclear deterrent to counterbalance
our adversaries the potential of proliferation to our allies is
a real concern that we should take just as seriously as what
Russia and the CCP [Chinese Communist Party] are doing.
While our adversaries are making significant qualitative
and quantitative improvements to their nuclear forces, U.S.
programs, whether at NNSA or across the DOD, continue to face
schedule delays and cost overruns.
Just last week, I read that Sentinel, which is planned to
deliver just in time to replace the aging Minuteman III ICBMs,
could be up to 2 years delayed. I am certain any schedule shift
will also be met with a corresponding price tag increase to the
already staggering $96 billion program.
Meanwhile, at NNSA the uranium processing facility is $2
billion over cost and is similarly delayed up to 2 years, and
NNSA's plans to produce plutonium pits at the rate DOD requires
have been delayed, again, by years until the mid to late 2030s
and we won't know how much it will realistically cost until
2025.
We also made public a few weeks ago that the CCP has
surpassed the U.S. in their quantity of ICBM launchers and is
exceeding its own nuclear modernization plans with a path to
get to 1,500 warheads by 2035.
In the 2018 Chinese military power report DIA [Defense
Intelligence Agency] assessed that the purpose of their nuclear
forces was to maintain a limited but survivable second strike
capability consistent with their purported ``no first use''
policy.
There was no mention by the intelligence community just 5
years ago about the potential expansion of their nuclear
arsenal. But, yet, in 2021 they released that they would more
than double their stockpile by 2027.
In other words, while U.S. programs are several years
behind, the Chinese are now several years ahead. This is
unacceptable.
And we don't know yet what a Moscow-Beijing alliance might
portend for all of this. While Russia is sabotaging the last
real example of verifiable arms control, we have yet to see a
clear strategy for engaging the CCP in arms control
discussions.
I hope today's witnesses can help this committee better
understand what is being done on both policy and acquisition to
ensure that U.S. nuclear forces continue to keep us safe.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you for your remarks. We now turn to
our witnesses.
Your prepared statements will be made part of the record.
Since we have a full house today I would ask each of you to
please limit your opening comments to 5 minutes.
Because you don't have a clock in front of you, with 1
minute to go I'll give a light tap on the gavel as a helpful
reminder, hopefully.
And, Assistant Secretary Plumb, you're recognized first.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN F. PLUMB, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE FOR SPACE POLICY, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Plumb. Thank you. Thanks, Chairman Lamborn. Thanks,
Ranking Member Moulton, distinguished members of the committee.
Good morning, and thanks for inviting me to testify on the
fiscal year 2024 defense budget request for nuclear forces
alongside my colleagues, Assistant Secretary Rosenblum, Under
Secretary Hruby, General Bussiere, and Admiral Wolfe.
As Secretary Austin has observed, the U.S. is on the verge
of a challenging and dangerous moment in which we will face two
major nuclear powers and strategic competitors for the first
time, Russia and China.
Both are investing heavily in nuclear weapons and forces to
hold the U.S. and our allies and partners at risk. But neither
is demonstrating the behaviors associated with responsible
nuclear weapon states.
China is engaged in a significant fast-paced expansion and
modernization of its nuclear forces. But China has not shown
interest in establishing dialogue related to nuclear weapons. A
lack of dialogue breeds mistrust in peacetime and can lead to
miscalculation and crisis.
Russia has engaged in nuclear saber-rattling throughout its
unjustified and unprovoked war of aggression in Ukraine. Russia
continues to emphasize nuclear weapons in their strategy and we
expect they will do so even more due to their conventional
force losses in the Ukraine conflict.
Russia's recent declared suspension of its participation in
New START is the latest example of a pattern of irresponsible
behavior and, in addition, of course, there are two near peer
competitors, North Korea and Iran. Both continue to act as
destabilizing forces in their own regions and present
challenges for the global community.
To meet these threats, the 2022 National Defense Strategy
and Nuclear Posture Review are both clear about the urgent need
to strengthen and sustain deterrence.
Now, going back for decades, the United States has under
invested in nuclear modernization but no more, and I thank this
committee for their help on that.
As a tangible sign of the administration's clear commitment
to modernize the triad, the President's 2024 budget request
includes $37.7 billion to recapitalize, sustain, and operate
DOD's nuclear enterprise.
This is $3.3 billion more than the fiscal year 2023 request
and it includes $4.3 billion for the continued development of
the Sentinel ICBM weapon system, $6.2 billion for the Columbia
class SSBN program, $5.3 billion for the B-21 Raider bomber,
almost a billion dollars for the long-range standoff cruise
missile, and $456 million for the life extension of the Trident
II D5 sea-launched ballistic missile.
These investments will ensure that each leg of the triad is
modernized and has the needed adaptability and flexibility to
address a changing threat environment for the coming decades.
The President's budget request also includes more than $7
billion to sustain and recapitalize our Nuclear Command,
Control and Communications architecture, NC3, and in addition
the President's budget requests full funding for our nuclear
security infrastructure to reestablish, repair, and modernize
our production capabilities and infrastructure.
The President's budget will ensure that our strategic
deterrent remains safe, secure, and effective and that our
extended deterrence commitments remain strong and credible.
Sustained and consistent congressional support for this
modernization effort is absolutely essential to ensure the
security of the United States for the coming decades.
So I would like to thank the members of the committee for
your support to this monumental effort and for your tireless
dedication to the department.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Plumb can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Assistant Secretary Rosenblum, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF DEBORAH G. ROSENBLUM, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR NUCLEAR, CHEMICAL, AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE
PROGRAMS, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Ms. Rosenblum. Great.
Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn as well as
Ranking Member Moulton and the distinguished members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity today to be able to
testify regarding the fiscal year 2024 request for U.S. nuclear
forces.
It's a pleasure to join all my colleagues here to discuss
all of the matters that undergird our U.S. nuclear deterrent.
The President's budget request as just outlined by Dr.
Plumb reinforces the importance of these efforts by fully
funding the nuclear sustainment as well as modernization
efforts.
It is no secret that we are navigating a decisive decade.
The decisions that we make as a nation today will have profound
effects on our nuclear deterrent for decades to come.
As the Assistant Secretary for Nuclear, Chemical,
Biological, and Defense Programs, I serve as a senior adviser
and technical expert to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of
Defense on DOD's efforts to sustain and modernize our nuclear
deterrent. I also serve as a staff director for the Nuclear
Weapons Council.
As just well articulated by Dr. Plumb, the global security
environment has continued to deteriorate and we are facing the
prospects of two major nuclear-armed adversaries, both of
whom--Russia and China--are growing and diversifying their
arsenals.
Our adversaries, however, do not represent our only
challenge. Today, we are faced with an unprecedented set of
cross-cutting risks that affect multiple organizations tasked
with sustaining the current nuclear stockpile and
simultaneously modernizing the future nuclear triad.
These risks reside in our nuclear industrial base with our
future warfighter--workforce, excuse me--in supply chain
security and in cybersecurity threats that require action in
the near term in order to make lasting impacts over--for the
deterrent across the next 15 years.
Despite these challenges, we have made significant progress
in our weapons modernization programs, and in my written
statement, which I would ask be submitted for the record,
contains further details. But I'm happy to answer any of them
today for you.
As staff director of the Nuclear Weapons Council, I am also
pleased to report that the NWC is actively making decisions to
modernize a modern, flexible, and balanced stockpile
underpinned by a resilient and responsive production
enterprise.
In addition to executing our statutory responsibilities,
the NWC embarked on an endeavor this past year to think broadly
about the necessary capabilities and capacities potentially
needed for the future and to understand how future requirements
may impact on current plans and schedules and the program of
record.
The council recognizes that it can no longer make
individual decisions related to specific warhead programs but,
rather, the council, with all of the efforts of my colleagues
here at this table, are focused on understanding a suite of
decisions that reflect the priorities of the department and
enable the council to trade and balance risk across the
deterrent and between DOD and the Department of Energy.
Our adversaries' technological advances also pose direct
risks to both our legacy and future nuclear forces. To that
end, I want to thank and acknowledge this subcommittee's
support for the Department of Defense's ongoing 2022 failsafe
risk reduction review.
This represents an historic opportunity to conduct an
enterprise wide review to rebaseline nuclear surety.
Finally, as vice chairman of the NATO High Level Group we
are very focused on and helping to lead NATO's modernization of
the nuclear deterrent and we are working very closely with our
allies on the B61-12 and in close coordination with the U.S.
Air Force and allies to ensure the F-35 is operationally
certified later this year for their dual capable aircraft role.
So with this, I'd like to thank the subcommittee for all of
your support and I look forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rosenblum can be found in
the Appendix on page 45.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Administrator Hruby, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF JILL HRUBY, UNDER SECRETARY FOR NUCLEAR SECURITY
AND ADMINISTRATOR OF THE NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Ms. Hruby. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member
Moulton, and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to present the President's fiscal year 2024 budget
request for the Department of Energy's National Nuclear
Security Administration.
Chairman Lamborn, a written statement has been provided and
I respectfully request that it be submitted for the record.
The deteriorating international security environment
reminds us daily of the importance and urgency of the NNSA
missions. This security atmosphere and the ramifications of
Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine are expanding the scope
of our responsibilities.
As a result, we are laser focused on the need to accelerate
delivery in all of our missions while simultaneously advancing
the foundational science and technology that provides the
United States with comprehensive deterrence.
I am proud of NNSA's progress. The B61-12 and the W88 Alt
370 are in full-scale production and are achieving planned
deployment schedules. The other three weapon modernization
programs--the W80-4, the W87-1, and the W93--are making
significant progress.
Our investments in pit production have advanced the ability
to produce 80 pits per year as close to 2030 as possible. At
Los Alamos we have produced 40 developmental pit builds with
the first production unit expected late in calendar year 2024.
The investments made at the Savannah River pit production
facility has accelerated progress by conducting early site
preparation, removal of unneeded equipment, and procuring long
lead items.
The uranium processing facility is over 50 percent complete
with the first four nonnuclear sub projects concluded.
Nonproliferation efforts also continue to succeed with three
disposals of surplus plutonium, removal of weapons usable
materials from countries around the world, and replacement of
almost 100 Cesium irradiators from U.S. facilities. We have
partnered with Ukraine and neighboring countries to train
emergency responders and we have provided equipment to the
Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant.
Additionally, the Office of Naval Reactors has completed
the refueling and overhaul of the prototype land-based reactor
in New York, progressed development of the Columbia class and
SSN(X) [Next-Generation Attack Submarine] submarine propulsion
systems and supported AUKUS.
I'm especially pleased to say the entire enterprise is
energized because of the importance of our mission, our
emphasis on accelerated delivery, and our investments in
science, technology, infrastructure, and workforce.
NNSA's fiscal year 2024 budget request of $23.8 billion, an
increase of $1.7 billion over fiscal year 2023 enacted levels,
reflects current national security priorities and remains
consistent with the Nuclear Posture Review and other
administration policies and strategies.
The budget request supports the five ongoing weapon
modernization programs, two Phase One exploratory efforts, and
enhanced cybersecurity for our networks and digital assurance
of our weapons and enterprise.
The request responds to inflationary pressures, supply
chain and labor shortages in the construction sector by
prioritizing funding for ongoing large-scale nuclear production
modernization efforts and expansion of nonnuclear production
capabilities while delaying some planned construction
activities to maximize success.
The budget request in defense nuclear nonproliferation
continues nuclear risk reduction work and supports our robust
nonproliferation regime and international partnerships and
advances associated research.
Expanding nonproliferation portfolio priorities include the
support for Ukraine and preparing for a growing and evolving
civil nuclear power fleet.
The naval reactors' budget request continues to support
reactor designs for new systems, provides a qualitative edge
for our naval fleet, and funds the recently rebaselined spent
fuel handling facility.
Before closing, I want to express my appreciation for my
colleagues from the Department of Defense for their strong
collaboration. We continue to focus both--on both short- and
long-range planning to align our respective mission
deliverables to maintain a safe, secure, reliable, and
effective nuclear deterrent at all times.
The priorities and challenges for NNSA are clear and
progress is being made. With your continued support I'm
confident we will succeed.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hruby can be found in the
Appendix on page 55.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
General Bussiere, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL THOMAS A. BUSSIERE, COMMANDER, AIR FORCE
GLOBAL STRIKE COMMAND, UNITED STATES AIR FORCE

General Bussiere. Good morning, Chairman Lamborn and
Ranking Member Moulton, and distinguished committee members.
I'm absolutely honored to be here today to represent the men
and women of Air Force Global Strike Command and provide you an
update on our mission, our airmen, our modernization efforts,
and the challenges we face in sustaining our legacy weapon
systems.
As you know, the world is a very different place than it
was in 2019 when this command was activated. The Air Force
Global Strike Command was created to ensure the Air Force
dedicated the appropriate leadership and oversight over our
nation's nuclear mission.
As the commander of Air Force Global Strike Command I
intend to ensure no one forgets why our command exists. For the
first time in history the U.S. faces two major nuclear powers
as strategic competitors.
China continues to expand, modernize, diversify their
nuclear forces and is the foremost country positioned to
reshape its region and the international order to comply with
its authoritarian purposes.
Meanwhile, President Putin has engaged in reckless rhetoric
about the use of nuclear weapons as Russia persists in their
unprovoked attacks on Ukraine in an attempt to expand their
power and influence.
Air Force Global Strike Command remains the bedrock of our
nation's defense and the international assurance against these
threats. We are postured to respond to the strategic
competition our nation currently faces.
We are responsible for the air- and land-based legs of the
nuclear triad and, fundamentally, we are the long-range strike
force for the free world. The entire inventory of U.S. bombers
and intercontinental ballistic missiles rests within our
command.
I'd like to thank the members of this committee for your
steadfast support for our continued efforts to modernize our
weapon systems. I will briefly highlight some of our ongoing
initiatives.
We continue to maintain and sustain our current Minuteman
III ICBMs and we already are preparing our wings and their
surrounding communities to receive our future ICBM, the
Sentinel.
Additionally, our bomber fleet including our B-1s and our
dual capable B-2s and B-52s are being sustained with innovative
solutions as we prepare for the future bomber fleet, including
the B-21 Raider and the modernized B-52J.
In addition to the ICBM and bomber fleets, we continue our
efforts to modernize our Nuclear Command, Control and
Communications, or NC3. As you know, NC3 is integral to the
national military command system used to exercise and conduct
continuous, survivable, and secure nuclear command and control.
We are at a critical time for the United States. The
threats we face are more complicated and more dangerous than
any time in my career. The evolving global environment demands
a credible strategic deterrence and to achieve this Air Force
Global Strike Command must continue to modernize at the speed
of relevance.
Unique to our command is our requirement to maintain full
operational capability with our legacy nuclear weapons systems
to answer the President's call until the new weapon systems are
fully operational.
The nation's nuclear enterprise is the foundation of our
nation's defense and integrated deterrence will not operate as
designed without the stability it provides.
To maintain the security of our nation and of our allies
and partners the U.S. must ensure our weapons are capable and
ready, our airmen are empowered and equipped. The airmen of Air
Force Global Strike Command continue to fulfill our mission
with discipline, excellence, and pride.
However, a number of our airmen also face personal
challenges including health concerns, housing and childcare
availability, and we are working to develop prompt and
comprehensive solutions to ensure our airmen are getting the
care they need and deserve.
Last December I was honored to be confirmed to be the
commander of Air Force Global Strike Command. There is no other
job I would rather have. Strategic deterrence and long-range
strike are foundational to our nation's defense and Air Force
Global Strike Command is the backbone of these mission sets.
With our legacy platforms and our modernized forces and our
devoted people we safeguard our nation now and the decades to
come.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Bussiere can be found in
the Appendix on page 80.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Vice Admiral Wolfe, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL JOHNNY WOLFE, DIRECTOR,
STRATEGIC SYSTEMS PROGRAMS, UNITED STATES NAVY

Admiral Wolfe. Good morning, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking
Member Moulton, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Department of
the Navy's budget priorities for nuclear forces.
I'd like to thank this subcommittee for its continued
support of the Navy's nuclear deterrence mission. The mission
of my command, Strategic Systems Programs, is to provide
credible and affordable strategic solutions to the warfighter.
To quote from the administration's 2022 Nuclear Posture
Review and as said many times already this morning, in a
dynamic security environment a safe effective nuclear deterrent
is foundational to broader U.S. defense strategy and the
extended deterrence commitments we have made to allies and
partners.
For nearly 7 decades the Navy has provided unwavering
support to the sea-based leg of the nuclear triad. The coming
year will build on this remarkable history.
Later this year, the Navy will conduct the final
demonstration and shakedown operation for an Ohio class
ballistic missile submarine, demonstrating the unmatched
reliability of our sea-based nuclear deterrent.
Alongside our partners in the U.K. we will celebrate the
60th anniversary of the Polaris Sales Agreement. In
coordination with our colleagues at NNSA the W93/Mk7 program
continues on schedule, further demonstrating our commitment to
responsible stewardship of the nuclear stockpile.
As this work shows, we must continue to sustain today's
deterrent while modernizing for the future. The Navy continues
to manage the nuclear strategic weapon system across three main
mission priorities: sustaining the current weapon system D5LE
through Ohio end-of-life, developing the strategic weapon
system of the future, D5LE2 for the Columbia class, and
safeguarding our special relationship with the United Kingdom
embodied in the Polaris Sales Agreement.
First and foremost, we must maintain the current D5LE
missile inventory and provide the necessary operational support
to sustain Ohio class submarines through the end of their life
in the early 2040s.
All of our life extension efforts remain on track and our
current program will support the deployment of all existing
warheads. We must also recapitalize our supporting Navy nuclear
deterrent mission infrastructure to support and sustain nuclear
weapons and SSBN operations that enable sea-based strategic
deterrence.
Secondly, we must continue to ensure the transition between
Ohio class and Columbia class submarine stays on schedule. For
my command, SSP [Strategic Systems Programs], this requires a
seamless transition of the current Trident II D5LE weapon
system and missile inventory onto the new Columbia class
ballistic missile submarine.
We have already started the work on the next variant of
Trident and its corresponding weapon system. This next
generation of D5LE missile, D5LE2, will continue to meet
required missile performance while providing flexibility in the
system to adapt to meet future warfighter requirements.
D5LE2 will be necessary to outload the Columbia class SSBNs
starting with Hull 9, ensuring that Trident remains credible
until at least 2084.
In order to achieve this requirement we must design,
develop, produce, and test this next-generation Trident over
the coming decade with the first flight test scheduled for
2033.
Finally, one of the greatest advantage the United States
has is its alliances and partnerships. As the U.S. project
officer for the Polaris Sales Agreement I will continue to
support the U.K.'s sovereign deterrent for today's Vanguard
class submarines and their successor, the Dreadnought class.
For decades U.S. policy had recognized that the independent
British nuclear deterrent adds to NATO and, indeed, global
stability. Execution of these three mission priorities is only
possible through investments in our people, our infrastructure,
and our industrial base.
Our government and contractor teams are working hard to
deliver a safe, secure, and effective strategic weapon system
that will ensure sea-based strategic deterrence. Nuclear
modernization will take time to complete so sustained
resourcing and enterprise effort is absolutely essential.
Chairman, as you said, we can no longer put off
recapitalizing the nuclear triad. Our strategic competitors are
not idle.
Ranking Member, as you said, Russia and China's nuclear
arsenal is our nation's biggest existential threat. It is only
through your continued support that the department's top
modernization program priorities can be achieved and the Navy
can deliver a reliable sea-based strategic deterrent
capability.
As the fourteenth director it is my highest honor to
represent the men and women of SSP. I echo General Cotton's
comments before this committee recently where he said, I quote,
``Our people are the foundation of every capability that
enables strategic deterrence,'' end quote.
My number-one priority is to ensure that they are poised to
execute the mission with the same level of success, passion,
and rigor that has characterized our workforce since our
program was founded in 1955.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of
the dedicated Americans that make deterrence of major power
conflict their life's work.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Vice Admiral Wolfe can be found
in the Appendix on page 95.]
The Chairman. All right. Thank you, and thanks to all of
you for being here this morning and we'll now start with our
questions.
Administrator Hruby, on the topic of NNSA workforce in our
office call you and I discussed earlier the trouble we're
having recruiting and retaining enough specialized craft and
trade workers across the country at locations like New Mexico,
South Carolina, and Texas.
The NNSA facilities in these States are critical for
reconstituting plutonium, pit production, assemble Tritium
packages, and modernizing our high explosive science
capabilities.
If recruiting is so hard why can't we just pay potential
workers more? Wouldn't that save money in the long run?
Ms. Hruby. Yeah. Thank you for that question. You're
absolutely right. Of all of the issues that we have with
construction labor shortages are our biggest concern and the
biggest cost driver, and craft workers are a large part of
that.
We will look at all options for attracting more craft
workers. For example, we're actively recruiting people who are
coming off the Civil Nuclear Power Plant Vogtle to work at
Savannah River, which is relatively nearby.
We're working with all the union shops. We have
apprenticeship programs that we're funding and we will look at
paying higher wages. So we'll look at all of those options. We
have--now that we are tracking very closely our craft worker
shortage, I think we can tailor those solutions in a more
effective way.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Okay, thank you.
On the Sentinel delay I want to ask several questions here.
Secretary Plumb, I'll start with you.
From a policy point of view, recapitalizing the land-based
leg of the triad with the Sentinel program is something this
administration is completely committed to. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Plumb. Absolutely, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you. And, Secretary Rosenblum, as the
witness from the Acquisition and Sustainment Office is it
correct to say the changes in the Sentinel schedule are the
result of macroeconomic factors and that the need for the
program remains unchanged?
Ms. Rosenblum. Yes, that is true.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
And, General Bussiere, let's drill down into this just a
little more. You're responsible for sustaining the current
Minuteman III system. Do you agree that the need for the
Sentinel program has not changed?
General Bussiere. Chairman Lamborn, absolutely not. It
hasn't changed. We struggle with our current maintenance and
sustainment of the Minuteman III. I mean, it's a very old
weapon system.
In the last 5 years, we have had 2.5 million maintenance
man hours, which was a 30 percent increase over the previous 5
years, and we're anticipating a 25 percent increase in the next
5 years. So the solution to that aging weapon system is the
Sentinel.
The Chairman. And with some delays in the Sentinel will
these life extension programs that you've just articulated be
enough to say that we have a reliable and credible nuclear
deterrent in the meantime?
General Bussiere. Yes, Chairman Lamborn, I would agree with
that statement. So I know you're going to get a lot more
information from Honorable LaPlante tomorrow, but this--the
size, scope, and scale of the Sentinel deployment over, as you
know, a 10 year period and the unique aspects of having to
maintain full operational capability of the Minuteman III
system until replaced by the Sentinel.
So we'll have both systems as we transition over,
essentially, a decade and the unique aspects of that is as we
field Sentinel we're going to harvest the parts that we can
from Minuteman to maintain the Minuteman until completely
replaced.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
Admiral Wolfe, can you describe the need for a second life
extension for the D5 missile and why production of additional
DSLE missiles is not practical?
Admiral Wolfe. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question.
Yeah. So if you look at where we're at with our industrial
base, we have gone out of production on, essentially, every
major component of the Trident D5 life-extended missile. So
that's the first issue. We have got to address obsolescence and
life issues of the current system.
Additionally, as we start to field Columbias, and if you
remember in my opening statement I talked about the 9th Hull of
the Columbia class, the reason that is so important is because
at that point the current inventory of Trident D5 life-
extension missiles that we have got will not be sufficient to
outfit from Columbia Hull 9 and into the future for the
remaining platforms and then back fit where we need to get on
the first date.
So both of those are driving the need for us to have
additional assets to both life extend and provide those to
Colombia for the future.
The Chairman. Okay, thank you.
General Bussiere, back to you. How are you preparing to
field the Sentinel missile and what investments in equipment
and personnel will be necessary to meet the planned deployment
schedule?
General Bussiere. Chairman Lamborn, there's a lot of facets
for fielding this weapon system. The first point I'd like to
make is the full operational capability is a unique part of any
weapon system in the Air Force, or in the department for that
matter, where you have to maintain full operational capability
versus off ramp and on ramp, typical of other weapons systems.
So that's a unique aspect of it.
It'll require increased manpower for that transitionary
period. It'll require our operators, our maintainers, our
defenders, to have to maintain those two weapon systems as we
transition.
It will take a great partnership between Air Force Global
Strike Command or Force Materiel Command, the Army Corps of
Engineers, our communities and partners, members of this
committee, as we take on what's been reported as one of the
largest work projects in the last 50 years for our nation.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you. And while I've got you
can you update us on something that's come out in the news
recently and that is the possibility of higher cancer findings
with people that have been involved in these programs? Where do
we stand on researching and getting to the bottom of that?
General Bussiere. Thank you for asking that question,
Chairman Lamborn.
It was illuminated in January from a member of Space Force
that used to be serving in the Air Force as an ICBM operator at
Malmstrom Air Force Base and this member had been diagnosed
with non-Hodgkins lymphoma and several of his colleagues that
had served at Malstrom about 15 to 18 years ago had also been
diagnosed with non-Hodgkins lymphoma.
So although there had been previous studies specific to
Malstrom, I asked the Air Force Surgeon General and the Chief
and the Secretary if I could do a more comprehensive study that
looked across all of our AFSCs--Air Force Specialty Codes--that
serve in the missile field operations at all three of our bases
to make sure we have a deep understanding if we're putting our
airmen at risk, and if we are we're going to mitigate it.
So about 2 weeks ago we started our efforts. The first
phase is to look at all the cancer registries in the Department
of Defense as well as those that are available from the State
level and see if we have higher incident rates within the areas
that we do missile field operations, and if we do then we're
going to go down into the next level of the study to assess
what is causal and then, hopefully, be able to mitigate it.
The Chairman. Do you have a time line on how that long--how
long that's going to take?
General Bussiere. We're anticipating getting the data. The
database is going to take anywhere from 6 to 10 months. But
we're not going to wait until that's done. If we find something
then we're going to drill down into that causal area.
The Chairman. Okay. And please keep the subcommittee and
full committee informed on that.
General Bussiere. Absolutely, Chairman.
The Chairman. And, lastly, my last question will be who can
update us on--we have talked about the other programs in more
detail, but the LRSO [Long Range Standoff Weapon]--who'd like
to give us a breakdown on where that stands right now?
Ms. Rosenblum. Yes, I can, Representative.
The LRSO achieved milestone B in 2021. It remains on track.
It's currently in the EMD [Engineering and Manufacturing
Development] phase. And I'll ask Administrator Hruby to provide
detail with regards to the warhead for the LRSO. But the big
takeaway is it remains on track.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
Representative Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Bussiere, you have detailed how tricky this
transition is from Minuteman III to Sentinel and how Minuteman
III is aging quickly. So how are we going to deal with this 2
year delay?
General Bussiere. Ranking Member Moulton, I wouldn't
necessarily characterize what was in the press as equating to a
2 year delay. So what I think the program office is doing very
innovatively is they bundled the weapon system into kind of
three different areas.
So there's the missile itself. Then there's the command and
control architecture or the launch facility or the
construction--the MILCON [Military Construction]. And then
there's the support equipment, and they've kind of bundled all
that.
What I think the article kind of illuminated was
potentially the macroeconomic impacts to the missile itself as
well as some workforce challenges the contractor is having.
But what it doesn't illuminate is the success not only in
organizing this large project the way this--the project office
has done it but also the fact that they've moved certain things
left of schedule and had great successes, for example, recently
with a stage one rocket.
So there's a very discrete challenge in the missile based
on workforce and technology. But other facets of this program
are actually moving left of schedule.
Right now, I am not--you know, 3 years into a 7 year
developmental process of this program I have confidence that
the program office--and, again, I believe Dr. LaPlante will
provide more illumination of this tomorrow--is able to take
that program where it needs to go.
Mr. Moulton. Do you think there's anything more important
for our national security as a nation that we are doing than
this kind of program?
General Bussiere. No, sir. I think--in my opinion, this is
our nation's most important mission.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. So if it's our most important mission I
hope there is a plan to not just limit further delays but to
actually get us back on track, because I would point out that
the macroeconomic challenges that you described--the troubles
because of COVID, the supply chain issues because of COVID,
worldwide COVID economic recession--those are all challenges
that our adversaries have faced as well. And, yet, China is
exceeding their schedule. They're getting ahead while we're
getting behind.
I mean, I like to think that we can outcompete China at
everything and, yet, here we are just trying to build a
technology that fundamentally has existed for 60 years and
we're way behind. That's just--at the macro level it is
fundamentally unacceptable.
So I appreciate all the hard work you're doing. It's
encouraging to hear that some things are left of schedule. But
I think the goal has to be to 100 percent get this back on
track.
General Bussiere. Ranking Member, I couldn't agree with you
more and I believe the department and the Air Force has made
this a priority, and I would absolutely love to see the nation
make it a priority also, not just department priority.
Mr. Moulton. Well, I think the nation has made it a
priority because taxpayers are funding this to a 100 percent.
General Bussiere. Yeah. Ranking Member, I wasn't
referencing the funding stream. I was referencing, you know,
great innovative minds wanting to come and work in this
business----
Mr. Moulton. Got it.
General Bussiere. ----et cetera, where the nation our
talented youth go, I want to go serve in that capacity to
defend our nation.
Mr. Moulton. Well, that's a very good point. We should--we
should continue that discussion.
ASD Rosenblum, do you have anything to add to this?
Ms. Rosenblum. Yeah. No, thank you very much, and I know
you'll hear tomorrow from Dr. LaPlante along with Chairman
Lamborn.
Just a few highlights with regards to this. This remains
absolutely one of the department's top priority so that we have
a sustainable ICBM leg. There have been a number of
constructive recommendations that the Air Force has made to Dr.
LaPlante by way of buying things in lead--long lead items and a
variety of different acquisition mechanisms that he has
approved last night. He'll be able to detail those for you
tomorrow.
The department has also used to full effect the Defense
Production Act in giving the Sentinel program the DX rating,
which means with suppliers it will be preferenced and we are
also working hard along with the Air Force with regards to some
of the workforce challenges. So it is really a combined OSD
[Office of the Secretary of Defense] and Air Force effort to
make sure that this program remains on track.
As of now, we believe we're still aiming for the threshold
objective date of 2030. But it would be premature to let you
know the degree to which these particular actions will move the
schedule further to the left.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. Thank you very much.
Dr. Plumb, what specific options is the administration
considering to respond to Russia's suspension of New START?
Mr. Plumb. Thanks for that question, Ranking Member
Moulton.
So just to lay the base work, on February 28th, as I
testified last time, Russia passed its law and suspended--
declared they were suspending participation in New START and we
have not received any daily notifications from them since that
time.
Just this week--which, yes, that's yesterday--we had a
further interaction with Russia pressing them on the upcoming
end of the month there is due a semiannual data exchange. Every
6 months under the treaty we exchange data on kind of high
level numbers.
Russia responded that they will not be providing that
information, and so as a diplomatic countermeasure the United
States will not be providing that information back.
We are going to continue to examine what are the diplomatic
countermeasures that are appropriate and what we're trying to
do, sir, is balance both responding to Russia's irresponsible
behavior but to continue to demonstrate what we believe a
responsible nuclear power's action should be.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. With respect to China there are a lot of
analysts, observers, who think that China is not going to be
willing to enter arms control discussions until they,
essentially, reach parity with the United States.
Is there any daylight there? Is there any places where we
might be able to convince them to come to the negotiating table
before that point?
Mr. Plumb. I mean, I think we should all hold out hope and
we should continue to pursue. I do believe there are a track
two, which is, you know, nongovernmental conversations that go
on. But as far as track one, I'm not aware of any progress on
that front.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. This is something that the Chairman and
I have discussed as we would like to see a real strategy here
for how we're going to and even just imagine an arms control
framework that encompasses dealing with two peer adversaries.
Now, I'm just asking how do we even start the discussion
with China. But to think behind the scenes about how we get to
this point where we have some trilateral arms control agreement
is something that we should be thinking about today even before
they're willing to come to the table.
One final question for Administrator Hruby. Your fiscal
year 2024 budget request shows increasing costs, schedule slips
for many of the programs and projects that are key, as you've
detailed.
Will NNSA's enhanced mission delivery initiative outlined
in the September 2022 report allow the agency to recover
schedule and cost overruns? And can you provide specific
examples of how NNSA will hold contractors accountable for
their performance, including cost control?
Ms. Hruby. Yeah. Thank you, Congressman Moulton.
The EMDI initiative stands for Enhanced Mission Delivery
Initiative. It was aimed at making our enterprise more
efficient across the board in many ways.
With respect to construction projects and the delays
associated with that there's one specific recommendation that
has to do with the inefficiencies involved in acquisition that
we're working very hard on. That should save us weeks or months
every year in the approvals between the people doing the work,
the contractors doing the work, and the government.
So it is specifically aimed at improving the schedules for
the construction projects and all the efficiencies across the
enterprise.
Mr. Moulton. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. And by way of reminder, upon every
member here asking their questions in this open hearing we'll
immediately go into recess for a brief time and reconvene up in
2337 in the SCIF [sensitive compartmented information facility]
for everyone who has the appropriate clearance.
Representative Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank each of you
for your service, and I am really grateful.
Chairman Doug Lamborn was correctly concerned, Secretary
Hruby, about tritium production. I'll be getting to a question
on that.
And then it's really bipartisan, as you see, our hopes for
all of you to succeed for the American people, and in
particular I agree with Ranking Member Seth Moulton that we
have got a situation, obviously, with war criminal Putin where
he just this week has--aside from murdering people in Ukraine
he's now threatening the security of the people of Belarus by
placing nuclear capabilities there, and that should be a
sovereign country, which has been virtually annexed by Putin.
And then we have the Chinese Communist Party, obviously,
making threats to Taiwan, to America, and then it was
disconcerting to me that the Chinese spy balloon could easily
have been monitoring the Savannah River site as it traversed
across North and South Carolina.
And then with the regime in Tehran, the threats that they
make, their capabilities of developing ICBMs in the midst of
anything else, and then they have a goal and it's the
vaporization of Israel, the vaporization of the United States.
And so as we have democracies the rule of gun facing the
authoritarians' rule of law--by rule of gun and democracies
rule of law, again, I just want to thank you for what you're
doing.
And, Secretary Hruby, I'm really grateful that the
communities of South Carolina and adjacent Georgia are
extremely supportive of the plutonium pit production mission at
the Savannah River site, and maintaining the enacted levels for
this is necessary for nuclear deterrence.
With that, sadly, the NNSA will not be able to meet the
requirement of producing 80 pits per year by 2030. How critical
is it that we do everything we can to minimize the delay and
reach the requirements as close to 2030 as possible?
Ms. Hruby. Well, thank you, and I appreciate the question
and I definitely appreciate the support from the local
communities in South Carolina. The pit production--recreating
the ability to make pits in the United States at the rate of
about 80 per year starting in 2030 remains important.
We also have known for a couple years now that this--the
2030 date was going to be complicated for us, that 80 pits
are--we're going to make 80 pits per year. In fact, we're
likely to make more than 80 pits per year because of the demand
once we get up and running.
But the time requirement is very difficult for us. While we
continue to try to do everything we can and we have made some
important decisions thanks to the support last year--the
funding last year, we're doing some acceleration activities
with prebuying equipment, with doing demolition in the existing
building that needs to be done before we can start new
construction, and some other site preparation work and
training--in a high-fidelity training facility.
So we're doing lots of things to try to accelerate progress
and, most importantly is we're working with my colleagues here
in the Nuclear Weapons Council to make sure that we have a
credible plan to keep our--and then this case it's associated
with the ground-based ICBMs--to keep those systems, you know,
reliable at all times.
And so we have--we're accelerating pit production and we're
working closely to make sure schedules stay aligned and that
our nuclear deterrent is effective.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you.
And, again, Chairman Lamborn is correct again on his
concern about the tritium production, and this is so important
because it makes nuclear weapons--a thermo nuclear weapons--it
boosts the chain reaction inside the weapon and increases
magnitude dramatically.
The tritium finishing facility is being--is replacing a
part of the overall Savannah River site tritium enterprise,
which was built in the 1950s and now it's been zeroed out, and
there's been $120 million already spent on this and it's--
unlike most radioactive elements tritium decays very fast and
therefore the stockpile must be replenished frequently.
And so what's being done because of the tritium finishing
facility for funding in the future?
Ms. Hruby. Yeah, thanks for that question. We did--we
have--we did zero out, so to speak, but we haven't cancelled.
We're delaying the tritium finishing facility for one reason
and one reason only is so that we can concentrate on getting
the Savannah River pit production facility as close to be
finished as close to 2030 as possible.
We have a significant craft labor shortage. If we have two
big projects going on at once we're going to have a bigger
craft labor shortage. So we're delaying the tritium finishing
facility. We'll restart it.
If you look at the FYNSP [Future-Years Nuclear Security
Program] we'll restart it in 2027 with construction expected to
start again in 2029 as it fits into the overall construction
plan with SRPPF [Savannah River Plutonium Processing Facility].
So we know the--we know we can maintain the current tritium
facility. We will not--we will have tritium for our gas
bottles. We're just trying to update that facility, make it
more modern. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
Mr. Garamendi. I'm just trying to get my head around all
the happy talk that I've heard. The fact of the matter is every
single one of these systems are behind schedule and over
budget. Every single one of them, and the happy talk from each
and every one of you doesn't get down to the detail. I'm going
to delay my questions until we can get into a classified
session when we can get past the happy talk and get down to
details.
For example, not one word about the cost of the
infrastructure for the Sentinel. No information at all about
what it's going to cost to build the infrastructure or when it
would be completed.
On pit production, good luck on South Carolina--on Savannah
River. If there's ever a place that's delayed, and Joe--well,
now that he's not here I'll just unload. It has never been on
schedule for anything and here you go again with another delay.
With regard to the Sentinel, delay, delay, delay. Command and
control, which is probably the most important, we just get
happy talk. We don't get any detail.
The Columbia, oh, now we're going to have to--we're going
to have to refit the Ohio because the Columbia is delayed.
Pit production--at Los Alamos, where is it? What is it?
When will it be and at what cost? No information from any of
you, but then this is public.
I yield back my time. I'm going to go--I look forward to
the classified.
The Chairman. Representative Turner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I'd like to defend South Carolina for Joe
Wilson. The second thing is is I want to say this is the first
time I think I've been in a Strategic Forces Subcommittee
hearing where I can actually say I completely agree with
everything Mr. Garamendi has just said because there's a lot of
things that we disagree on but I completely agree with him on
our being behind and over budget and how critical this is.
Mr. Garamendi. You're going to ruin your reputation and
mine.
Mr. Turner. Yeah, that's right. But we're good friends so
that helps that we can agree on this.
So in the Intel Committee just yesterday we had a hotspot--
so Ms. Houlahan serves with me on the Intelligence Committee--
on focusing on Russia and China and their nuclear weapons, both
deployed stockpiles and their research projects. Of course,
it's classified. I don't want to talk about classified things.
We're going to--you'll have the opportunity later to talk
about classified things. But there's a number of things that
are not classified that, General, Admiral, I want to discuss
with you.
And, General, you said for the first time we're going to be
facing--and it's not in your written testimony but I want to
highlight in your--in your testimony that you read to us you
highlighted the fact that, you know, China is in the midst of,
you know, strategic breakthroughs, rapid nuclear expansion, and
that Russia is doing the same--that our environment has
changed.
So I want to focus on that with the two of you. Would you
both agree that in the aggregate that China and Russia are
increasing their number of deployed nuclear weapons, their
stockpiles--that both are increasing?
General.
General Bussiere. So, Congressman, as it relates to Russia,
if you believe what they stated they're going to comply with
the New START treaty deployed operational----
Mr. Turner. That's just strategic. I'm talking about
aggregate.
General Bussiere. For nontreaty accountable weapons they've
expanded and diversified that portfolio. It's not accountable
under any treaty program. The unclassified numbers are around
2,000 and we can discuss other things in the closed hearing.
Mr. Turner. So back to my question, do you agree that China
and Russia are increasing their aggregate deployed nuclear
weapons and their stockpiles?
General Bussiere. So that was Russia. As it relates to
China, absolutely. They're rapidly diversifying and modernizing
and deploying.
Mr. Turner. General, I really would like a yes here.
General Bussiere. Yes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you.
Admiral, do you agree that China and Russia are increasing
their aggregate deployed nuclear weapons and stockpiles?
Admiral Wolfe. Yes.
Mr. Turner. Excellent. General Admiral, we signed the New
START treaty in 2010. Russia, since that time period, has
announced Skyfall, which they tested in 2019 post New START;
Poseidon, their underwater, unmanned or torpedo, however you
want to refer to it, 2023; Avanguard, their hypersonic weapon;
and what we call Satan, their larger MIRV [Multiple
Independently-targetable Reentry Vehicles] that could have up
to 15 nuclear warheads.
All of those are since New START. China is also developing
a hypersonic nuclear weapon that would orbit the Earth. They've
tested it most recently.
General, Admiral, in our plans for modernization are we--
are we planning new nuclear weapons, new nuclear capabilities
or are we modernizing the capabilities we have? Because these
are new. Many people call these novel nuclear weapons. These
are new capabilities. Do we have on the board any new
capabilities?
General Bussiere. Congressman, no.
Admiral Wolfe. Congressman, I agree with the general. I
would say no except for the fact that for the Navy, the W93/Mk7
will be a third variant of warhead that the Navy will deploy as
we work within NNSA. Our focus then is on just modernizing what
we have in Trident today.
Mr. Turner. Sure. So Ms. Hruby, Dr. Plumb, we have, I
believe, as a fallacy pursued the view in policy that if we
constrict, if we go down in our numbers, that others will
follow. Clearly, China and Russia are not following. They're
reaching new capabilities. They're increasing their overall
numbers.
Why then when we get our Nuclear Posture Review there's no
change other than the fact that you're recommending that we get
rid of SLCM [Submarine-launched Cruise Missile]? Why is it that
in a period of expansion and as we look--in the future we're
going to have expansion--that there's no recommendation from
this administration of a change in our nuclear posture?
Mr. Plumb. So, Congressman, first of all, thank you for the
question.
Second, I'll just say that under the current security
environment we see no need to change our nuclear force posture.
But the Nuclear Posture Review makes clear that we're going
to continually review the security environment and make changes
if required, and so I don't want the concept that we're not
changing right now to indicate that we aren't looking towards
the future and constantly reevaluating to see what might need
to be done.
Mr. Turner. Do you have an answer also?
Ms. Rosenblum. Yes. I would just concur with what Dr. Plumb
has just articulated.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. Okay. Representative Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for being here today.
From the opening comments of both the chair and the ranking
member along with many statements by our witnesses, we continue
to talk about the challenges of the workforce, the craft worker
in particular, and what we have heard is there are issues,
delays, narrowing of the projects, when projects are going to
be started because of the workforce, and the statement of risk
of our industrial base, our workforce, our cyber.
But what I'm not hearing is--we know it's a problem. I'm
not hearing any specifics on how we are addressing this. For
the chairman to bring out why can't we pay them more is a
rather simple question but it goes right to the heart of it.
What are we doing? Knowing that these projects are going to
continue through the course of the next decade, how are we
addressing other than saying it's a problem?
And let's go right down the line. Would you please address
what specifically are we doing to make sure we have the
workforce? We can take care of the hardware. We can make sure
that all of the items that we need will be on the table.
But if nobody's there to install it that has the expertise,
help me understand this.
Ms. Rosenblum. Yeah, let me kick off.
Representative, you've done a very nice job of articulating
the challenge that's facing this country across the board where
we no longer have a robust manufacturing workforce and it's
something that our country needs to be recreating.
Specifically at the Department of Defense we are investing
in the current workforce as well as developing under the
Defense Production Act a number of programs and projects that
are designed to develop the workforce that we will need over
the next 10 to 15 years investing ----
Mr. Norcross. Okay. Hold on--just one moment so we get a
better understanding. We have the manufacturing and then we
have the construction--two completely different worlds.
But when you talk about the Defense Act that was recently
put on for hypersonics what programs do we have that that has
been applied to and what does that do to increase?
Ms. Rosenblum. So under the industrial base analysis
program we have monies that are used in order to build programs
to train welders, to train mechanics, to train construction
workers, everything that we are going to need across the
nuclear modernization program, whether it be on the East Coast
in terms of our submarine force, working closely with the Navy
with regards to that as well as some of the other areas.
I'll leave it to Administrator Hruby to speak specifically
to the NNSA complex. It's something that the department is
investing in over the long term, recognizing that we will
continue these modernization programs over the next 10 to 15
years and it is an area of focus for both Secretary Austin as
well as our deputy secretary in terms of having both the
commercial and the organic workforce that we need.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
Administrator.
Ms. Hruby. Yeah, thanks for this question. It's a very
important question and I appreciate your interest in it. I want
to start by saying we have taken a lot of actions in our
science and technology workforce.
In fiscal year 2022 we instituted a--and distributed a
midyear pay increase to stop attrition, which was the highest
we'd seen in the history of the complex. We leaned into
flexible benefits and pay adjustments for 2023 as well and
we're seeing our attrition come back to closer to normal rates.
We all have to continue to watch that because without that
workforce there is nothing to construct or--right. So we're
looking at that. We have taken lots of action now. We have also
started apprenticeship programs for our craft workers.
We're working with the communities near the--in the areas
near our plant. But we haven't--I mean, I'll say we need to be
broader about pay increases. I mean, we do try to be good
stewards of taxpayers' dollars so we have to make sure that's
going to work before we just willy nilly do it.
But we will look at everything. This is an issue. We
recognize it is an issue. We thought we would recover but we
have a shortage of workers and, honestly, the productivity of
workers is not where it has been historically where it's been a
new space that we're tracking as closely as possible, and we
appreciate your support and interest and where we're equally
interested.
Mr. Norcross. Chairman, again, thank you for bringing this
up, and as I leave--I'm going to over to Education and Labor to
have the hearing on unleashing our hiring, which will be rather
short but----
The Chairman. I see a connection there.
Mr. Norcross. Could be. I yield back.
The Chairman. Very good.
Representative Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, everybody, for
being here today. I appreciate your leadership and your
dedication to our country.
One of the main of two objectives I have in the Armed
Services this Congress is to ensure that we can have a 100
percent reliable nuclear command and control survivability. We
used--I think we used to have it but I'm not so sure we have it
today.
You know, we had a 24/7 airborne command and control
operations for 3 decades that ended in 1990. After the
communist government fell in Moscow, after the Berlin Wall
fell, we rightfully thought, hey, the world is a safer place.
We stopped those 24/7 airborne operations with a general
onboard to take control if need be.
Then in 1998 we deactivated the EC-135 that had the Looking
Glass mission. We transitioned it to the E-6s in the Navy. But
today there's not enough E-6 aircraft to fly extended 24/7
airborne operations.
We used to have a 35 minute warning time when it comes to
ICBMs, perhaps loss of subs if they were closer to our coast.
But today with hypersonic weapons with nuclear weapons on them
we're talking 15 minutes or less. If certain flight profiles
are used maybe no warning. If space weapons are used no
warning.
I think we are back to the future and I think we need to
seriously consider do we need to go back to 24/7 command and
control airborne or ground away from the Pentagon, away from
the White House, so we could have 100 percent assuredness that
we can respond to a first strike.
And it's not really about us having that strike. It's about
the Russians and Chinese having that assurance that we have
deterrence.
So my question is really to Ms. Rosenblum and to General
Bussiere. If we funded a big enough fleet for 24/7 operations
with a new platform would that not improve our command and
control survivability and should that not be a requirement
coming from DOD?
Ms. Rosenblum. Thank you. Let me make a few remarks and
then turn to General Bussiere.
As Dr. Plumb, my colleague, articulated this was something
that was looked at in terms of NC3 as part of the Nuclear
Posture Review and the decision was taken that there was not a
need to make a change to the posture nor to the alert status.
That said, we are very actively engaged in an upgrade and a
modernization on the NC3 systems that we have and STRATCOM
[U.S. Strategic Command], which is the enterprise owner, as
you're well aware, of that is working very actively with both
the Air Force and the Navy on that modernization upgrade.
Mr. Bacon. If I may interject, and I'll turn to General
Bussiere. I used to be the general on board of the Looking
Glass mission. I'm not convinced we can respond within a 15
minute warning time and that scares me. I think it's
unacceptable, in my view. I'm going to do everything we can to
get those fixed.
General Bussiere, thank you.
General Bussiere. Congressman, thank you for the question.
The only thing I'll add to what Honorable Rosenblum said was I
know General Cotton and STRATCOM are evaluating all the
different facets of command and control.
As you know, there are different avenues by which we can
perform that mission. One of them is in the air domain and, as
you know probably better than most, that mission was aggregated
into the E-6B years ago.
If the decision is made to field another capability in the
area layer the only analysis we'll have to do in addition to
just the command and control procedures is the analysis on the
increased manpower required and the training to be able to do
that mission.
Mr. Bacon. I think this is something Congress would fund to
ensure that we get this 100 percent assurance. And I do hear a
lot about, hey, we're studying--we're looking at it. I don't--I
think time is of the essence.
We have Russia invading Ukraine, talking about moving
nuclear weapons into Belarus. They've already shown a
propensity that they will attack if they think they can get
away with it. Right makes might, or might makes right in their
mind.
So I think we need to communicate to them that there is no
way that they can catch us off guard and I think it's
imperative for the safety of our country.
One last question for you, General, if I may. The Navy is
transitioning the E-6 for its TACAMO [Take Charge and Move Out]
mission to the 130s. What does that portend for the Looking
Glass mission? Or maybe I should ask the admiral. I don't know.
Whoever is the best on this one.
General Bussiere. Congressman, again, as the Navy
transitions to their new platform for the TACAMO mission the
Looking Glass mission will be performed based on what General
Cotton decides is the best platform for that. That may or may
not be in the air later.
Mr. Bacon. Just to let you know, we'll be pushing this. I
think time is of the essence. We can't have years of
discussions and analysis and treading water. I think we got to
push forward.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Representative. Thank you for
articulating that important issue. And for your information and
for everyone on the subcommittee, we are going to have a
briefing on NC3 to bring us up to speed, hopefully, on April
19th at 4:00 p.m. Thank you.
Representative Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Hruby, in September 2022 the GAO [Government
Accountability Office] assessed the NNSA's nuclear weapons
cybersecurity practices and found, quote, ``The NNSA and its
contractors have not fully implemented six foundational
cybersecurity risk practices.''
Based on the findings, the GAO recommended nine actions
that the NNSA could implement to protect cybersecurity threats.
In November 2022 the NNSA agreed with each of the nine
recommendations.
Can you provide a status on the implementation of these
recommendations and how the fiscal year 2024 budget addresses
these shortfalls? The thought of our nuclear weapons systems
being vulnerable to a cyber threat is pretty terrifying.
Ms. Hruby. Yeah, thanks for that question. What you'll see
in the fiscal year 2024 budget for our IT [Information
Technology] and cyber infrastructure programs is a 30 percent
increase over the 2023 enacted--I mean, it's the 2023--for our
2024 budget.
In addition, there's a almost 40 percent increase in a
program we call Nuclear Enterprise Assurance, which is the
cyber and other sabotage associated with the weapons program.
So we have increased both of those programs substantially in
fiscal year 2024.
This is a threat that we take very seriously how we deal
with cyber in the enterprise, our IT systems, and, frankly, it
was ignored.
I also just want to say with respect to that GAO report it
did mention a number of good things that NNSA has done and
progress. But we--like you said, we agree with all the
recommendations and we're working hard on it. Thanks.
Mr. Carbajal. It sounds like it was a bandwidth issue
because you don't have enough resources.
Ms. Hruby. Yeah, and we appreciate the--actually the
government has authorized a pay increase for people in these
fields, in the cyber fields, which will help us attract and
retain Federal employees in the cyber area, which we really
need to do.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
General Bussiere and Admiral Wolfe, what are you doing to
ensure your programs are protected from a cyber threat?
General Bussiere. So from an Air Force perspective,
Congressman, 16th Air Force kind of runs our cybersecurity
really as a supportive component to both STRATCOM and,
obviously, as the Air Force Global Strike Commands, the air
component to STRATCOM.
So we have a dedicated number at the Air Force that does
that for us as well as individual airmen that maintain our
networks.
Mr. Carbajal. Admiral Wolfe.
Admiral Wolfe. Yes, sir. So, for our program, everything
that we do cyber is an integral part of the design development.
It's an integral part of how we--how we test things.
We also do other types of testing and I'll just leave it at
that. As a matter of fact, we just took Secretary Rosenblum--
over the past year she actually went and looked at our program
and how we do a lot of the cybersecurity aspects of what we do
in Trident.
So it's not just what we do internal but it's what the
department does as well to oversee to make sure that we're
doing all of the right things, not just now but as we look into
the future.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
General Bussiere, I received notification recently that the
Air Force canceled the Sentinel reentry vehicle facility that
was intended to be built at Vandenberg Space Force Base, which
is in my district, due to requirement uncertainty.
We were told the cancellation and delay won't impact the
first test flight--flight test for the Sentinel program. What
can you tell me? Will it have an impact on the overall
readiness of the Sentinel program? If so, what are you doing to
minimize the impact of this delayed construction?
General Bussiere. Congressman, I might have to take that
one for the record. My understanding we just slipped it, didn't
cancel it, because of the need date. But I will--I will take
that for the record and get back to you.
Mr. Carbajal. I understood it was canceled. So then I was
going to ask you what can we do with $48 million at Vandenberg
Space Force Base to prepare for the construction of this
facility. But I'll let you answer that later.
Ms. Hruby, it is my understanding that the NNSA has great
success with the Minority-Serving Institution Partnership
Program. Can you please give us more information on this
effort, how successful it's been to recruit, hire, and retain a
talented workforce? How is this program executing compared to
other initiatives across the agency?
Ms. Hruby. Yeah. We're very excited about that Minority-
Serving Institution Partnerships Program. It has two elements
to it. It has grants to minority--serving institutions and
we're working--we have a lot of programs across the full
spectrum of the kind of workforce we need through that program
and we also have----
Mr. Carbajal. How successful is it?
Ms. Hruby. Well, we have hired a lot of those people so I
consider that one marker of success. I've met a lot of these--
the students working in this program and they're amazing. So we
have expanded that program year over year. We have an intention
to expand it again, and it's it's getting us a workforce of the
future.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Representative Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Salud, you took one of my questions and then
you're leaving. No fair.
It's really nice to be here with you guys. I want to talk a
little bit about what a lot of other folks have also brought
up, which is workforce issues.
I know that we focused a little bit on welders and other
sort of manufacturing and craft jobs. I want to talk more,
though, about things like cyber or engineering or any of those
other kinds of billets that may or may not be filled now.
I would like to start with you, Ms. Hruby--Administrator
Hruby, to talk about what kind of--these 90 FTEs [Full-time
Equivalents] that are in your fiscal year 2024 budget, what
kind of people are they--equivalents are they?
Ms. Hruby. I think you're referring to the Federal
workforce?
Ms. Houlahan. Mmm-hmm.
Ms. Hruby. Okay. Thanks. And we--I really appreciate the
question because we haven't had a chance to talk about the
Federal workforce yet in NNSA.
We have experienced a greater than average attrition--quite
a lot, actually--in the 0 to 5 year experience range. So we're
trying to explore ways to address that----
Ms. Houlahan. But are they people with four-year degrees?
Like, what kind of requirements are they?
Ms. Hruby. They are. Well, they're at least four-year
degrees. Yeah, this is a professional workforce, this workforce
that we're talking about, and our workforce has--our Federal
workforce has expanded far less than our programs.
Ms. Houlahan. And when we're talking about the, you know,
people with professional experience for your workforce are,
what, 0 to 5 years, and then you also listed at the beginning
of your testimony the places where you're looking for them to
work. Could you list them again? Geographic places.
Ms. Hruby. Oh, the geographic places. Yeah.
Well, we have labs in New Mexico and California and we have
production plants in Kansas City, South Carolina, Tennessee,
and Texas, and we have the nuclear test site in Nevada.
Ms. Houlahan. So I guess what I'm trying to understand is
we're in an environment now post-COVID where a lot of people
with these kinds of skills and backgrounds are given
opportunities for much, much more flexible working capabilities
than what you're describing is.
We're also talking about people who are increasingly with
spouses or partners who also have careers of their own who want
to make sure that they can find places to land and to work.
Is there a world where we can be not just paying more
potentially but also more flexible in what it is that we're
allowing people to do and where we're allowing it to--where we
are allowing them to do it physically from?
Ms. Hruby. Yeah, thanks for this question. I love this
question. We do have a large remote workforce now and we're
trying to do that at all levels--managers, you know, to make it
easier also for staff to see how it's done.
I would say this has greatly--has greatly helped us. But we
do have a lot of jobs that are classified and we do have a lot
of jobs that are production that you have to be, you know, in
the right facility on the floor.
But we are leaning in as hard as we can to the flexibility
in the workforce for the parts of the workforce that we can do
that in.
Ms. Houlahan. Are there any authorizations or authorities
or anything else that you all collectively need from us to be
able to allow for a more flexible working environment when
you're talking about classified environments?
As an example, is there a way for people to--I know when I
go home to my community I can access the SCIF in my community
if I need to. Is there a way to be more adaptive in that area
that we can be helpful with?
Ms. Hruby. That's a great question. I will look at that. I
use SCIFs all over the world and certainly all over the United
States, and so do many others in our workforce.
But I would like to get back with you as to whether or not
there's anything else we can do there. I appreciate the
question.
Ms. Houlahan. Anybody else with my remaining 40 seconds
that has anything that I--that our collective body can be doing
to be helpful in stimulating the working workforce?
Admiral Wolfe. Ma'am, I'd just like to chime in, and I
think many of the members have said it today. I think it's
getting today's workforce to understand how critical it is what
these missions that we're doing right here are for our national
defense and for the protection of allies and partners.
This is hard work and it takes a lot of dedicated folks to
do that. It's not always glamorous but it does underpin
everything that this nation and our allies count on. So helping
us get that word out----
Ms. Houlahan. Yeah, a hundred percent agree. The reason why
I am asking this question--indulge me for a couple of seconds--
is I served in the early--the late '80s and early '90s. I was
in the Hanscom Air Force Base, Boston area. I was married to a
gentleman, and still am, who couldn't necessarily find a job in
the middle of, you know, somewhere else.
And so I want to make sure that we're being thoughtful. I'm
a patriot. I'm sure many people are patriots as well who want
to work on these really important programs. We just have to
find them where they are and they're not always in the places
we're looking.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you. We will now go into an
immediate recess and reconvene in 2337 upstairs in 5 minutes.
[Whereupon, at 10:31 a.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 28, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 28, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 28, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN

Mr. Lamborn. The 2022 Nuclear Posture Review eliminated ``hedge
against an uncertain future'' as a formal role of nuclear weapons. Can
you explain the rationale behind this decision?
Mr. Plumb. The 2022 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) determined that
``hedge against an uncertain future'' does not constitute a valid role
for nuclear weapons, and that retaining it as a role could lead to
confusion and misunderstanding of our nuclear strategy. Elimination of
the formal hedge role, however, has not changed our overall approach to
risk management. Mitigating risk is an integral function of the nuclear
enterprise that enables our ability to fulfill the three roles of
nuclear weapons: deter adversaries, assure allies and partners, and
achieve objectives if deterrence fails. We must be able to effectively
reduce, and where necessary manage, emerging geopolitical,
technological, operational, and technical risk across the Joint Force
and within the nuclear production enterprise. A resilient and adaptive
nuclear enterprise is critical to managing such risks, and the 2022 NPR
commits both DOD and the Department of Energy to continue revitalizing
the enterprise through a strong and diverse workforce and timely,
consistent investments in science and production capabilities.
Mr. Lamborn. The 3M Company has announced it will discontinue use
of a category of substances known as ``PFAS'' by the end of 2025. Has
DOD assessed the impact this will have on operations, and what
continency plans is DOD developing to mitigate this?
Ms. Rosenblum. Preliminary assessments indicate expected impacts to
operations for multiple weapons platforms and in key enabling
industries if PFAS manufacturing and supply are disrupted. The scope of
potential impacts to these programs and the defense industrial base and
potential mitigation strategies are still being assessed. We estimate
that it will take months to identify and understand the extent of this
expanding issue and the potential impact on DOD and its supply chain
and years to develop and qualify alternative materials in many
applications. DOD is currently conducting a data call with the Services
and other DOD components to identify known uses of PFAS materials and
products purchased directly from 3M that may be impacted by 3M's
departure from the PFAS market. In addition to these potential impacts
to weapons platform and key enabling industries, during the assessment
process we may identify potential broader impacts to DOD operations and
mission-critical material. The DOD is working alongside the U.S.
Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration and other
U.S. Government mission partners on assessments and potential
resolutions. To date, DOD had engaged closely with 3M senior managers
and have focused on identifying which materials 3M sells directly to
DOD and what alternatives to these products may be available as well as
working to identify materials 3M sells to a third party that then
incorporates them into products for DOD. The DOD is also working
alongside its Federal partners to prioritize substitutes for products
that contain PFAS, consistent with Executive Order 14057 and Office of
Management and Budget Memorandum M-22-06. DOD issued a new Military
Specification (MILSPEC24) for fluorine- free foam in January 2023, thus
taking an important step toward eliminating PFAS exposures from
firefighting foam. DOD also issued a Defense Federal Acquisition
Regulation Supplement (DFARS) class deviation 25 in 2022 to prohibit
procurement of certain items that contain PFOS or PFOA. Each military
department established a transition plan covering its facilities and
mobile assets to ensure a methodical conversion over the next few
years.
Mr. Lamborn. The FY24 budget request proposes to reduce B83-1
sustainment funding by more than 50%. Is this based on the assumption
that the NNSA will begin retiring B83 bombs next year? If so, what
percent of the inventory is planned to retire? Can you provide the
committee with a schedule of retirement activities planned for FY24?
Ms. Hruby. The FY 2024 B83-1 budget request is lower than the FY
2023 enacted because NNSA will apply prior year carryover funding,
originally requested for two alteration activities that are no longer
required, to FY 2024 activities. The FY 2024 budget request is
consistent with requirements to ensure the safety and security of the
B83-1 until all weapons are retired and fully dismantled. Details of
the B83-1 retirement and dismantlement plan remain classified.
Mr. Lamborn. The 3M Company has announced it will discontinue use
of a category of substances known as ``PFAS'' by the end of 2025. Has
NNSA assessed the impact this will have on operations, and what
contingency plans is NNSA developing to mitigate this?
Ms. Hruby. Preliminary assessments indicate negative impacts on
warhead programs across the complex if PFAS manufacturing and supply
are disrupted. Impacts to existing and future weapon programs and
potential mitigation strategies are still being assessed. It will take
months to quantify this expanding issue and the impact on NNSA's supply
chain and safety systems. NNSA continues to explore mitigation and
solution options across industry groups, to include finding alternate
suppliers and materials. Once NNSA selects these alternate suppliers
and vendors, material and/or vendor qualification will occur and will
take years to complete. NNSA is working alongside the U.S. Department
of Defense and other U.S. Government organizations on assessments and
potential resolutions. In specific cases, such as FK-800, NNSA is also
collaborating with 3M to explore the possibility of additional
procurements ahead of production discontinuation. In addition to
impacts to NNSA's weapons program, there are also potential broader
impacts to DOE programs and activities, given the many uses of PFAS and
PFAS-based systems. DOE is also working alongside its Federal partners
to prioritize substitutes for products that contain PFAS, consistent
with Executive Order 14057 and Office of Management and Budget
Memorandum M-22-06.
Mr. Lamborn. Can you describe the process for uploading Minuteman
III ICBMs? What would this look like in practice? Is this a slow and
labor-intensive process, or can you execute it quickly? a. Are there
steps you could take now to decrease the time it would take you to
execute this?
General Bussiere. CUI) The process for transporting and installing
and removing missiles is a deliberate and labor-intensive. It requires
coordination across multiple organizations (Wing Leadership, Security
Forces, Helicopters, Vehicle Section, Missile and Munitions
Maintenance, Operations, Civil Engineering and local law enforcement).
Unconstrained, operating under normal scheduling operations today, from
empty silo to a missile on alert takes approximately 3-5 days,
depending on re-entry system type, minimum.--(CUI) Missile roll/
transfer (1 day): Moves missile from shipping trailer to an operational
transporter-erector for installation. Requires 4-person Missile
Handling Team a full shift to perform (8 hours)--(CUI) Route survey (1
day): Required to ensure routes of travel are safe for transport.
Requires 3-person team (Civil Engineering and Maintenance) to evaluate
road hazards and certify travel routes prior to missile movement.
Consumes one duty day (8 hours), can be completed in parallel with
roll/transfer operations.--(CUI) Missile transport and installation (1-
2 days): Moves the missile from support base to launch facility for
installation. Requires certified Convoy Commander, 4-person Missile
Handling Team, 5-person Missile Maintenance Team, 2-person vehicle
support team, 2-person Security Forces team. Requires 1-2 12-hour
shifts depending on distance travelled from support base to launch
facility. Transporter-Erectors, used to install boosters, are at end-
of-life and experience a 45% on-site failure rate.--(CUI) Re-entry
system build (2-4 days): Builds a re-entry system from multiple DOE and
AF supply chain components. Requires 3-person Munitions Maintenance
Team 2 days for a single re-entry vehicle configuration and 4 days for
a 2 or 3 re-entry vehicle configuration. Can be performed in parallel
with missile prep and installation.--(CUI) Re-entry system transport
and install (1 day): Transports configured re-entry system from support
base to launch facility for installation. Requires 5-person Missile
Maintenance Team, 53-person Security Forces team, helicopter overflight
and 2-person vehicle support team. Security Forces teams are providing
transport security using an armored vehicle fleet ranging from 1998-
2012 year models, with a 72% in-commission rate. (CUI) Timelines above
assume ready access to components required for build-up and do not
account for component failures during the maintenance process or delays
caused by weather or personnel issues. A 5-day timeline should not be
construed to indicate each unit can complete an upload every 5 days.
Each system must be incorporated into the scheduled maintenance
required to sustain an alert force. (CUI) Storage and infrastructure
limitations at our operational units prevent us from posturing
sufficient resources to significantly decrease the time required to
execute missile installation or re-entry system builds.
Mr. Lamborn. The Air Force's position has been that it should
purchase at least 100 B-21 bombers--how many do you think we'll need?
General Bussiere. Air Force Global Strike Command is assessing how
to achieve a modernized force of 220 total bombers as we transition
from a three-bomber fleet of B-1s, B-2s, and B-52s to a two-bomber
fleet of B-21s and heavily modified B-52s. We plan to maintain 75 B-
52s, so 145 B-21s would get us to the desired 220 total. However, the
current B-21 program of record is for a minimum buy of 100 aircraft.
Mr. Lamborn. The Air Force's position has been that it should
purchase at least 100 B-21 bombers. Are there scenarios in which you
could foresee a greater B-21 buy? If so, what are those scenarios and
to what degree could you see the numbers required?
General Bussiere. The U.S. faces renewed great power competition
from Russia and the PRC. As these and other potential threats evolve,
AFGSC foresees the need to remain agile and responsive in our nation's
acquisition of capabilities, including long range strike platforms. Air
Force Global Strike Command is assessing how to achieve a modernized
force of 220 total bombers. We plan to maintain 75 B-52s, so 145 B-21s
would get us to the desired 220 total. However, the current B-21
program of record is for a minimum buy of 100 aircraft.
Mr. Lamborn. In the 2030s, both the ICBM and submarine-leg of the
triad will be recapitalizing at the same time; do you think it would be
prudent to invest and improve the readiness of the bomber force so that
it is able to act as a hedge against the possibility of a disruption in
the Sentinel or Columbia programs?
General Bussiere. AFGSC intends to maintain full operational
capability with the Minuteman III ICBM until it can smoothly transition
to the Sentinel, ensuring no gaps in operational coverage. AFGSC firmly
believes that the bomber force can provide an increased capability and
capacity to alleviate disruptions to the Sentinel and/or Columbia
programs. Depending on the level of disruption, AFGSC has identified
scalable options for augmenting the joint force in the global strike
mission area. With modest investment in its aircraft and weapons
portfolio, AFGSC has identified multiple opportunities to leverage new
research and emerging technologies to enhance the capability and
capacity of the bomber force for strategic competition and the high-end
fight. With an additional commitment to resourcing, the bomber force
could further enhance capability and capacity with investment in
additional personnel, equipment, and facilities.
Mr. Lamborn. Airmen in nuclear-coded billets are reporting elevated
rates of non-Hodgkins Lymphoma. Will you investigate to see if this
community is susceptible to other forms of cancer? Given the difficulty
in advanced screening for NHL, will you investigate with NIH the
possibility of conducting a pilot study that offers liquid biopsies to
at-risk Airmen? The purpose would be to both test and refine liquid
biopsy technology while offering Airmen an additional layer of
developmental screening?
General Bussiere. The missile community cancer study currently
underway will assess whether there is an increased incidence of Non-
Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) as well as other cancers throughout the missile
community. If the incidence of NHL or another cancer is found to be
increased, the evaluation would progress to identify causative agents
with the intent of eliminating or reducing any increased risk. If a
high risk population is identified we would of course explore all
possible ways to ensure we reduce their risk, put appropriate programs
in place to ensure timely diagnosis, and support them with appropriate
treatment. Your suggestion to investigate the role of liquid biopsy
technology to support these efforts has been communicated to our AF
hematology and oncology experts and researchers as we await the results
of the initial phases of the study.

[all]
