[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 118-70]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

MEETING JOINTLY WITH

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ON

POSTURE AND READINESS OF THE
MOBILITY ENTERPRISE--
TRANSCOM AND MARAD

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 11, 2024

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-591                    WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota              MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
LANCE GOODEN, Texas                  MARC VEASEY, Texas

Kyle Noyes, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Ethan Pelissier, Research Assistant

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

TRENT KELLY, Mississippi, Chairman

ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 SARA JACOBS, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia            Pennsylvania
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN, Virginia
NICK LaLOTA, New York                JIMMY PANETTA, California

Ethan Pelissier, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.........     2
Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................     4
Kelly, Hon. Trent, a Representative from Mississippi, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.................     1
Waltz, Hon. Michael, a Representative from Florida, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     3

WITNESSES

Van Ovost, Gen Jacqueline D., USAF, Commander, U.S.
Transportation Command.........................................     5
Phillips, RDML Ann C., USN (Ret.), Administrator, Maritime
Administration.................................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Courtney, Hon. Joe...........................................    32
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................    36
Kelly, Hon. Trent............................................    31
Phillips, RDML Ann C.........................................    72
Van Ovost, Gen Jacqueline D..................................    39
Waltz, Hon. Michael..........................................    35

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Rogers...................................................    85
Mr. Scott....................................................    86
Mr. Waltz....................................................    86
Mr. Gimenez..................................................    87
Mr. Finstad..................................................    89
Mr. LaLota...................................................    90

POSTURE AND READINESS OF THE MOBILITY ENTERPRISE--TRANSCOM AND MARAD

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness, Meeting Jointly with the
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 11, 2024.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 3:01 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Trent Kelly and
Hon. Michael Waltz (chairmen of the subcommittees) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TRENT KELLY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSISSIPPI, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION
FORCES

Mr. Kelly. The subcommittee will come to order. I ask
unanimous consent that the chair be authorized to declare a
recess at any time. Without objection, so ordered.
I thank the witnesses for being here. Whether it is
competition or outright conflict, our strategic insurance will
depend on our ability to move and sustain people and platforms
around the globe.
Force projection is only possible because of the sealift,
airlift, and refueling operations carried out by Transportation
Command, TRANSCOM, with support from the MARAD, the Maritime
Administration.
TRANSCOM and MARAD support the full range of military
operations, including everything from humanitarian aides to an
operation like those underway in the Red Sea. However, we
cannot take our logistics capabilities for granted.
We must be prepared to meet the logistic demands of a
conflict against peer competitors halfway around the world. The
tyranny of distance will strain our logistics capability, and
we must make decisions now to meet our operational requirements
for the future.
The committee has legislated several key efforts that
bolster our lift capability and prevent potential backsliding.
For example, Congress required a minimum 275 intertheater
aircraft to ensure we can meet our needs for long range
aircraft.
For a heavier lift, we rely on commercial vehicles
supported by the Maritime Security Program (MSP) as well as an
increasing aging reserve fleet to move mountains of iron and
material. Sealift recapitalization is a priority, but we need
to go about it the right way.
General Van Ovost, in your prepared testimony, you state
that the purchase of used sealift vehicles is complementary to
an effort to build new sealift vessels. We have the
congressional intent reversed. Used purchase authority should
complement a new build effort. Unfortunately, years of
collective feet dragging has brought us to where we are now.
I agree we need to recapitalize the sealift fleet. But
there must be a dose of reality in the cost and availability of
foreign built 15-year-old ships that need hardened decks and
retrofit after the fact.
The results of the market assessment required in last
year's NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] will hopefully
be informative.
I thank our witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to your testimony.
I am joined by my colleagues, Ranking Member Joe Courtney,
Chairman Waltz and Ranking Member Garamendi today. I want to
thank them for their partnership and continued leadership on
these important issues before our subcommittee. And with that,
I recognize Ranking Member Courtney.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Chairman Kelly, and thank you to
the witnesses again. Time is going to be tight with votes
coming up so I will try and just truncate my remarks.
But I just want to really foot-stomp what Trent said that,
you know, sometimes our committee, it seems like our focus is
on, you know, big Navy and Air Force in terms of some of these
programs. But I think I speak for both of us and really most of
the committee that your departments we view as on part at least
in terms of the, you know, times that we are living in right
now, in terms of missions that you both have. And I am proud
that our subcommittee has over the last few years working in a
bipartisan manner actually plussed up capabilities in the
capacity of our mobility enterprise.
Again, we did not wait to sort of receive ideas or budgets.
I mean, we took, I think, the initiative, which we should,
under the Constitution to really, you know, move these critical
programs forward.
So we established the Tanker Security Program, the National
Security Multi-Mission Vessel Program and authorized, as Trent
just said, a domestic New Build Sealift Program for 10 vessels
built here in the U.S.
And in the fiscal year 2024 budget that was just signed by
the President a few weeks ago, again, our subcommittee led the
way to secure $12 million for MARAD to carry out design of a
New Build Sealift Program using the vessel construction manager
contracting model, which I think we have actually finally
reached some consensus that this is the way that we can
efficiently and affordably, you know, really grow the fleet.
Again, like Trent, I have lots of questions about, you
know, whether we should be expanding the purchase of used
vessels. I just had a meeting actually not too long ago today
where because of what is happening in the Gulf of Aden, the
cost of buying in the used market has, if anything, gone up
because the willingness to part with vessels is actually
contracting and that just, again, it's going to have an impact
in terms of cost.
So, again, really, again thank the witnesses. I have the
greatest respect for the great work that you are doing and all
the different theaters that Trent said. And I look forward to a
good hearing. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. And I now recognize Chairman Waltz.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL WALTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
FLORIDA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I echo both of your
remarks. And I think as we all know and have discussed, that
with China as the greatest threat this country has ever faced,
the tyranny of distance will strain everything, platform,
people, material, fuel, logistics win or lose wars. And I pray
that with a strong logistics footprint in place, a capable
sealift, capable airlift capability that the Chinese Communist
Party every time they see that that will be a powerful,
powerful deterrent.
We know the closure of Red Hill in Hawaii is well underway.
Defueling is now complete. It has been a couple of years since
Congress has designated TRANSCOM as the executive agent for
bulk fuel management in fiscal year 2022 NDAA.
I am interested in how TRANSCOM has embraced the mission,
this responsibility and what you are doing to support strategic
operations, especially in INDOPACOM [Indo-Pacific Command]. We
are in a race against time.
I am also, as you know, General Van Ovost, keenly
interested in oversight of the global household goods [GHG]
contract, the least we can do after our service members come
home is make sure their moves happen seamlessly and that their
families are taken care of, particularly in the recruiting and
retention crisis that we are now in.
And I do expect, as you know, and I appreciate your
engagement, for you to work with the prime vendor to make sure
that we avoid any missteps but that we have a single point of
failure now for a key element for our military families.
And then I agree with Chairman Kelly that recapitalization
of our sealift fleet that we absolutely rely on to move the
Army, all ground platforms and material into theater, is a
pressing issue. Crewing these issues is a huge concern. We have
a significant shortage of credentialed mariners that Admiral
Philips and I have talked about. That combined with poor vessel
states, poor maintenance, it has resulted in what I think we
would all agree is a less than impressive readiness rate during
recent exercises.
We rely on all of this small pool, this same pool of
credentialed mariners, to crew commercial vessels in the
Maritime Security Program and the Tanker Security Program. And
we have a tough road ahead.
In closing, our ability to execute logistics in a contested
environment, which we have not done as a nation in a very long
time, will define our ability to succeed or fail in this
strategic competition.
I look forward to hearing whether the fiscal year 2025
budget request meets this task. I yield my remaining time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Chairman. And I now recognize Ranking
Member Garamendi.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Well, look who is here. General
and Admiral, thank you so very much for joining us today.
Obviously, very, very important.
I want to start by thanking both of you for your
leadership. I am proud to represent a district with some of our
nation's most vital assets. It's the gateway to the Pacific.
And we also have Mare Island and MOTCO [Military Ocean Terminal
Concord] and a few other key assets in my district that are
essential for our presence and activities in the Pacific. And
General Van Ovost, thank you for recognizing and providing in
your testimony the critical importance of MOTCO.
By the way, there is a hill overlooking MOTCO that is going
to be developed. You may want to purchase an easement and
prevent that development from going forward.
Let's talk about air mobility. I remain concerned with the
low readiness levels of the air refueling fleets. This combined
with the sunsetting of the KC-10 and the unresolved issues of
the KC-46 increase the concerns.
I unfortunately will continue to accept operational risks
for the KC-46 program, notably deficiencies that threaten the
already low readiness levels of the air frames. TRANSCOM, you
are going to have to ensure that given the unresolved issues of
the [KC] 46, we are not divesting at a rate which exposes the
U.S. to unacceptable air refueling risks.
Speaking of unacceptable risks, our mobility fleets have
been operating without connectivity for decades. We have talked
about this. I guess people that don't fly in these planes
really don't care much about it. But if you are in one of these
airplanes, you basically don't know what is going on around
you. And you are at great risk. And so it is just unacceptable.
A minimum investment, and I draw this to the attention of
my colleagues here, a minimal investment in these transport
platforms can significantly increase the ability of that
platform to survive in a contested environment and also be far
more efficient in its operations.
Maritime, I thank Mr. Waltz for raising it as have two of
my other colleagues here, we have got to deal with this issue.
And I know, Admiral Phillips, you have worked at this for some
time. We are going to buy used ships that are 25 years old and
spend a whole lot of money refurbishing them, perhaps
sufficiently, and they are going to age out very, very quickly.
We are going to need a different strategy here. Some of
this has been talked about. I know Mr. Waltz and I have talked
about the national maritime strategy in which we would use
Jones Act vessels and other vessels that are in the American
maritime trade that they would be available, made to be
militarily useful, and then call them up when we need them,
building a reserve fleet that is quite different than our
current reserve fleets.
I want to -- I am going to continue to look at how this
might be done. It does not require that the military own all
the ships. It simply requires that the military make those
ships that are privately owned militarily useful with an
additional investment and probably some stipend to keep them
available if and when needed.
General Van Ovost, I know you do this with airplanes. In
fact, I think you took two of the planes I needed to fly back
and forth nonstop from Sacramento. So you put me on a route to
Chicago. I blame it on you.
So this is part of what we need to do. A ready reserve
fleet, we have had this discussion about how we might be able
to create a National Maritime Security Program using the Jones
Act fleet, using the other privately owned vessels that are on
the water.
My final point deals with Title 11 financing to support our
shipyards on the private side. Big issues on the government-
owned shipyards. We could talk about that ad nauseam. But on
the privately owned side, we need to -- if we are building
ships, we will -- on the commercial or the private side, we
will invariably improve our shipyards and the capacity for
those shipyards to repair government ships and other ships when
necessary in the face of a conflict.
We have enacted legislation to reaffirm MARAD's authority
to determine cargo preference. We want that to be effectively
put in place. We want to make sure that if there is cargo --
cargo is king, I'm told. Military cargo is critically
important. So let's support our maritime industry by making
sure that what is in the new law is actually engaged.
A lot of other things to talk about. The fact that both of
you are here, I want to thank the chairmen of the committees.
You have done something unique, which I should have -- I should
have expected you to do it, but I hadn't. But you brought
together two of the key critical players in one hearing. Thank
you for doing so. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you. And before I start, we are going to
put us on the clock so that we give everybody a chance because
we have got votes. But General Van Ovost, I would go -- I need
to make sure. Hopefully, this is not your last posture hearing,
but I think that it may be. And if it, thank you, for your
tremendous service to our nation and thank you also Admiral
Phillips.
My first question is, General Van Ovost -- oh, I am so
sorry. I am getting ahead. I still mean that, though, so you
are recognized.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL JACQUELINE D. VAN OVOST, UNITED STATES AIR
FORCE COMMANDER, UNITED STATES TRANSPORTATION COMMAND

General Van Ovost. Great. Thank you, Chairman. Chairman
Kelly, Chairman Waltz, Ranking Member Courtney, Ranking Member
Garamendi, distinguished members of the committees, good
afternoon. It is my honor to join you today with my senior
enlisted leader, Chief Master Sergeant Brian Kruzelnick, to
represent the men and women of the United States Transportation
Command as we defend the nation, take care of our people and
succeed through teamwork.
I am extremely proud of our team of logistics professionals
who lead the joint deployment and distribution enterprise. They
continually exceed expectations and ensure hope, deterrence,
and victory are assured as we contribute to our nation's
defense.
From competition to crisis, the entire enterprise proudly
delivers for our nation, allies, and partners. And we know our
success around the globe would not be possible without the
steadfast support of this committee and the whole of Congress.
The fiscal year 2025 budget request continues to make
strides in closing gaps in our mobility areas as we prepare for
global operations in a contested environment.
A contested environment is the reality of today. Whether it
is in the homeland or abroad, we cannot presume freedom of
maneuver to execute operations or full access to our lines of
communication.
Our organic fleets, coupled with the vital capacity
provided by our commercial transportation partners must
continue to present credible capacity, meaning, we must
modernize our mobility capabilities to include cyber resiliency
and digital modernization initiatives.
A connected, aware, and survivable mobility fleet and
network is needed to maintain our advantage against a capable
and determined near peer adversary. My top readiness concerns
remain sealift and air refueling. Sealift is the backbone of
our ability to deliver a decisive joint force. However, the age
of the fleet is dragging readiness rights to alarming levels.
Seventeen of the 47 organic ready reserve force ships are
50 years or older. To address readiness and the decrease in
capacity due to the planned retirements of 27 ships in the next
8 years, we must add younger ships to the fleet.
TRANSCOM supports the Navy strategy to acquire used sealift
vessels from the commercial market and for the requests to
provide the Secretary of Defense discretionary authority to
purchase foreign built used ships under favorable market
conditions without restrictions.
We acknowledge Congress' intent to include domestic new
build sealift ships to recapitalize the ready reserve force,
and we are working with the Navy and the Maritime
Administration to create an acquisition strategy for new
construction that will complement the Buy Used Program.
Admiral Phillips and I recently toured the Philadelphia
shipyard and saw shipbuilding capacity available there. I
believe the vessel construction manager model is a viable
option for a future sealift construction program.
I greatly appreciate your support for timely, predictable
and stabilized funding to meet our sealift recapitalization
requirements. Similarly, air refueling is foundational to our
nation's power projection advantage. It is our most stressed
capability.
We must ensure continuous modernization and
recapitalization of the aging fleet to meet the operational
requirements of the modern battle space.
TRANSCOM supports the Air Force strategy for uninterrupted
tanker recapitalization and accelerated fielding of the next
generation air refueling system.
Over the past year, we have made great strides diversifying
our bulk fuel distribution and delivery posture by having an
increased forward presence with fuel afloat in contracted
maritime tankers and increasing capacity and access to the U.S.
flag maritime tanker fleet through the Tanker Security Program.
In addition, we fully support the Maritime Security
Program, Jones Act, and cargo preference laws that all work to
ensure we have the necessary U.S. flag capability and U.S.
merchant mariners ready to move sensitive defense materials
during a national emergency.
Maritime stakeholders have been experiencing challenges
with recruiting and retaining qualified mariners. And we
support MARAD and industry efforts to identify strategies that
address the mariner shortage and ensure their readiness.
To effectively sense adversary threats and activities in
our logistics networks, both home and abroad, the nation must
utilize all available resources.
Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
provides many insights into adversary's intents, capabilities,
and activities to contest our logistics capabilities. The loss
of this authority adds risk to my mission.
Additionally, passing a national defense supplemental is
vital for the health of the transportation working capital
fund, which preserves essential readiness and ensures response
options for the Secretary of Defense.
I am honored to join Rear Admiral Ann Phillips. The
relationship between TRANSCOM and MARAD has never been stronger
as we work together to strengthen our national security. Thank
you once again for your leadership and the support you have
brought our workforce. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Van Ovost can be found
in the Appendix on page 39]
Mr. Kelly. Admiral Administrator Phillips, you are now
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL ANN C. PHILLIPS, USN (RET.) MARITIME
ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Admiral Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon,
Chairman Waltz and Chairman Kelly, Ranking Member Garamendi,
and Ranking Member Courtney, and members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for your tremendous support for the Maritime
Administration, the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, and the U.S.
maritime industry.
Before I go further, allow me to express our condolences on
behalf of the Department of Transportation to the families of
those who lost their lives earlier this month when the Francis
Scott Key Bridge collapsed in Baltimore. Events like this
highlight how important our maritime transportation system is
to our nation's national and economic security.
MARAD's mission is to foster, promote, and develop the
maritime industry of the United States to meet the nation's
economic and security needs. In that context, the President's
fiscal year 2025 budget request of $859.7 million for MARAD
will enable the agency to continue to strengthen our sealift
enterprise by advancing recapitalization of the ready reserve
force and vital commercial sealift programs that support U.S.
flag vessels operating in foreign trade.
Let me begin by discussing our ready reserve, an area of
focus today. Our 2025 budget requests $974 million from DOD
[Department of Defense] budgetary authority for MARAD to
acquire, upgrade, and maintain vessels in the NDRF [National
Defense Reserve Fleet] and ready reserve force.
These funds help MARAD to keep the fleet in a ready,
reliable, and responsive condition to ensure MARAD can meet the
nation's strategic sealift needs.
The RRF [Ready Reserve Fleet] consists of 48 vessels today,
averaging over 45 years in age, and they are maintained in
reduced operating status. This fleet will expand to 51 vessels
by the end of fiscal year 2025 with the plan to transfer
vessels from the military Sealift Command.
MARAD is responsible for maintaining these aging ships as
part of the Navy sealift recapitalization plan.
We are actively advancing urgent recapitalization of the
RRF using congressional authority to purchase vessels through a
contracted vessel acquisition manager. This approach
successfully acquired two ships in fiscal year 2022, and in
fiscal year 2023 purchased three more, one 10 years old and two
11 years old. The ongoing reflagging process following the
stringent alternate compliance program will make all five
vessels ready for use by the third quarter of 2024.
We continue to collaborate with the vessel acquisition
manager and have identified several potential ships for
purchase with the goal of reaching the congressionally limited
number of nine used vessels by the end of fiscal year 2025.
In the fiscal year 2023 NDAA, MARAD was directed to develop
a sealift ship design for the construction of 10 new vessels
for the NDRF.
I offer my thanks to Congress for appropriating $12 million
in fiscal year 2024 funds to begin this vessel design.
The 2025 budget also requests the full authorization level
of $318 million for the Maritime Security Program to support 60
commercially viable military useful vessels currently enrolled.
We have also fully implemented the 10 vessel Tanker Security
Program and are requesting $60 million for the program. These
ships will provide DOD with reliable access to product tankers
supporting national economic security.
One program participant withdrew after accepting a long-
term U.S. government charter. And MARAD is actively working to
fill the vacancy, and we are expecting to do later this summer.
We continue to work with the Center for Naval Analysis on
the body of analysis that will support the maritime strategy,
and we understand congressional interest in this important
effort.
We continue to collaborate as well with stakeholders to
address the mariner shortage. We recently convened the fiscal
year 2024 directed maritime workforce working group to identify
the number of licensed and unlicensed mariners, recommended
improvements in recruiting and detention, and evaluate how we
can best recruit, train, and retain and reduce barriers to
retention to grow our pool of merchant mariners.
We also continue to expand and mark participation. Today
there are 21 commercial operators enrolled, which operate over
180 vessels. We are working to develop a proposed EMBARC [Every
Mariner Builds a Respectful Culture] rule pursuant to the 2023
NDAA.
In addition, the fiscal year 2025 budget request includes
$191 million to support U.S. Merchant Marine Academy operations
and our capital asset management program for USMMA [United
States Merchant Marine Academy]. It also requests $87 million
to support the six state maritime academies, including
continuing to build out new training vessels.
Four national security multi-mission vessels are under
construction using the VCM [vessel construction manager]
process, with one delivered last fall, Empire State. The
second, Patriot State, is expected to be delivered later this
summer. And State of Maine, just launched last Friday.
The fiscal year 2024 NDAA doubles the student incentive
payments program amounts from $32,000 to $64,000. This will
offer more financial support for cadets in the strategic
sealift midshipman program at our SMAs [State Maritime
Academies]. We thank Congress for this authorization.
These programs reflect MARAD's priorities, supported by the
President's budget. We plan to keep you updated, of course, on
our progress in these areas. We are honored to testify here
today before, again, with General Van Ovost, and we look
forward to questions you may have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Phillips can be found in
the Appendix on page 72]
Mr. Kelly. I thank you, and I'm going to be really strict
on the clock today, guys. So I may give you 10 seconds but no
more. And I will cut off answers. And with that, if you will
put me on the clock.
General Van Ovost, how do you communicate results of the
mobility capability requirement study to the military services
to inform shipbuilding, air refueling and airlift procurements?
General Van Ovost. Thank you, Chairman. We use the Mobility
Capability Requirements Study to provide our assessment of
mobility sufficiency of the fleet.
We work very carefully with the services, OSD [Office of
the Secretary of Defense], and the joint staff. They are with
us throughout the entire process. And I will brief the
recommendations. And then that turns into the budget process
where we go after the gaps to try to close them.
Mr. Kelly. And Admiral Phillips, what is your assessment of
interest in the Tanker Security Program and ability to meet the
authorized 20 ships, whether medium-sized tankers or otherwise?
Admiral Phillips. Thank you for that question, Chairman
Kelly, sir. We find that there is interest in the program. As I
have said, we had 10 vessels enrolled. One had an option to
leave for a long-term charter.
We thank Congress for the $25 million to help us as we have
discussed in the past, prepare for additional training
opportunity, to ensure we are able to man these vessels. And,
of course, it also depends on the ability of government cargoes
to help assist and offset the costs of managing a tanker under
the TSP program. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you. And General Van Ovost, our air
refueling fleet is comprised of mostly second generation
aircraft. We have to key to mic to receive threats.
What is the way ahead on connecting the aircraft to
information that makes them more survivable in a contested
environment?
General Van Ovost. Thank you. I say logistics is
foundational to any strategy. And we have got to be able to
move -- air refueling is foundational to the ability to project
and sustain the joint force.
We must ensure that they are connected, and they have
battle space awareness. And so I am working with the United
States Air Force to define those requirements for all of those
-- for aircraft. It looks like a lot like the types of
capabilities we have in the KC-46 aircraft, which is sort of
the future of air refueling.
Mr. Kelly. And do you have an assessment of the cost of
that?
General Van Ovost. I do not have an assessment of the full
cost. However, the Air Force does.
Mr. Kelly. Okay. If you could, if you can provide that just
so that we have an assessment of that. I think that is very
helpful for us to understand.
And then General Van Ovost, how is a contested environment
expected to affect TRANSCOM's ability to use the ready reserve
force as well as commercial contracted logistics partners more
broadly?
General Van Ovost. The contested environment is going to
require us to be able to communicate securely with civilian and
military assets of the fleets. And therefore, we are working on
installing secure communications on the ready reserve force
ships as well as working with our commercial mariners and
commercial shipping to try to understand how we are going to
get them information.
We have been learning a lot with respect to the Red Sea as
we were doing escort operations for U.S. flagged ships. And so
we are taking those lessons learned, and we will be folding
them into what we are doing in the Indo-Pacific for
communications with them.
Mr. Kelly. And I am going to cede some of my time back. But
I want to thank both of you for being here today. I want to
thank you for the visit in the office yesterday where we talked
much more deeply.
And with that being said, I now recognize Ranking Member
Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And this is a
question, I guess, to both witnesses, which is that I think you
know from your meetings with members and, you know, past
hearings that this subcommittee is very focused on the
availability of used sealift vessels on the global market. In
fact, in last year's NDAA, we directed TRANSOM and MARAD to
conduct a market analysis to determine the availability of used
sealift vessels that meet military requirements and can be
purchased.
So number one where does that report stand? When are we see
-- going to see that?
General Van Ovost. You will be seeing that here by June.
Mr. Courtney. In the meantime, obviously, you have a
request for another round of buying used vessels. Admiral
Phillips, I mean, in your testimony you indicated that the
government was able to purchase, I guess, the last prior round
for about $90 million a boat, is that correct?
Admiral Phillips. Yes, sir.
Mr. Courtney. All right. And does that -- but that doesn't
represent the total cost because there is an additional cost to
actually convert that used vessel to your specifications?
Admiral Phillips. There is. Yes, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Can you give us sort of, you know, round --
you know, some kind of estimate in terms of what that number
looks like?
Admiral Phillips. I think I would take that question for
the record, sir, to be absolutely certain that I give you a
good idea. But it is certainly on the order of between $10 and
$20 million for the Jolly class vessels. And that, again, I
will take it for the record so we give you an accurate count.
Mr. Courtney. We do sort of need that number. And I
appreciate, you know, your willingness to share that with us. I
mean, we have heard 20 to 30 from some other folks that have
visited the office, our offices.
Because, again, just sort of going back to the math of last
year's spending bill, in fiscal year 2024 Congress appropriated
the request of $142 million for two vessels, which, again, if
you take $90 million and add the conversion costs on top of
that, it just seems like we are going to have -- you know, we
are going to run into some problems in terms of being able to
afford all of that.
And, you know, I guess that is sort of the thing we
struggle with, which is, you know, this at some point just
becomes a cost and a risk and an aging vessel that you just
sort of wonder whether we are getting the best value.
So, again, do you feel that you can use last year's
spending appropriation to buy two vehicles and convert them?
Admiral Phillips. We do think that we will be able to buy
two vessels with the appropriation that we have and start the
conversion process and hopefully complete it as well using
those funds. But I would add that the key is newer vessels cost
less money to convert. And when we buy older vessels, we find
things that we didn't know were there.
The Alternative Compliance Program is quite strict. And we
find ourselves in a similar situation to where we find
ourselves with the ready reserves sometimes, chasing our tail
trying to catch up with things that have been in existence for
a very long time and that adds to the cost.
Mr. Courtney. And I think that describes the dilemma well.
Again, the problem is that we just don't know what is in the
market from one day to the next in terms of whether older or
newer are actually available there.
So we did provide money for design of new sealifts as you
point out. And as I mentioned, you know, it seems like the
vessel contract manager, vessel acquisition manager/model seems
to be something that people are embracing. I think it was in
both of your testimonies.
So if we were to give you the money for a New Build Sealift
Program in this year's budget, could you put that into contract
in fiscal year 2025?
Admiral Phillips. Sir, I think it would be a stretch to put
into contract in fiscal year 2025 without having 100 percent
design at this point in time. We would have to have 100 percent
design, and I would estimate roughly two years to be able to
get it under contract because I don't want to overpromise
something that I can't deliver.
Mr. Courtney. Again, that's helpful. You know, it's a
question that I think we are going to keep asking. Okay. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. I now recognize Chairman Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And forgive me trying
to get a sign up here, but I think this visual is powerful. We
are all aware of Chinese Communist Party influence and how far
the People's Republic of China has come and its influence over
shipbuilding, over shipping, the industry, maritime
infrastructure.
It is to the point where I think the People's Republic of
China could exact economic warfare, economic coercion on the
high seas even during peacetime. And when we see the PRC
[People's Republic of China] with 50 percent of the civilian
global shipbuilding capacity, that is incredibly concerning.
Just by point of some numbers here, 7,000 Chinese flag
ocean going vessels compared to less than 200, and 1,700 orders
last year that the Chinese are going to build less than five.
The American people need to understand this, 600,000 workers,
1,500 ships, large ships they are going to build. We are going
to build -- Mr. Chairman, we are going to build 20.
So I think you are both aware of the recent petition filed
by the administration advocating for investigation into unfair
and uncompetitive practices by the PRC in the maritime sector,
behavior I believe that the CCP is doing as part of the long-
term strategy to basically make it nearly impossible for the
U.S. to build or operate ships that we need not only for
economic vitality but to support our warfighter.
Admiral Phillips, I am going to give you the floor on this.
What policy decisions and resources does MARAD need from
Congress to help the maritime sector rise above these
challenges?
This is an all of society. This is steel, aluminum,
shipyards, dry docks, workers, wrench turners. We have asked
for a national maritime strategy, my office in concert with
others. Both the House and the Senate have issued our thoughts
on it. Talk to me about how we get here as a nation and start
digging ourselves out of this hole.
Admiral Phillips. Thank you, sir, and thank you for the
opportunity. What we need is a clear signal from Congress that
this is a serious issue, that you take it seriously, which I
know you do, and that you are intent on finding solutions to
move things forward. By that, I mean, I will frame out --
Mr. Waltz. How about if I can just interrupt you? How about
if we gave you a separate budget line? Is that a clear signal?
Admiral Phillips. It is a clear signal, sir. And, of
course, appropriations would be required as well. But to put a
fine point on it with the ready reserve as you have mentioned,
at the end of 2025, I have authority to buy four more ships and
then I am done. I have $12 million, for which we thank you, to
do a design for a sealift vessel. But we would need additional
appropriations, authorizations, and capacity to move forward
from there.
Mr. Waltz. Correct me if I'm wrong, in the first Gulf War,
approximately what was it, about 400 ships that took our ground
force over? And now you are sitting on 40 to 60?
Admiral Phillips. Well, that also would have included, sir,
the commercial vessels that were available, but they were
approaching 200 ready reserve force vessels at that time.
Mr. Waltz. Okay. Keep going though. What do we need to do.
What else? Clear signal.
Admiral Phillips. Yes, sir. Clear signal, with intent to
move forward to begin build programs for things that we need
nationally. And this could include not only building, but it
could include programs that are similar to things that we have
done before where we have either built and then leased or
leased and then we provided the leases as the U.S. government
and industry built to meet those leases. Long-term, it would be
a 20 to 25 year commitment.
Those are options or ideas for things that could be
considered for the future. But what comes with that is, of
course, a clear signal that we care about this, and we are
going to move forward, support from Congress to make that
happen. That also, of course, impacts our ability to provide
crews, too, because then the industry sees, a-ha. I have a
future here. I have a way to move forward.
Without that, we have the fleet that we are authorized and
appropriated to have using the cargo preference laws that we
have and our DOD cargo requirements over time, which is what
largely supports what we have today.
Mr. Waltz. I think there's a -- the Chinese Communist Party
now has the largest Navy in the world because they have the
largest civilian shipbuilding industry in the world. And those
thousands of ships, every one of them, can be a war ship just
like that.
And I think we have talked about this. We have talked about
this sealift recapitalization, this issue since I have been
here. But Mr. Chairman, I think it is time both of these
committees start moving out in support of MARAD. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Garamendi, Ranking Member Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Chairman Waltz is marching down a path that
I have just given the rest of my time. It is interesting to
note that those used ships that you are about to buy, the
owners of those ships will take that -- what is it, $90 million
and then go buy a Chinese built ship.
I am trying to figure out, Mr. Waltz, how that fits into
the concerns that you so adequately put forward. It seems to me
that we are headed down the wrong path. But there are
strategies that we really can and should put forward.
The bottom line of this, until we authorize and
appropriate, we are not going to succeed. There are some ways
we can do this less expensively. I would like to say on the
cheap but just less expensively.
For example, we are going to need a lot of oilers if we are
going to have a problem in the Pacific. In fact, we need them
today. The John Lewis ship runs what, just under a billion a
copy? Is that about right? We are not going to build many of
them.
However, if we were to pass a piece of legislation that
Senator Wicker and I put forward, which is called the
Energizing the American Shipbuilding Industry, Admiral and
General, this is not for you. This is for my colleagues.
If we were to do that and say that 10 percent of the export
of petroleum products from the largest petroleum product export
nation in the world, the United States, was on American built
ships, we would build probably 40 to 50 ships in the next
decade to 15 years, energizing our shipbuilding industry.
The cost to the government? Not much. However, we would
want to put in a small requirement that those ships be -- the
word you used, Mr. Waltz, militarily useful. Have a king post
in the middle and some communications systems.
We could do this by simply changing the law, which we once
had. All of the oil from the North Slope in the original 25
years was brought to the continental United States refineries
on American built ships. And then we allowed that to go
offshore to other refineries over the years and then we did
away with the ships. And now we are where we are.
Energizing the American Shipbuilding Industry. Anybody from
Mr. Wicker's state here? There are ways we can do this. The
Jones Act, allow and use the Jones Act for militarily useful
ships. Add maybe 10 percent, and we will subsidize that. We
will give a stipend as we do with the craft program, the
aircraft program. And we can then build a domestic fleet at the
same time rebuilding our shipyards.
Geez, I'm supposed to ask questions of the witnesses.
Forgive me, commanders.
I don't know. You say you are agnostic, General Van Ovost.
You just need the ships. I don't like that reply, and you know
why. We have had this conversation. I want you to be an
advocate for American ships. Can you do that?
General Van Ovost. I am absolutely an advocate for American
ships. And we owe you a comeback with MARAD and the Navy to
talk about a creative acquisition strategy that is going to
support maritime nation writ large and be part of the national
maritime strategy that MARAD is putting together.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. I know that we talked earlier
about the -- my colleagues talked earlier about the mariners
themselves. Obviously, an ongoing problem not only like across
almost every part of our economy, it's about pay. It's about
knowledge. And it's also about in most of these cases, we have
maritime unions, apprenticeship programs.
There are apprenticeship programs in some of the more
recent legislation. We ought to look at that. Use that more
robustly. With that, I am going to yield back. Thank you so
very much.
Mr. Kelly. Well, I think -- and I will not disagree with
Senator Wicker. And when he and Mr. Garamendi and I all agree
on something, we are probably in the right space.
I now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Indeed, it is
remarkable that we get to agree together with Congressman
Garamendi and General Kelly, and it is wonderful to agree also
with Senator Wicker. And indeed we support bipartisan your
efforts in every way.
And General Van Ovost, I want to thank you for your service
to the nation and leadership of the United States
Transportation Command. And taking the opportunity to highlight
South Carolina, we are so grateful that the servicemembers of
the 437th Air Wing stationed at Joint Base Charleston from the
Air Mobility Command under your command of TRANSCOM.
The Joint Base Charleston is a great example of the joint
readiness across the force. And this is due to the leadership
within TRANSCOM enterprise. And I particularly appreciate it.
My dad served in the Flying Tigers in World War II, Army Air
Corps, and we used to go visit the Tulsa Air Base to see F-86s
take off, which we thought were very advanced at that time. And
so, again, your leadership is very critical.
And your statement to sadly mention that 17 of the 47 ships
in the organic ready reserve force are 50 years of age or older
with the oldest being 56 years of age. This raises readiness
concerns for the impact of that age and the life cycle for our
sealift capacity. And that's why I am so glad, as you can
clearly see, you have the bipartisan support, even bicameral,
and so of the House and Senate.
With that in mind, for each of you, the Iranian backed
puppets, the Houthis, have continued their assault on the
commercial and military vessels in the Red Sea, disrupting the
free flow of commerce through transit routes.
Events like this underscore the importance that the
contingency plans and redundancy plans we have in the global
supply chain with the direct challenge to our allies, Korea,
Japan, India, Philippines, Australia. With that in mind, with
the ongoing events that, General, Admiral, the military
exercise, what lessons learned have we captured to help improve
in the areas that we have against such threats?
General Van Ovost. Thanks, Congressman. I will start with
we are very focused on contested lines of communications,
things like choke points. And so we are working with commercial
industry to help them communicate with us to give them the
intelligence. And, in fact, you saw us do convoys with our
commercial partners through the Straits and into the Red Sea.
So we are taking those lessons out to the Indo-Pacific. It
is a different category out there. The threat is much higher.
So we are also focused on training mariners about how to
navigate in contested waters. We know that they will be with
us.
But also, I think about, we are so dependent on our
commercial transportation partners we cannot project and
sustain the force without them. So we will absolutely take
these contested logistics ideas, and we are exercising them
right now in the Indo-Pacific.
Mr. Wilson. And today, it was really outstanding. We had
Prime Minister Fumio of Japan speak, and I hope everybody saw
his resolve, stated his resolve to work with NATO [North
Atlantic Tr, to work very closely, and continue with the United
States and how important it is that we would be working
together and indeed with the Red Sea routes. And I know Korea,
too, has been involved.
General Van Ovost, would you assess the Middle East as
being one of the most enduring security and stability
challenges due to the numerous attacks on our infrastructure,
Iraq, Syria and losing three American service members in Jordan
recently on January 28, the horror of that. Are there any
further steps that Congress can do to better facilitate your
efforts?
General Van Ovost. Thank you. Our hearts go out to the
families of the fallen. When I think about the globe, though, I
have to think about our pacing challenge is China, and our
acute threat is Russia, as you all know what is going on there,
with especially Russia and Ukraine and the future of whether
Ukraine stands or falls, which is dependent on the
supplemental. And I will let General Cavoli make that
statement, but it's critical. And we depend on the supplemental
as well to continue going.
There are enduring threats around the globe to include the
Middle East. We have great partners in the Middle East, and I
work very closely Erik Kurilla to ensure that he has the
transportation and logistics he needs to maintain deterrence in
the Middle East.
Mr. Wilson. We want to thank both of you. Your service
could not be important as we have a war between dictators and
democracy. I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. And we are sending every witness to the school
you went to. You were succinct, and you answered the questions.
I now recognize the gentleman, Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman, both Chairmen and
Ranking Members for holding this meeting and certainly to our
witnesses. We very much appreciate the time we have had to
discuss not only in the past but today.
We have heard a lot about the capacity. Mr. Waltz has a
chart up there showing what China is doing. And certainly China
follows a rule that we don't. You don't see any of China's
naval vessels being made anywhere but China and certainly the
support boats.
And our conversation, the one that I would like to have
today, talks about our industrial base, the ability for
shipbuilding. Certainly, Seapower has been focused on it and
Joe Courtney and others.
But the uninterrupted recapitalization. So on one hand we
are having to go out to the used market to purchase ships
because they are not available to us in the time factor and the
costs that we need them.
Yet, we don't want to set up that recapitalization to build
new from the get-go. So it is a self-fulfilled prophecy. We are
not going to have the capacity until we make that decision
collectively that we have to build this in America to build up
that capacity because we talk about supply chain issues,
particularly between the light during the pandemic.
Well, the most difficult part to get of any ship, of any
airplane, of any vessel that might run on tracks is called the
human capital. And you don't grow it overnight. It takes time
and certainly it takes a lot of pressure from us to say we need
to build this. How many times did it take getting it attached
onto the Jones Act?
So what I am going to do is the both of you went the full
yard and talked about the construction management model. And
what we saw there virtually in naval terms, absolutely on time
and under budget in naval terms. But what they are doing there
-- and we can expand that model so that self-fulfilling
prophecy of not being able to have the capacity, you have to
start somewhere.
So, Admiral, share with us a little bit what they are doing
in Philadelphia under that construction management model and
how we can take that and potentially expand it because they
want the work. How can we give them the work they need and more
importantly have those vessels for what we need to defend
America?
Admiral Phillips. Thank you, sir, for that question. I
would add that Philly isn't the only one that wants the work.
But certainly Philly has shown, Philadelphia has shown that the
Vessel Construction Manager Program can work. The program
consists of us contracting with the vessel construction manager
who then contracts with the yard to build the vessel as
designed.
In this case, I believe a lot of the success is attributed
to having a strong vessel construction manager first of all but
also starting with 100 percent design, with a firm fixed price
contract and a very small change order budget and then using
commercial best practices to oversee the design, build, and
implementation of that build with the ship.
So that is what has made the Philly ship NSMV [National
Security Multi-Mission Vessel] program so successful. And I
believe that can be replicated in many senses to facilitate
additional ship construction programs. And it can be worked
across many yards at many different vessel construction
managers.
Mr. Norcross. We build those ships differently than our
vessels that go to war. There is no question about that. But
100 percent design or as close as we can get to it, and we have
seen that change.
One of the questions that came up is how can we send a
clear message to you? Well, we did it last year in the NDAA.
The modified Buy American provision for major acquisitions used
to be in the fifties. We are going to move that up
incrementally per year to send the signal to industry, we are
going to buy from American, up to the 75 percent.
That is the sort of signals we are sending. But if we don't
exercise it on our end and your end to actually implement
these, they are not going to get it the right way. And I am
going to yield back my final 30 seconds. Thanks.
Mr. Kelly. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I have a little
take than some of the previous comments that have been made. I
want the American citizens to know we are not talking about
aircraft carriers or destroyers when we are talking about the
buy used. If I'm not mistaken, and correct me if I'm wrong, we
are typically talking about a roll on, roll off ship very
similar to what we see in the pictures, unfortunately, of the
bridge collapse. Is that correct when we are talking about
these roll on, roll offs?
Admiral Phillips. Yes, sir, it is, essentially. The three
most recent ships we bought were ROCONs, so some container
capacity, some roll on, roll off capacity. The two previous
were ROROs.
Mr. Scott. When is the last time that a roll on, roll off
ship was built inside the United States of America?
Admiral Phillips. The last commercially built vessels that
were built in this country, sir, for international trade, not
Jones Act, international trade, were built in the 80s.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Admiral Phillips. We do have Jones Act construction now of
-- an example would be Matson and Pasha to West Coast carriers
who build container vessels.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Admiral Phillips. And they build them in this country.
Mr. Scott. So how many of those container vessels have been
built inside the United States in the last 10 years?
Admiral Phillips. I can't answer the last 10 years. Sir, I
know Pasha just finished two vessels, and Matson has an order
for three in Philly that will follow the NSMV program.
Mr. Scott. And how long will it take to build those three?
Admiral Phillips. Several years, I would expect. This is an
estimate, probably four years.
Mr. Scott. Okay. My point is that if we are going to deal
with the capacity challenge that we have in the time that we
have to deal with it, you have to accept that the calendar days
and the time limit and the capacity is a problem. And I think
we should raise the nine ship limit.
And if we get rid of a 50-year-old ship, and we end up with
a 15 or 20-year-old ship, until we are able to get new ships
built, if something kicks off between now and then, then we are
better able to serve this country.
And so my question is, you know, you have called for,
General Van Ovost, the nine ship limit to be removed, what if
it is not removed? How long would it take if it is not removed
for us to fill the capacity gap that we have?
General Van Ovost. Given the expected decommissioning of
the 27 ships in the next 8 years, we will be at a much elevated
risk to be able to meet our mission requirements, which is why
we need to come back to you with a more comprehensive strategy
that looks at the near term, the midterm and the far term --
Mr. Scott. And that is my --
General Van Ovost. -- compilation.
Mr. Scott. And so when we talk about the need to
temporarily -- to raise the limits so that we are temporarily
able to use ships not built in China, but built in Singapore,
built in Japan, we are standing down how many ships over the
next? Give me that number again, what you just gave me?
General Van Ovost. Twenty-seven, 56 percent of the fleet.
Mr. Scott. Okay. So we are going to get rid of 50 percent
of our transportation capacity over the next how many years?
General Van Ovost. Eight.
Mr. Scott. Over the next eight years?
General Van Ovost. 2032.
Mr. Scott. Okay. And it doesn't sound to me like in the
last 30 years there have been that many ships built inside the
United States in that category. It is simply a question of do
you want to have something to fill the gap until the U.S.
manufacturers are able to fill this or not if you ask me.
So real quick, General Van Ovost, we talked about the
supplemental and the need for the supplemental for you. Can you
talk to us just briefly about the $550 million, the specifics
of that just so that everybody -- I think the people on the
committee understand. But just so the American citizens
understand the need for the supplemental from the standpoint of
Transportation Command.
General Van Ovost. Yes, sir. From the standpoint of
Transportation Command, $550 million were earmarked for
transportation services to account for the transportation for
the events after October 7 in the Middle East. Those
transportation costs have not been recouped. We have not been
reimbursed. And that causes us to drain our funds such that we
-- if we have another emergency, we would have to look to see
where we would have capability to provide options for the
Secretary of Defense.
So our transportation working capital fund is necessary to
-- it is really our readiness function for TRANSCOM.
Mr. Scott. And that money has already been spent because of
what happened in Israel?
General Van Ovost. Approximately $180 million has been
spent so far. But we are forecasting up to 550 because we
deployed forces, and we will have to bring them back in 2024.
Mr. Scott. I thank both of you for your time and your
service.
Mr. Kelly. The gentleman's time has expired. I will now
recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Deluzio.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General, Admiral,
good to see you both.
General Van Ovost, I will start with you. I appreciate the
Transportation Command report responding to a request I had
made in this past year's NDAA identifying vulnerabilities in
transportation networks here in this country.
Personnel section under USTRANSCOM concerns regarding
commercial railroad capabilities, the report states, and I will
read this brief passage. "Over the past decade, the
implementation of lean operational processes by the major
railroads, commonly referred to as precision scheduled
railroading, or PSR, has had impacts on the railroad labor
force across almost all specialized trades. The railroads have
reduced the number of employees. Although the intent of PSR is
to improve the overall economic competitiveness and efficiency
of rail operations, it has arguably sacrificed resiliency in
the ability of the rail industry to effectively respond to
changes."
General, the overall assessment in the report is that
essentially freight rail is adequate to meet the needs of your
command. Although you have identified that risk in the report,
just give me a sense of those staffing issues and how they
could raise concerns intermediate longer term to the mission
you have to accomplish.
General Van Ovost. Certainly, I would say across the
transportation industry we are having -- we are seeing labor
shortages and so railroad is no exception to that. So as you
have less crews, you have less resiliency. It could occur with
delays. And so we are working very closely with the railroad
industry to have discussions about how to ensure resiliency
across the networks.
That said, should we have an issue on a rail, we do have
multiple ways to perhaps offload the rail and go to trucking.
So I work with NORTHCOM [Northern Command] with respect to
transportation, making sure that we have a robust way to defend
the transportation lines. And I work with the DOT [Department
of Transportation] to ensure we have multiple pathways to get
our cargo where it needs to go.
Mr. Deluzio. Very good. Thank you. And I appreciate the
department's announcement in the last few weeks of implementing
two-person minimum staffing. I think it will help with real
safety across the board. It is part my Railway Safety Act in
general.
Admiral Phillips, your testimony last year at last year's
posture hearing mentions direction from Congress from MARAD to
develop a roll on, roll of ship design for construction. We
have had a little bit of discussion there.
Give us a sense where things -- what kind of updates you
have for us if any.
Admiral Phillips. Thank you for that question, sir. We
thank Congress this year for -- last year we didn't have any
funding to do this. This year we do have funding to do this. So
2024 NDAA authorized $12 million, and we have an appropriation
for $12 million to begin to develop this design.
Mr. Deluzio. Very good, with that in mind given the pace of
things today and votes, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kelly. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from Minnesota who has an accent, Mr. Finstad.
Mr. Finstad. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you both for
being here and for your service.
Many hardworking suppliers of several different
transportation systems which fulfill missions and requirements
for the three subordinate commands of U.S. Transportation
Command live and work in southern Minnesota.
The demand signals for the industrial base is critical to
our national security, projecting power and investing in the
defense workforce. It is these private sector workers and
innovators that will build and sustain the mobility enterprise.
Employees and independent contractors alike have a role to play
in this most important work.
So with that being said and with the acknowledgment of the
time that we have here, General Van Ovost, I understand that
USTRANSCOM favors moving away from the independent contractors
for truckers that move freight and household goods. Do you
think this is a wise move? And have you based this course of
action on any underlying data, considering that a large portion
of our trucking fleet is made up of independent contractors?
General Van Ovost. Gosh, I wouldn't say we are walking away
from independent contractors. In fact, if you provide quality
move services, you are absolutely welcome and volunteer to join
the Home Safe Alliance.
And, again, this is a single move manager. But we will have
multiple sub-companies set up underneath. In fact, at least 40
percent of the contractors up underneath Home Safe Alliance
must be -- you know, are smaller industry small business
owners. And so we are keeping a close eye to ensure they meet
that requirement. In fact, it is a performance parameter for
them to meet.
Mr. Finstad. Great. Well, that's good to hear. I mean, it
is obviously important for the folks that I represent. It is a
great opportunity and partnership to really strengthen and send
signals to the defense industrial base. And I am just happy to
hear your response.
So with that, Mr. Chair, me and my funny accent will yield
back.
Mr. Kelly. I now recognize the gentlelady from Hawaii, Ms.
Tokuda.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And General,
thank you so much for your service.
General, your written testimony highlighted the fact that
our forces are not ready, postured, or scaled to optimize
limited strategic assets for global patient movement. I am
especially interested in the challenges of patient movement in
a contested environment and in large scale combat operations
against a peer or near peer adversary in the Indo-Pacific, my
back yard.
The fiscal year 2020 NDAA established a pilot program to
enhance interoperability and surge capacity of the national
disaster medical system, which includes three main components,
medical response, patient movement, and definitive care.
Now I believe it called for five pilot sites, none of which
are in the Pacific region. That being said, General, would you
please briefly discuss how TRANSCOM works with and integrates
the national disaster medical system into your planning for
global patient movement in the large-scale Pacific contingency?
General Van Ovost. I would like to first point out that our
air medical evacuation personnel have performed brilliantly
over the last few decades to save our servicemen and women
around the globe. And I am immensely proud of what they do
every day.
That said, we are at risk. To me, the casualty demand
expected in a large-scale combat operation, especially in the
waters of the Pacific -- in fact, we expect to have to move the
amount of the entire patients removed last year in one week in
such an event.
This is how we have to think about how we are going to have
to change our concepts of operation and our modes and actually
how we deliver when we think about people having to dwell in
theater, how we have to partner more with our allies and
partners to provide medical capacity in theater and how do we
make those routes streamlined to get back to the United States?
And when we get back to the United States, I work with
USNORTHCOM to work with NDMS [National Disaster Medical System]
to try to distribute those patients at different centers.
So, again, this is an end-to-end discussion. But it is at
the volume that we have just never seen. In fact, we really
haven't seen -- should we lose a ship, you know, mariners in
the water, how we collect them out of the water and how we get
them into the system. So we are really -- this is going to be a
whole of nation effort if we have to go to war. And we are
absolutely going to be using all services and resources of our
nation to deliver.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you. I know I am running out of time. And
I would --
Mr. Kelly. You're not. You have got an additional two
minutes because they didn't restart two minutes. So you have
got an additional two minutes to what is showing.
Ms. Tokuda. That being said, I do know we have to go to
votes. I would suspect that if we are looking at some kind of
large scale disaster, engagement, casualties in the Pacific,
Hawaii would play a critical role in supporting patient
movement and care, especially as we get them towards the
continent.
You know, what kind of challenges do you foresee with
transportation infrastructure both in Hawaii and in the
Pacific, places like Guam, in terms of our ability to conduct
air medical evacuations. Also one big problem that we face
consistently in Hawaii, which will only get worse in the case
of some kind of contingency, is having sufficient medical
workforce, equipment, supplies, facilities, to be able to
support health care needs.
Is TRANSCOM thinking through what kind of surge capacity
for health care staff and facilities we need to be prepared
for, whether military or civilian, to meet any kind of patient
movement or care through the Indo-Pacific, through Hawaii,
again to the continent?
General Van Ovost. Thank you. We are doing a lot of
thinking about the entire network. Again, I am responsible for
the end-to-end movement of patients around the globe. So we are
rethinking. We are reposturing where would we hold patients.
Where could we bring them for rehab? You know, Tripoli would
certainly be, you know, an option for that.
And so as I work with NORTHCOM and NDMS on where we would
have to expand or where we are thinking, again, about new
concepts and new ways to take care of them. So that would be
necessarily the downstream work as we set requirements for
different locations around the Pacific and in the United
States.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you. You know, I know there is, as I
said, five pilot sites perhaps if there are an extension of our
additional pilot sits. One in the Pacific would be a valuable
one so that we can really start to look at what would be
necessary for us to be able to prepare for any kind of conflict
and mass casualties. Thank you, Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. I now recognize Mr. Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, during
World War II for every aircraft carrier that was built by the
Japanese, we could build six. Unfortunately for us today, we
are Japan, and China is us except their capacity it is even
greater than what our advantage was in World War II.
We must, Mr. Chairman and colleagues, we need to make
shipbuilding a defense, a security priority. It is not going to
be done here. Whatever we do here is peanuts to be honest with
you when you look at, you know, really what shipbuilding
capacity is all about.
And we are talking about 9 ships or 20 ships, that is
nothing compared to the capacity that China has. And so we need
to play the game that China played. They played it very well.
They subsidized their industry. They captured the market. The
world is dependent on them. They have got all the capacity. And
they did it probably not using what we call fair trade. They
use their own -- they subsidize their industries. And that is
what they do by the way. That is what they do for everything
that they feel to be strategic, all those industries are
strategic for them.
They subsidize it, capture the market, and then they got
it. And so we have got to start playing some of that game, not
just here in HASC [House Armed Services Committee], but on a
whole of government approach. And that is my comment for this.
But my question to you, Admiral Phillips, the Port of
Baltimore is home port of part of the military sealift
command's national defense reserve fleet. What is the
assessment of the ability to respond with the tragedy of the
Francis Scott Key Bridge? Were any of the vessels impacted by
this incident?
Admiral Phillips. Sir, Thank you for that question. We
maintain -- typically we have six ships there. We have four in
Port Baltimore right now. Two of the four are under
maintenance. The other two would be fill-up rounds. They are
unable to leave the port. I would add that we believe once the
35-foot channel is open, which we expect at the end of April,
that they are all clear, should they be recalled by the
Department of Defense.
Mr. Gimenez. Were you prepared for the event like what
happened at that bridge and are there any contingency plans for
let's say a black swan event or deliberate attack on our key
infrastructure like bridges that could bottle up our fleet?
Admiral Phillips. So, sir, as you are aware, there are 48
total vessels in the ready reserve right now. So there are
additional vessels stationed around the country with similar
capacities that would be available.
Of course, a black swan event is always a challenge to
anticipate, but that is exactly why we don't station them all
together, and we station them strategically around the nation.
Mr. Gimenez. Finally, for you, Admiral, I would really be
interested in your views on how we can build -- we can restore
shipbuilding capacity here in the United States. And not on an
incremental basis. Somewhere to it really meets the security
needs of this country.
I really believe this is a critical piece of our security
infrastructure and that we have been asleep at the wheel, and
we don't have the capacity to respond like we used to. We
certainly don't have the capacity to respond to an adversary
like China.
This is going to be a long-term thing. It is not going to
happen overnight. How can we get back to having at least the
capacity that we need to maintain our freedoms here in the
United States? And I appreciate that. And I will yield back.
Mr. Kelly. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General, I wanted to
ask if you could talk a little bit about the V-22. I know that
the Pentagon has cleared it to fly again. And given the unique
capabilities that the V-22 has, particularly in rapid intra-
theater transport, can you speak to how the V-22 fits into the
operational strategy particularly for missions that require
both speed and versatility?
General Van Ovost. Sir, I would love to talk about the V-
22. It is a great airplane. However, I would ask you to speak
to the Navy and SOCOM about the airplanes. I don't have them in
my repertoire.
Mr. Veasey. Okay. And then I also wanted to ask you, and I
talked with you about this before, I know that it has taken
nearly six years from the initial announcement in 2018 to begin
implementing the new military household goods shipment system.
And I wanted to ask you, why are these specific 14
installations chosen for the initial rollout?
General Van Ovost. We are doing a conditions-based rollout.
And we started here in April. And we chose those locations
because the services said that they were ready because -- this
is not just a single contractor. We are changing the entire
model. So we work with the services to train them. They came
forward and said we are ready at these locations. And it made
sense.
These are local moves within 50 miles. And so as they chose
sort of the heat map of where the most moves would be and where
they were the most ready, that is how we selected them. We do
all of this in conjunction with the services.
Mr. Veasey. Okay. And what are the parameters for success
in this initial phase? And based on the current schedule, when
do you foresee the new system being rolled out to encompass 99
percent of service members?
General Van Ovost. So we are going to pause bringing on new
capability during the peak system to reduce risk and really
focus on customer experience. So the vast majority of this
season will be done under the old tender of service system. And
then we will begin full domestic ramp-up through the end of
this year, about September through December. And then all the
way through to next year, we will start doing overseas moves
beginning in September of 2025 and then ramp up from there
again, a deliberate conditions-based approach to this
capability.
That said, we have, you know, almost 30 metrics that we
watch. We gather data every day, do analysis weekly, on the
metrics that they are going to be graded against. So
immediately we will be able to see if there are any concerns
and provide immediate feedback. And that feedback is also
available to the services and to the company and some vendors.
Mr. Veasey. Yeah. I wanted to ask you also, how do you
think the moves -- if you look at the current experience versus
the new system that you want to put in place for the military
moving system, what steps are being taken to ensure that the
enhancements are going to be effective?
General Van Ovost. Absolutely. Look, the current tender of
service program does not provide consistent, high quality
moving experience for our service members and their families.
And it is difficult to hold industry accountable for
performance failures.
So this complete change in how we are doing household
goods, as really mandated in 2018 by Congress, this is going to
help us achieve a standardization, an integration, and capacity
management that we can achieve today.
Accountability with defined standards, with trained
personnel, modern digital management tools where you could do
the move on your iPhone, enhanced communications, and
simplified claims, again, that we do not have today. So given
all of those changes, we think it is going to be a radically
different experience.
Mr. Veasey. And speaking of the accountability that you
just mentioned, how was this new system as far as service
quality concerned, how is it going to handle potential issues
that you hear from families dealing with loss, damages,
people's belongings during the move?
General Van Ovost. We now have a 24/7 contact center, and
the quality assurance representatives that are at the locations
that will visit onsite are cleared to immediately make a call
if there is a problem, which then gets funnels to a center that
is going to take care of the problem right away. So we will
know immediately if things start to go off the rails because
what we really desire is that our service members and their
families have a confident, pleasant, quality move no matter
where they are moving.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Kelly. I now recognize the gentleman from Guam, Mr.
Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, General.
Thank you, Rear Admiral, for your testimony. And, General, I
appreciate your visits to my office. It has been very helpful.
And I truly support your objective to ensuring that we have the
fleet that is necessary, absolutely.
Once we get those ships into, especially, the INDOPACOM
area, we have to get it loaded and unloaded. And, General, in
our last meeting we talked about the urgency of funding the
Port Authority of Guam and its unique role for the Department
of Defense.
Can you please elaborate on the necessity of the Port
Authority of Guam in USTRANSCOM operational structure and what
infrastructure there is critical to your mission?
General Van Ovost. Thank you. I would say it is an
understatement to say how important Guam is to our operation in
the Pacific. So thank you for your leadership out there and
thank you to the committee for the support of the
infrastructure and resiliency work that we are doing out there
right now.
So Guam is critical. And the Navy Port, the Navy Seaport of
Guam, is critical for us for a lot of our deployment
requirements. And then the civilian side of the port has been
important for our sustainment if you will and construction
materials which are really critical again right now, as we are
bolstering our posture in helping the services and our allies
and partners come out there and get settled in.
So I think about Guam all the time. In fact, there is a new
two-star commander that is going to roll out and be responsible
for integrating all of those projects together. And I look
forward to working with him or her on how do we help to ensure
that we can phase in and meet the requirements of the build up
there.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you. And the new general is the one-star
that stepped up. Hoffman will continue on there with his
family. So that is wonderful.
Along with that line, there are two phases of
infrastructure I am concerned about to include the Port of
Guam's Gantry cranes, which are in need of replacement, and the
harbor's breakwater, which reportedly one more typhoon could
destroy.
If these two pieces of infrastructure fail, the people of
Guam could lose access to commercial shipping. Considering the
approximately 40 percent of cargo moving through the Port of
Guam is for the military, how will the Department of Defense be
impacted by this infrastructure deterioration?
General Van Ovost. Certainly, we like resilient options
with respect to berthing and where the cranes are, you know,
the Navy Port and the civilian side of the port.
As you now, the Department of Defense does not fund the
infrastructure on the civilian side. I turn to our maritime
administration partners for opportunities for loans because
essentially, we get billed to use those things. And it is that
money that goes back, that goes back to reinforce and
reinvestment supposedly by the civilian contractors. So I defer
to Admiral Phillips.
Admiral Phillips. Thank you, ma'am. And Congressman, thank
you. We have received letters from the governor on the topics
you are mentioning exactly. And we have also been visited by
Guam and Port of Guam staff many times. I see them often at
AAPA [American Association of Port Authorities]. And I thank
them for their interest and their visits.
As you aware, we have a discretionary grant program, port
infrastructure development program. That is an opportunity for
Guam. They are a strategic port. So they are a part of that
process as well.
And, as discussed, our gateway director, who is quite
familiar with the staff at the Port of Guam, has been in
contact with them to help them work through opportunities to
apply not only the PIDP [Port Infrastructure Development
Program], which I know you have done, and done successfully in
the past, but also to look at other grants within the
Department of Transportation that may also facilitate the needs
of Guam and particularly the Port.
Mr. Moylan. I thank you for that and am looking forward to
that being completed.
And the final question is for you, Rear Admiral. The
Maritime Security Program helps America's shipping companies
remain competitive in global markets and service routes to the
Western Pacific, including Guam. Can you please outline how
fully funding the Maritime Security Program benefits America
and the Pacific and supports our national security?
Admiral Phillips. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question. So
MSP, the Maritime Security Program, is fully funded at present
under current appropriations and authorizations, $318 million a
year. That is also in the President's budget request.
Certainly, having a full 60 ships ready to support U.S.
cargo movements around the world and particularly in support of
DOD requirements and other cargo preference requirements is
essential to us being able to move our cargo at the time and
place of our choosing. And MSP in particular is a key element
to that process. And we are very happy that we have 60 vessels
in there now who are executing those missions.
Mr. Moylan. I thank you for that. Thank you for what you
do. I am looking forward to working with you to make this
happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. And I would be remiss if I didn't recognize our
senior enlisted leaders and the hard work that they do as our
battle buddies every day, the aides, the civilian staff that
work so tremendously. I thank both of our witnesses, no joke,
for being the most succinct and accurate in answering the
questions. And I know that doesn't come without the great staff
that is behind you.
With that this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:21 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 11, 2024

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 11, 2024

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 11, 2024

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS

Mr. Rogers. USTRANSCOM's role is to provide the DOD with air, land,
and sea transportation. California is a major route for USTRANSCOM's
movements, especially as it pertains to dealing with our Pacific
posture. The California Air Resources Board, CARB, has a proposal that
I understand could significantly impact the ability of the national
rail network to support DOD deployment to the West Coast by banning
certain locomotives from operating in California starting in 2030 and
imposing a requirement for zero emission locomotives, which currently
do not exist. According to the Association of American Railroads about
65% of the nation's locomotives would be prohibited from entering
California starting in 2030. What impact would it have on your
operations if railroads could not service routes in California or had
to divert cargoes to other areas to meet DOD logistics requirements?
General Van Ovost. The preservation of robust commercial freight
rail capability in California is critical to USTRANSCOM's ability to
deploy and sustain forces rapidly, particularly in support of
USINDOPACOM requirements.
There are 15 defense sites or activities in California identified
in the 2023 Strategic Rail Corridor Network (STRACNET) report as
requiring commercial rail service. These sites are served primarily by
BNSF Railway and Union Pacific Railroad. On an annual basis, California
sees the second most rail shipments of DoD equipment, only behind
Texas. Many of these shipments are to or from the National Training
Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin -- a critical U.S. Army maneuver combat
center, which prepares Soldiers for unit deployments -- and accounts
for over 10,000 railcars moved in 2023.
Most critical to the DoD's ability to deploy and sustain forces are
the five designated Strategic Seaports (three commercial and two
military) within California. Access to these seaports is necessary to
project combat power rapidly from U.S. military installations
throughout the country to USINDOPACOM. USTRANSCOM cannot meet
USINDOPACOM operational plan requirements without the Strategic
Seaports located in California and without the ability to move combat
equipment to these Seaports via rail.
The most important Strategic Seaport in the nation supporting
USINDOPACOM is the Military Ocean Terminal Concord (MOTCO) in Concord,
California. This purpose-built ammunition terminal is the only
Strategic Seaport with the capacity to ship required quantities of
containerized munitions. Both MOTCO and NTC are unique installations
with critical roles that cannot be replicated. Therefore, any impact to
rail service to these two locations would be extremely detrimental to
national security.
Although military locomotives are exempt from the California Air
Resources Board (CARB) regulation, as noted above, USTRANSCOM relies
heavily on the commercial rail network. The Command is aware of the
rail industry's concerns with complying with the CARB regulation within
its prescribed timelines and specifically questioning the technical
feasibility of meeting the requirement for Class 1 line-haul
locomotives to be in zero emission configuration by 2035.
Regardless of technical feasibility, compliance will be costly and
USTRANSCOM anticipates the railroads will pass this cost onto
customers, including the DoD. In some cases, short line railroads would
not be able to pass these costs down to customers, which may force
short line railroads to discontinue service and close. More concerning
than increased transportation costs is the potential for degraded
service as the railroads are forced to make potentially significant
changes to their capital investment plans and operating procedures. The
freight rail network is a national network that benefits from the
ability to operate across state lines under a predictable and
consistent regulatory framework. Deferring or delegating rail industry
regulatory authority to state and local agencies may introduce
significant disruptions to freight rail service.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. US 501c3s are working with the Ukrainian government and
have vehicles needed by the Ukrainian government. Why can't U.S.
Transportation Command transport donated emergency vehicles from the
USA to Ukraine?
General Van Ovost. USTRANSCOM provides movement of an immediate
emergency or lifesaving nature, in direct support of a DoD mission,
when authorized by statute or requested by the head of an executive
agency of the Federal Government. Law and policy limit what USTRANSCOM
can provide in the way of transportation support to non-DoD agencies or
foreign governments, to include the movement of donated goods, even
when a demonstrated need exists as in the case of donated emergency
vehicles for Ukraine.
One statutory authority that would provide the capability to move
humanitarian goods is the Denton Humanitarian Assistance Program
(Denton Program). The U.S. Department of State, the U.S. Agency for
International Development (USAID), and Defense Security Cooperation
Agency (DSCA) jointly administer the program. The Denton Program is a
DoD transportation program, authorized by statute (10 U.S. Code 402),
centrally managed by the DSCA, and supported by USTRANSCOM.
The program moves humanitarian cargo donated by U.S.-based Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) to developing nations for
humanitarian assistance. DoD transports approved humanitarian cargo by
land, air, or sea assets on a space-available basis. For authorized
humanitarian assistance and disaster aid support under the Denton Act,
Federal agencies request DoD move such cargo through the Secretary of
Defense. Title 10, U.S. Code, provides additional authorities related
to supporting humanitarian and foreign disaster assistance.
Mr. Scott. How can established and vetted 501c3 groups that have
already sent dozens and dozens of emergency vehicles to Ukraine from
the USA work with U.S. Transportation Command to explore possible
partnership opportunities?
General Van Ovost. Specific statutory and regulatory authorities
limit the ability for DoD to move non-DoD assets and donated goods.
Established and vetted 501(c)(3) organizations may contact the
Department of State, or USAID, to have these requests considered for
movement under authorities related to disaster relief and humanitarian
aid efforts as authorized in Title 10, U.S. Code, to include the Denton
Humanitarian Assistance Program (10 U.S. Code 402) that provides for
DoD movement of humanitarian cargo donated by U.S.-based NGOs to
developing nations to ease human suffering.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Mr. Waltz. DoD has introduced a proposal that could jeopardize the
safety and security of the transportation of arms, ammunition, and
explosives (AA&E) carried by motor carriers that proudly support DoD
missions and federal agencies by transporting arms and ammunition,
disaster relief supplies, and other specialized freight. As you know,
the DoD requires motor carriers to comply with numerous rules to
transport any military freight. These truckload and less-than-truckload
motor carriers play a vital role in moving goods throughout the United
States to ensure military readiness.
There are additional safety and security requirements specifically
for a class of freight called TPS (Transportation Protective Services),
which includes AA&E (Arms, Ammunition, and Explosives), that motor
carriers must abide by to haul those sensitive shipments. The unique
additional requirements include (1) constant surveillance and custody
of a shipment by a qualified DoD-approved carrier, (2) identification
requirements to verify the driver's connection to the carrier on the
bill of lading, (3) the capability to trace an in-transit shipment in
less than one hour, (4) unique training for drivers, and (5)
significant investments in specialized equipment.
This new DoD proposal would allow the tendering of TPS shipments to
unqualified, non-TPS motor carriers and logistics providers during
surges in AA&E transportation (such as sharp increases in overseas
ammunition shipments). It is unlikely that a non-TPS motor carrier,
that has never previously met the necessarily high security thresholds
for AA&E shipments and has never moved such shipments before, will have
the experience and operational protocols in place to safely move these
sensitive goods.
DoD has not yet provided any data to justify the need for this
proposed change, such as identifying the number of AA&E shipments that
industry was unable to support, anticipated shortfalls in capacity, or
how many TPS shipments would be hauled by non-TPS carriers. As a
result, the current pending DoD proposal creates unnecessary risks to
solve a problem whose scope is unclear. Can you provide me the data to
justify this proposed change?
General Van Ovost. USTRANSCOM's responsibility is to ensure access
to transportation capacity to meet current and potential movement
requirements. This includes routinely reviewing options designed to
increase capacity through policy changes, operational changes, and
waivers. The proposal you describe stems from capacity issues
encountered during Presidential Drawdown Authority movements supporting
Ukraine operations. Specifically, this policy proposal would provide
the Commanding General of the Military Surface Deployment and
Distribution Command the authority to approve limited Transportation
Protective Service waivers that may be executed during a contingency or
crisis situation to expand DoD's available motor ammunition and
explosives (AE) capacity.
This waiver authority requires thorough consideration of multiple
factors before execution to include alternate courses of action, DoD
mitigating actions to increase required capacity, and situation-
specific data analysis; these waivers will only be approved after
formal risk acceptance at the General/Flag-Officer level.
The specific concerns relative to unique requirements are related
to a limited proposal which allows SDDC/CG to authorize non-cleared
drivers with HAZMAT authority to move only Hazard Class 1.4 ammunition
and explosives, which are generally considered small arms ammunition
and low risk explosives. This would only be executed when requirements
exceed available capacity, and the priority would be given to currently
approved AE carriers or a Freight Carrier Registration Program (FCRP)
approved affiliated company, who may be able to access additional
capacity if the driver training and clearance and unique vehicle
requirements are waived.
The existing constant surveillance and shipment tracing remain in
place. This proposal is just one of many policy and operational changes
under consideration to ensure continued capacity availability to
support DoD AE movement requirements. Since contingencies or crises may
come in several -- and often unforeseen -- forms, it is difficult to
provide data up front to support all the different permutations where
these proposals may be executed. USTRANSCOM actively is engaged with
appropriate DoD stakeholders and our industry partners in conducting
comprehensive risk informed reviews of all proposals. USTRANSCOM will
continue to partner with industry in further developing and scoping
these proposals.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GIMENEZ
Mr. Gimenez. Please describe the challenges you will face
overcoming the vast distances of the Pacific especially with regards to
your role coordinating the JDDE (Joint Deployment and Distribution
Enterprise) for intra-theater distribution in a contested environment?
General Van Ovost. Part of USTRANSCOM's Unified Command Plan
assigned mission is to advocate for global deployment and distribution
capabilities, which includes addressing challenges with intra-theater
lift capabilities and capacity. Our role includes advocating for
solutions to mitigate the tyranny of distance which is exacerbated when
supporting a contingency or crisis in the Indo-Pacific. Our research
shows intra-theater demands emanating from emerging Military Department
and Joint Warfighting Concepts are increasing the demand for intra-
theater airlift and sealift to position or reposition forces and
sustainment for broadly distributed operations.
Recent Indo-Pacific analysis highlighted a tight coupling between
air and sea-lift assets required to maneuver and sustain fielded forces
given the dearth of overland routes. Absent sufficient shallow-draft
sealift vessels, movement requirements will shift to intra-theater
airlift and inter-theater platforms due to the significant distances in
the Pacific theater. This exacerbates demands already levied on our
airlift fleets. Consequently, the President's FY25 Budget programmed
theater airlift fleet of 271 C-130 aircraft is assessed at elevated
risk to meet the competing theater airlift demands.
I have similar concerns with regards to intra-theater fuel
distribution. Reliance on non-U.S. carriers raises questions of assured
access and continues to be an elevated risk. Expansion of bilateral
agreements offers promise but carries its own challenges and requires
continued engagement.
In summary, multiple simultaneous mission requirements and emerging
warfighting concepts severely stress theater lift acutely in the Indo-
Pacific. To alleviate stress on the theater and strategic airlift
fleets, we must fully resource not only our airlift fleets, but also
our theater sealift capacity to support maneuver concept requirements,
especially in the Indo-Pacific. Additionally, the Indo-Pacific theater
geography and limited U.S. Flag presence emphasizes the need for
assured access to Allied and partner nation intra-theater fuel
distribution platforms. USTRANSCOM supports establishing formal allied
agreements with partner nations and expanding the Tanker Security
Program to place U.S. Flag intra-theater fuel tankers into economically
sustainable Indo-Pacific operations.
Mr. Gimenez. Your written statement talks about our nation's
strategic network of allies and partners that provides capacity,
logistical capabilities, intelligence, and Access, Basing and
Overflight. Can you give us some examples of those capabilities? Do we
have allies that are as capable as USTRANSCOM for logistics? How do you
ensure we have those necessary agreements? What happens to your mission
if we lose those agreements?
General Van Ovost. Much of the logistics support provided by allies
and partners is through international agreements. For instance, within
their respective Areas of Responsibility (AORs), the Geographic
Combatant Commands (GCC) have a total of 129 Acquisition and Cross
Servicing Agreements (ACSA) with countries around the globe providing
varying levels of logistics support.
Furthermore, our global reach capability would severely be hampered
without the network of basing agreements with countries such as
Germany, Italy, Spain, Turkiye, United Kingdom, Qatar, Kuwait,
Australia, and Japan, to name a few. Additionally, as our country's
largest consumer of petroleum products, the ability to access fuel
stocks globally, either by ACSA or via a Defense Logistics Agency
contracts, is crucial to enabling our logistics mission. USTRANSCOM
also participates in shared lift consortiums (e.g. the Movement Control
Center Europe) where Ally and partner capacity supports regional
mission requirements in exchange for replacement-in-kind capacity or by
the exchange of services of equal value. Lastly, USTRANSCOM has started
exploring additional opportunities to gain access to foreign-flagged
tankers via contract to augment our tanker vessel fleet.
No other nations have the capabilities to match the strategic
capacity or capability of USTRANSCOM. On a regional level, however, the
alliance of nations under NATO presents a robust logistics capability.
The NATO alliance is now taking a greater interest in the logistics
capacity and capabilities throughout the continent. Furthermore, we
have Allies and partners that are experts in their trade routes, local
economies, and climates, which can be leveraged to enhance global
operations. For example, our Scandinavian partners are more practiced
and better prepared for Arctic operations, which we leverage during
joint training exercises.
Maintaining regular Ally and partner engagements and participating
in bilateral exercises can strengthen the relationships that help
maintain agreements. Assured access to and through foreign nations are
incorporated into agreements, ranging from an exchange of Diplomatic
Notes to a comprehensive Mutual Defense Treaty or Defense Cooperation
Agreement of indefinite duration.
The reciprocal exchange of Logistic Support, Supplies, and
Services, including airlift, sealift, aerial refueling, and related
services, are addressed in ACSAs with Allies and international
organizations. USTRANSCOM has the authority to negotiate and conclude
ACSA Implementing Arrangements with Allies and international
organizations. For treaties, protection agreements, services
agreements, basing agreements, access agreements, diplomatic notes, and
implementing arrangements, USTRANSCOM relies on each GCC in
coordination with the State Department to initiate negotiations and
conclude agreements with host nations within their areas of
responsibility.
The speed and precision of our logistics deployment and
distribution capability would be impacted significantly depending on
the terms and capabilities afforded by these agreements. The loss of
overflight agreements or limited overflight contingent on the mission
type could force more circuitous routes, thereby slowing delivery
times. Timelines for country clearances and permissions would be
extended without approved agreements in place, impacting our ability to
mobilize forces and deliver sustainment to the point of need. The
ability to forward stage or refuel would also be impacted without such
agreements in place, creating additional stress on already strained
existing resources. USTRANSCOM seeks redundant and resilient options to
minimize the impact of dynamic changes to agreement status and the
operational environment.
Mr. Gimenez. Your written statement mentions your global mobility
posture. Do you have everything you need to accomplish your global
mission? What can the Congress do to help?
General Van Ovost. Accomplishing our global mission relies on a
vast network of capabilities, forces, footprint, and agreements. While
USTRANSCOM aggressively and continuously seeks innovative approaches to
address our global mobility posture requirements, we currently do not
have everything we need to accomplish our global mission.
Our most pressing needs for prosecuting our global mission are
found in capabilities, primarily focused on the age and number of
aircraft and sealift vessels required. Some mitigating actions involve
working within the DoD. For example, the FY24 NDAA maintained
authorities that limit used purchases to no more than total nine
foreign-built vessels.
The Buy Used program is projected to reach that limit with the
purchase of the FY25 vessels. Not purchasing additional used vessels
beyond FY25 will impact our ability to address identified gaps in
global capacity.
The FY25 budget request makes the necessary investments to
implement and execute the 2022 National Defense Strategy (NDS). The
FY25 President's budget request allows us to continue to implement the
NDS and build the right mix of capabilities to defend against current
and future threats. The budget request also supports investments in
areas to ensure the DoD maintains key strategic advantages.
The passage of authorities and appropriations provides the single
greatest assistance Congress can provide. Additionally, on time passage
of annual appropriations is critical to the USTRANSCOM's Transportation
Working Capital Fund (TWCF) efficacy, which provides the agility
necessary to respond rapidly to complex and unplanned operations.
Enduring Continuing Resolutions (CRs) impact Military Department
budgets and their timely purchase of capabilities that enable
USTRANSCOM missions and future readiness for the Joint Force.
An essential part of maintaining TWCF solvency is timely
reimbursement from contingency operations. A CR has great potential to
increase cash balance volatility that impacts the TWCF. CRs also impact
our Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation programs. Although
existing projects receive sufficient funding to continue during a CR,
new starts, which are approximately 25% of the annual innovation
program, would be delayed.
USTRANSCOM submitted four legislative proposals as part of the DoD
FY25 Legislative Proposal submission to the House and Senate Armed
Services Committees. USTRANSCOM's number one priority would be
recommended changes to the working capital fund statute, 10 U.S.C.
2208. Raising the capital asset threshold from $250K to $350K and
expanding contract authority to include service and supply contracts
would not only free up contract authority for immediate USTRANSCOM
priorities but would also increase the flexibility of limited budgetary
resources to aid audit readiness for the TWCF.
A second legislative proposals requests amending the statutory
language of the General Services Administration's (GSA) audit
authorities for Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)-based
transportation contracts. The current structure is confusing, has
spawned and will likely continue to spawn litigation, and does not
require the GSA to consider the USTRANSCOM Contracting Officers'
authority, input, and expertise. The legislative proposal would provide
needed clarity for industry on the audit and appellate authority for
GSA contract payment offset authority and codify consideration of the
Contracting Officers' input.
USTRANSCOM also seeks an extension of the authority for charging
the DoD reimbursement rate for other Federal agencies; foreign military
sales; state, local, or tribal agencies; or DOD contractors when
transporting supplies in the Defense Transportation System. This
authority, which expires on 1 October 2024, benefits those entities and
USTRANSCOM by allowing USTRANSCOM to fill excess capacity with paying
cargo at the DoD rate.
Lastly, USTRANSCOM requests the ability to apply the credit-debit
system in the European Air Transport and Air-to-Air Refueling and other
Exchange of Services to liquidate Acquisition and Cross-Servicing
Agreement debts at the owing country's request. This flexibility aids
USTRANSCOM's efforts to build better allied and partner relations,
particularly considering the challenges with the pacing threat in the
USINDOPACOM area of responsibility, as well as provides a means for
owing countries to service their debts through other than cash means.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FINSTAD
Mr. Finstad. Does TRANSCOM have performance data to support the
notion that service levels are improved when freight or household goods
movements are handled by employee drivers and crew as opposed to
independent contractors? If so, can you provide this to the Committee?
General Van Ovost. No, our performance data does not distinguish
between employee drivers and crew as opposed to independent
contractors. USTRANSCOM collects Customer Satisfaction Survey feedback
and tracks transportation service provider (TSP) performance data
points to assess current program performance. The current program
assesses and evaluates TSP performance at the standard carrier alpha
code level. The current program does not require TSPs to report or
distinguish the category of workers (employee driver and crew or
independent contractor) performing the work.
Mr. Finstad. Independent contractors make up about 70% of the
moving industry's drivers and a large portion of on-site crews. The IC
model provides highly seasonal businesses with flexibility, individuals
with opportunity, and supports high-quality service during peak season.
As I talk with movers they are concerned with DOD's approach to ICs
under the GHC Program, especially after a recent presentation where
TRANSCOM staff outright stated its goal was to eliminate IC moving
crews. Isn't it beyond TRANSCOM's scope to be disrupting the underlying
business model of an industry that supports 300,000 military movements
annually, especially when you haven't provided any data showing the
employee model results in better service?
General Van Ovost. USTRANSCOM does not specify the business
operating model companies must use to participate in the Defense
Personal Property Program under the Tender of Service or Global
Household Goods Contract (GHC). Multiple business operating models are
in use today, and USTRANSCOM expects multiple business operating models
will continue to be used in GHC. USTRANSCOM is aware that some in
industry have concluded the only way to attain compliance with the
Service Contract Act is to turn all independent contractors into
employees, but that has never been and is not USTRANSCOM's position.
Those in the moving industry who wish to provide quality moving
services to our Servicemembers and their families will need to
determine how to best organize to meet GHC performance requirements.
Mr. Finstad. The Service Contract Act is an incredibly complex law,
and many companies working with the government have legal departments
to help them navigate it. Yet the moving industry isn't full of big
companies, instead it is made up of small businesses and one-truck
owner-operator drivers. Given that the SCA has had limited application
to the moving businesses that TRANSCOM relies on to provide high-
quality moving experiences to servicemembers and their families, can
you commit to me that you and your team will fully and completely
educate your service providers on how they can apply and comply with
the SCA under the Global Household Goods Contract?
General Van Ovost. The Service Contract Act (SCA) applies to the
GHC by Federal law (41 U.S.C. 6701, et seq.) and contains no relevant
exemption for the GHC. Per the statute, the U.S. Department of Labor
(DOL) is responsible for interpreting and enforcing the SCA and has
extensive SCA reference materials available. USTRANSCOM and DOL are
committed to assisting industry find the additional resources they need
to comply with SCA requirements. The SCA currently applies to DoD
moving and storage programs today. TSPs who participate in our Non-
Temporary Storage program and those who have Direct Procurement Method
contracts with USTRANSCOM must comply with the SCA and have done so
successfully. Companies may achieve SCA compliance under GHC in many
ways, which is why a prescriptive guide does not exist, providing
business owners the flexibility to adopt individual labor policies for
their respective companies.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LALOTA
Mr. LaLota. Rear Admiral Phillips, recognizing the essential role
of the maritime workforce in ensuring the competitiveness and security
of our national maritime industry: Could you outline the major
challenges MARAD faces in recruiting and retaining a skilled maritime
workforce? Additionally, how does MARAD plan to engage with educational
and training institutions, possibly including those in regions rich in
maritime history like Long Island, to address these challenges?
Admiral Phillips. [No answer was available at the time of
publication.]

[all]
