- [H.A.S.C. No. 118-1] ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING FOR THE 118TH CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-1]

ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING FOR THE
118TH CONGRESS

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

FEBRUARY 2, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-700                     WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Eighteenth Congress

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ADAM SMITH, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Vice    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
Chair                            RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  JASON CROW, Colorado
DON BACON, Nebraska                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana              SARA JACOBS, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 PATRICK RYAN, New York
PAT FALLON, Texas                    JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota                  Pennsylvania
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
NICK LaLOTA, New York                STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                JIMMY PANETTA, California
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                Vacancy
CORY MILLS, Florida
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia

Chris Vieson, Staff Director
Zach Steacy, Director, Legislative Operations
ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING FOR THE 118TH CONGRESS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Thursday, February 2, 2023.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
I ask unanimous consent the chair be authorized to declare
a recess at any time.
Without objection, so ordered.
Without objection, members have five legislative days
within which to submit written statements to be made part of
the record.
So ordered.
We have four items of official business to consider today:
adoption of the committee rules, approval of the committee
security procedures, approval of the committee authorization
and oversight plan, and appointment of the committee staff.
Before I begin consideration of the business, I want to
recognize myself for a few minutes to welcome everybody to the
Armed Services Committee.
This committee has the fundamental duty to provide for our
Nation's common defense. The work we do here is critical to the
security of our country and that of its partners and allies
around the world.
And while we have our disagreements at times, we have a
long tradition of carrying out our responsibilities in a very
bipartisan manner. That tradition will continue.
I look forward to working closely with my friend and
colleague, Ranking Member Smith, to enact the NDAA [National
Defense Authorization Act] that strengthens our national
defense and provides for our warfighters. That effort starts
next week with our first two hearings.
On Tuesday, we will examine the threats we face from China
and how best to prepare our military to deter and defeat them.
On Wednesday, we will hear about the state of the defense
industrial base and the work we need to do to ensure that they
are prepared for future conflicts.
I expect we will continue to have a very aggressive
schedule of hearings and briefings that will lead up to the
mark later this spring.
Oversight is going to be very important to Congress. At
both the full committee and subcommittee level, we will be
closely examining the decisions made by this administration. We
will demand to know how these decisions impact our ability to
build the ready, capable, and lethal fighting force that we
need to deter China and our other adversaries.
As we build the fiscal year 2024 NDAA, we will be laser
focused on the threats we face and the capabilities we need to
defeat them. We will closely examine programs to determine if
they actually provide the capabilities that we need to defeat
the threats we face. If they don't, they will be cut.
At the end of the day, I expect we will find a lot of
savings in the Pentagon. But I want to be clear about this:
modernizing our military will cost a lot of money and we cannot
shy away from that investment.
In many cases, our warfighters currently lack the advanced
technologies needed to succeed in future battlefields. But
China is fielding those technologies today.
We don't have a choice, we need to make robust investments
in our national defense.
I look forward to working with all of you to enact the NDAA
that accomplishes these goals.
With that, I want to quickly introduce our 11 new
Republican members.
First, Representative Carlos Gimenez from Florida. He was
born in Cuba and fled the island with his family shortly after
the Communist takeover. He is the former mayor of Miami-Dade
County and the first career firefighter ever elected to
Congress.
Number two, Ms. Nancy Mace of South Carolina represents
South Carolina's First Congressional District, home to one-half
of the State's military installations and one-third of the
State's veterans. She is the daughter of a retired Army General
and the first woman to graduate from the Citadel's Corps of
Cadets.
Number three, Brad Finstad, fourth-generation farmer. He is
a graduate of the University of Minnesota with a degree in
agriculture education, with an emphasis on rural leadership
development.
Next, we have a great Alabamian. Congressman Dale Strong
represents Alabama's Fifth District, which is the home of
Redstone Arsenal, where Army Materiel Command and Missile
Defense Agency are located. He was the chairman of the Madison
County Commission and he is a lifelong firefighter and EMT
[emergency medical technician]. So if we have a fire we have
got two firefighters now.
Congressman Morgan Luttrell from Texas, Texas' Eighth
Congressional District, is a native of Magnolia, Texas. He is a
distinguished veteran of the Navy, serving over 14 years.
Congresswoman Jen Kiggans represents Virginia's Second
District. She is a former Navy helicopter pilot who completed
two tours of duty in the Persian Gulf. She is the daughter of a
Green Beret who served in Vietnam, the wife of a former F/A-18
pilot, and the mother of four children, two of whom attend the
United States Naval Academy and Virginia Military Institute.
Next, we have Mr. Nick LaLota from New York's First
District. He is a graduate of the Naval Academy and had a
decorated career in the Navy, deploying overseas several times
and serving as a surface warfare officer on the USS Curts and
the USS Carl Vinson.
Next, we have Congressman James Moylan, who serves Guam's
congressional district. He served in the Army, protected his
district as a law enforcement officer, and spent more than two
decades in the private sector.
Next, we have the new Vicky Hartzler. It is Representative
Mark Alford. He is a proud husband, father, and former small
business owner. He spent 25 years anchoring Kansas City's
number one morning news show prior to his time in Congress.
Next, we have Mr. Cory Mills of Florida. He spent the
majority of his adult life serving our Nation. Through his
military and government service, he spent more than seven years
in Iraq, two and a half years in Afghanistan, and also spent
time in Kosovo, Pakistan, Somalia, Kenya, and Ukraine.
Finally, we have Mr. Rich McCormick to come to the aid of
Austin Scott in protecting Georgia. Rich McCormick served 20
years in the U.S. Marine Corps and Navy as a JFO [joint fires
observer], fighter pilot, and medical doctor with deployments
in Africa, the Persian Gulf, and Afghanistan.
I want to welcome all of you to our committee and I look
forward to working with you.
Now I yield to my friend, the ranking member, Mr. Smith,
for any opening remarks he may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And first and foremost, I want to congratulate Mike Rogers
on his elevation to being chairman of this committee. It is a
richly deserved honor.
Look forward to working with you in that capacity. So
congratulations.
And I concur with everything he said in his opening
remarks. This committee has a very strong tradition of working
together in a bipartisan and, yes, even in a bicameral fashion
in order to do our job every year. I think it is 63 straight
years now that we have passed the National Defense
Authorization Act, the only piece of legislation that passes
every single year.
It is not easy to do. It is a large piece of legislation
involving a lot of issues which just about every member gets
involved in. But it is enormously important that we do that to
exercise our oversight of the Department of Defense and meet
our paramount duty as a body to defend and protect this
country.
So this is a very serious committee. When Mr. Rogers was
the ranking member and I was the chairman, we worked incredibly
well together, and I have no doubt whatsoever that that
relationship will continue and all of the members of the
committee, on both sides of the aisle, will do the same.
It is not that we don't disagree, it is that we understand
that we do have to get work done. So at the end of it, we have
to find a way to agree, pass our bill, and move forward. So I
look forward to that process.
And Mr. Rogers is also right, we face a complex threat
environment right now, there are a number of requirements to
meet the national security needs of our country.
First and foremost to me is to make sure that Ukraine
remains a sovereign and democratic state and that we end the
war there and protect Ukraine and their sovereignty.
He is also right about the need for modernization. It is a
fast-changing world. Technology is crucial to what happens on
the battlefield. We are learning that every day in Ukraine.
We need to make sure that we here in the U.S. continue to
be the leaders in using that technology to put us in the best
position to meet our defense needs and be able to deter our
adversaries.
And the other issue that I know Mr. Rogers cares a great
deal about is recruitment and retention. What makes that
military work is the people who serve in it. We need to make
sure that we continue to be able to recruit and retain the best
and the brightest, support them, and also support their
families, to make sure that they get the support that they need
to do the job that is so incredibly important.
With that, we have six new members of the committee that I
would like to introduce.
First up, we have Representative Jeff Jackson from North
Carolina. He is a former prosecutor and a veteran of the war in
Afghanistan. He enlisted in the U.S. Army Reserve as a private
first class after the attack of September 11th and is currently
a major in the North Carolina National Guard.
Second, we have Representative Gabriel Vasquez, who
represents New Mexico's Second District, which includes the
birthplace of America's missile and airspace operations, White
Sands Missile Range. He served on the Las Cruces City Council
from 2017 to 2021.
The district is also the home of the Sandia and Los Alamos
National Laboratories, Kirtland and Holloman Air Force Bases,
and is home to most of Fort Bliss' training area. It is a
district with very, very strong ties to our national defense
apparatus.
Representative Chris Deluzio from Pennsylvania is a native
of western Pennsylvania. Congressman Deluzio is an Iraq war
veteran, Naval Academy graduate, voting rights attorney, and
union organizer.
Congressman Deluzio was commissioned as an Active Duty
surface warfare officer in the U.S. Navy and deployed three
times, including a tour of duty as a U.S. Army civil affairs
officer in Iraq. After returning from Iraq, Congressman Deluzio
received his law degree from Georgetown Law School.
And then we have, as we always do and always should, a
Representative from the great State of Hawaii, Representative
Jill Tokuda, a fourth-generation Hawaiian who served in the
Hawaii State Senate for 12 years and now represents Hawaii's
Second Congressional District.
A proud product of Hawaii's public schools, she was the
first in her family to go to college and attended George
Washington University, where she earned a B.A. [Bachelor of
Arts] in international relations with a minor in Japanese
studies.
And we have Representative Don Davis from the great State
of North Carolina. He is the fourth Air Force Academy graduate
to be elected to Congress.
Congressman Davis knows the challenges faced by service
members firsthand from returning to civilian life and for
military families during and after their loved one's
deployment.
Congressman Davis served eight years Active Duty in the Air
Force, earning the rank of captain, and as a ranking member in
the North Carolina State Senate, leading on military issues for
over a decade.
And our sixth and last new member is actually a seven-term
member of Congress, Congresswoman Terri Sewell from Alabama. So
the chairman will appreciate that.
The Chairman. Roll Tide.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Smith. As I said, she is in her seventh term and she
represents the civil rights district, which includes the
historic cities of Birmingham, Montgomery, Tuscaloosa, and her
hometown of Selma, Alabama.
In the 118th Congress she was selected to serve as a chief
Democratic whip and sits on the prestigious Steering and Policy
Committee. She is an honors graduate of Princeton University
and Oxford University and received her law degree from Harvard
Law School.
So she is smart is what we are saying, which is always
helpful in this committee.
[Laughter.]
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. Look forward to serving with
you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
All right. Onto business. I call up Committee Resolution
No. 1 regarding the committee rules for the 118th Congress.
The clerk shall read the resolution.
Mr. Greene. Committee Resolution No. 1. Resolved, that the
Committee on Armed Services, U.S. House of Representatives,
adopt the committee rules for the 118th Congress, which are
stated in the copy distributed to each Member.
The Chairman. The proposed rules have been developed
jointly with the ranking member and made available to members'
offices on Tuesday, January 31.
I ask unanimous consent that the resolution be considered
as read and that the resolution be open to amendment at any
point.
Without objection, so ordered.
At this time, is there any discussion or do we have any
questions concerning the committee rules?
Seeing none, are there any amendments to the rules?
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Wittman, for the purpose of offering a motion regarding
Committee Resolution No. 1, the committee rules.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Chairman, I move to adopt Committee
Resolution No. 1.
The Chairman. The question now occurs on the motion of the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman.
So many as are in favor, say aye.
Those opposed, no.
A quorum being present, the ayes have it and the motion is
adopted. And without objection, the motion to reconsider is
laid upon the table.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The next order of business is Committee Resolution No.
2 regarding the committee security procedures for the 118th
Congress. I call up Resolution No. 2. The clerk will read the
resolution.
Mr. Greene. Committee Resolution No. 2. Resolved, that the
Committee on Armed Services, U.S. House of Representatives,
adopt the committee security procedures for the 118th Congress,
a copy of which has been distributed to each Member.
The Chairman. The security procedures were coordinated with
Mr. Smith and were made available to members' offices on
Tuesday, January 31. I ask unanimous consent that the
resolution be considered as read and that the resolution be
open to amendment at any point.
Without objection, so ordered.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

At this time, is there any discussion or are there any
questions concerning the security procedures?
There being no further discussion, are there any amendments
to the security procedures?
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Wittman, for the purpose of offering a motion regarding
Committee Resolution No. 2, the security procedures for the
118th Congress.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Chairman, I move to adopt Committee
Resolution No. 2.
The Chairman. The question now occurs on the motion of the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman.
So many as are in favor will say aye.
Those opposed, no.
A quorum being present, the ayes have it and the motion is
adopted. Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid
upon the table.
The next order of business is Committee Resolution No. 3
regarding the committee's authorization and oversight plan for
the 118th Congress. I call up Committee Resolution No. 3. The
clerk will read the resolution.
Mr. Greene. Committee Resolution No. 3. Resolved, that the
Committee on Armed Services, U.S. House of Representatives,
adopt the committee authorization and oversight plan for the
118th Congress, a copy of which has been distributed to each
Member.
The Chairman. The authorization and oversight plan was
coordinated with Mr. Smith and made available to members'
offices on Tuesday, January 31. I ask unanimous consent the
resolution be considered as read and that the resolution be
open to amendment at any point.
Without objection, so ordered.
At this time, is there any discussion or are there any
questions concerning the authorization and oversight plan?
If there is no discussion, are there any amendments to the
authorization and oversight plan?
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Wittman, for the purpose of offering a motion regarding
Committee Resolution No. 3, the authorization and oversight
plan for the 118th Congress.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Chairman, I move to adopt Committee
Resolution No. 3.
The Chairman. The question now occurs on the motion of the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman.
So many as are in favor will say aye.
Those opposed, no.
A quorum being present, the ayes have it and the motion is
adopted. And without objection, a motion to reconsider is laid
upon the table.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

On the final order of business, I call up Resolution
No. 4, appointing committee staff in the 118th Congress. The
clerk shall read the resolution.
Mr. Greene. Committee Resolution No. 4. Resolved, that the
persons listed on the sheet distributed to the Members, and
such other personnel as may be required by the committee within
the limits and terms authorized under the Rules of the House of
Representatives, are hereby appointed to the staff of the
Committee on Armed Services, U.S. House of Representatives, for
the 118th Congress, it being understood that according to the
provisions of law, the Chairman will fix the basic salary per
annum.
The Chairman. As many of you know, our committee is unique
in that the committee staff is a combined staff. The staff is
here to provide advice and counsel to all of you, Republican
and Democrat members alike. Please feel free to avail yourself
of their services. They a talented group of professionals.
A copy of the committee staff for the 118th Congress was
prepared in consultation with the minority and made available
to members' offices on Tuesday, January 31. I ask unanimous
consent that the resolution be considered as read.
Without objection, so ordered.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

At this time, is there any discussion or are there any
questions concerning the committee staff?
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Wittman, for the purpose of offering a motion regarding
Committee Resolution No. 4, appointing the committee staff for
the 118th Congress.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Chairman, I move to adopt Committee
Resolution No. 4.
The Chairman. The question now occurs on the motion of the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman.
So many as are in favor will say aye.
Those opposed, no.
A quorum being present, the ayes have it and the motion is
adopted. Without objection, a motion to reconsider is laid upon
the table.
Without objection, committee staff is authorized to make
technical and conforming changes to reflect the action of the
committee in adopting Committee Resolution No. 1 through 4.
Before I go to Mr. Smith, I want to tell y'all, if you look
at the other committees, they don't do what we just did. Those
people are fighting like cats and dogs, trying to figure out
the rules.
This is my eleventh Congress. We have never had an
amendment or discussion. We get this stuff done in a bipartisan
fashion before we meet in here. We are the only committee that
does that and we should all take pride in that.
With that, I now recognize Mr. Smith for any closing
comments.
Mr. Smith. Only closing comment is to completely agree with
what you just said.
[Laughter.]
And thank you for running a good meeting.
The Chairman. Thank you.
We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 9:21 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
