- U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES AND COMMAND-- CHALLENGES AND RESOURCE PRIORITIES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-13]

U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES AND

COMMAND--CHALLENGES AND RESOURCE PRIORITIES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024
__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 9, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-336                    WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

JACK BERGMAN, Michigan, Chairman

AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 SARA JACOBS, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN, Virginia
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIMMY PANETTA, California

Joe Bartlett, Professional Staff Member
Will Johnson, Professional Staff Member
Zachary Calderon, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Bergman, Hon. Jack, a Representative from Michigan, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations............     1
Slotkin, Hon. Elissa, a Representative from Michigan,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations............     2

WITNESSES

Fenton, GEN Bryan P., USA, Commander, U.S. Special Operations
Command........................................................     5
Maier, Hon. Christopher P., Assistant Secretary of Defense,
Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict..................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Maier, Hon. Christopher P., joint with GEN Bryan P. Fenton...    29

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Scott....................................................    51

U.S. SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES AND COMMAND--
CHALLENGES AND RESOURCE PRIORITIES
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and
Special Operations,
Washington, DC, Thursday, March 9, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:09 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jack Bergman
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JACK BERGMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MICHIGAN, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL
OPERATIONS

Mr. Bergman. Good afternoon. I call to order this hearing
of the Intelligence and Special Operations Subcommittee on
``U.S. Special Operations Forces and Command--Challenges and
Resource Priorities for Fiscal Year 2024.''
I would like to first welcome our newest member to the
subcommittee, Representative Jennifer McClellan of Virginia.
So, hi.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm very excited to
be here.
Mr. Bergman. Well, welcome, and I served with your
predecessor. Don and I came in together and, you know, God rest
his soul. But glad you're here and looking forward to working
with you as we move through these things.
Okay. The United States today finds itself in a shifting
strategic landscape in which great power competition will be
the defining geopolitical feature over the coming decades.
With that, our special operations forces similarly find
themselves at an inflection point. After 20 years of the global
war on terrorism, the SOF enterprise is retooling and
retraining for the threats and competition posed by China and
other strategic adversaries.
This will not be easy as limited budgets compel the
Department and Congress to make difficult budget decisions,
especially as it pertains to special operations.
While USSOCOM [U.S. Special Operations Command] remains
tasked with combating the continued threat posed by violent
extremist organizations and other non-state actors, our special
operations forces will remain the tip of the spear in competing
against and deterring our strategic adversaries, creating
strategic dilemmas, and making them think twice about their own
capabilities.
As we discuss USSOCOM's priorities for the coming year's
budget, we must examine which capabilities and tools used for
the CT [counterterrorism] mission may also be used against
state adversaries in great power competition, as well as what
capabilities must be developed or expanded.
These capabilities and tools may range from counter-UAS
[unmanned aerial system] and advanced ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance] technologies, to cyber and
web-based tools to compete and win in the information
environment and increased clandestine operations.
We similarly must examine the force structure of the SOF
enterprise to ensure that SOCOM is adequately manned to compete
and operate in great power competition.
As a small single-digit percentage of the overall force,
any cuts in personnel to the SOF enterprise will have a
disproportionate effect on the ability of SOF to execute
required operations.
Make no mistake, as we look to compete with and deter
adversaries like China and Russia, our special operators will
remain at the tip of the spear, shaping the environment and
creating conditions for successful follow-on operations by the
joint force.
In short, if we are looking to prepare the military
services for a high-end fight with a near-peer adversary, then
we must ensure that our special operations forces are properly
manned, equipped, and trained to enable the rest of the force.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on the
priorities for U.S. Special Operations ahead of Congress' work
on the fiscal year 2024 budget and NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act].
With that, I would like to welcome our witnesses here
today.
The Honorable Christopher Maier serves as the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low-Intensity
Conflict, and General Bryan P. Fenton, who currently serves as
the 13th Commander of U.S. Special Operations Command.
In the interest of time, I ask the witnesses to keep their
opening remarks to 5 minutes or less so that we can have
sufficient time for question and answers.
With that, let me thank our witnesses for appearing before
us today and I now recognize the ranking member for today,
Representative Slotkin, who's filling in for Representative
Gallego, for any opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. ELISSA SLOTKIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MICHIGAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

Ms. Slotkin. Great. Real quickly, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for convening us on this hearing. I also want to welcome HASC's
[House Armed Services Committee's] newest member,
Representative McClellan. It's great to have you here.
We are, I think, doing something historic. I believe this
is the first time in a long time that two Michiganders have
chaired a HASC subcommittee. I'm happy to be here with Mr.
Bergman, my fellow Michigander.
And I think, you know, from my perspective, the global
security environment--we all know it's changing. We all know we
have shifted towards, you know, great power competition.
We all know that from Ukraine to the Chinese Communist
Party to Iran, North Korea, violent extremist groups, it's
dynamic, to say the least, and that these changes need to be
explained to the American people so that we can understand not
just what we have gone through in the last 20, 25 years in the
wake of the wars of Iraq and Afghanistan, but where--how we
chart the future forward, particularly with the unique
capabilities of the special operations community.
We have asked the special forces in the last 20 years to
really focus on counterterrorism, countering violent extremism,
Iraq, Afghanistan, other hot spots elsewhere. I lived this
firsthand as a CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] officer
working alongside and often living with the special forces on
three tours in Iraq, and we know the importance and the danger
of the work that our special forces took part in.
And while we still need to maintain that capability and not
lose sight of those gains, I think we really need to help
explain and chart the way forward on today and tomorrow.
What is the role of the special forces in an era of
increased great power competition? Do you have the right
training, manning, equipping, institutional support,
professional military education?
Do the lessons of the last 20 years carry forward or do we
think about things in a different way and adjust doctrine?
These are some of the core questions that I'm hoping to hear a
little bit about today.
And you all will have, one way or another, an essential
role in what I understand is, you know, the National Defense/
Security Strategy, going forward. The word deter was mentioned
56 times in that strategy and I think it's very clear that the
special forces community is going to have a really key and
essential role in that deterrence.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses and hand it
back over to the chairman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Representative Slotkin.
And not only do we represent the State of Michigan, between
your district and my district, we represent almost the whole
State of Michigan, not just two districts. I think we probably
would be probably 60-plus percent of the landmass.
We will now hear from our witnesses, then move on into the
question and answer session.
Assistant Secretary Maier, we will begin with you.

STATEMENT OF HON. CHRISTOPHER P. MAIER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE, SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW-INTENSITY CONFLICT

Mr. Maier. Well, thank you, Chairman Bergman and Ranking
Member for today Slotkin, and distinguished members of this
committee.
Thank you for providing this opportunity to testify on the
global posture of our Nation's special operations forces, or
SOF. I am honored to appear alongside General Fenton.
I could not ask for better teammates in both General Fenton
and Command Sergeant Major Shane Shorter in ensuring your SOF
enterprise is prepared to address the threats facing the United
States today and in meeting the challenges to come.
I start with thanking Congress and especially this
committee--this subcommittee--for your enduring support of the
men and women of SOF. I am particularly grateful for your
assistance in building the organization I lead, Special
Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict, with dedicated and
gifted public servants.
Sitting before this committee last year, I testified that
we were at an inflection point in SOF's transformation to focus
more on the pacing challenge of China and the acute threat
posed by Russia, while maintaining enduring capabilities to
counter violent extremist organizations, address Iran's
destabilizing behavior, and conduct no-fail crisis response
around the globe.
Today, in updating you on progress and the work that
remains, I will highlight three areas: SOF's ongoing transition
in support of the National Defense Strategy [NDS], the
development of SO/LIC [Special Operations/Low-Intensity
Conflict], and our continued emphasis on empowering and
supporting our people.
First, we are transforming the SOF enterprise to achieve
the goals of the NDS. While SOF's role in counterterrorism is
widely understood and appreciated, my team and I work daily to
ensure the value proposition of SOF in integrated deterrence
and campaigning against strategic competitors is accounted for
and incorporated into the Department's processes.
As it has been in every major military challenge this
Nation has confronted since World War II, your SOF will play an
essential role. To start, the deep relationships SOF has forged
with allies and partners over the last two decades, often
through shared challenges and sacrifice, has produced an
international SOF enterprise that provides unique firsthand
understanding of the global operating environment. It also has
enhanced the resilience of allies and partners to resist
aggression.
Second, drawing on those relationships and our ability to
reach some of the most difficult locations on the globe, your
SOF formations provide unique access and placement that creates
options for our Nation's leaders, and SOF is adept at creating
dilemmas for our adversaries.
Here, I would highlight the many years of our investment in
transforming Ukrainian forces into highly capable--the highly
capable force that is consistently outperforming Russia on the
battlefield.
Representing the value that SOF brings to the joint force
is one of my primary responsibilities and we continue to make
progress institutionalizing SO/LIC's role as Congress has
directed.
Through my role providing civilian leadership for the
organize, train, and equip of SOF, we have established over the
last year in the Department a series of recurring processes and
delivered key outcomes for the SOF enterprise.
For example, the Special Operations Policy [and] Oversight
Council that I chair provides a senior level forum to address
SOF-unique challenges across the Department.
We also have made progress on important initiatives to
deter our adversaries and fill warfighting gaps, especially on
irregular warfare and information operations. I'm also proud
that SO/LIC played a central role in the Department's landmark
Civilian Harm Mitigation Response Action Plan.
Finally, I would emphasize that the first SOF truth remains
truer today than ever: Humans are more important than hardware.
None of our efforts are possible without our most important
resource, our people.
With the strong support of Congress, we continue to evolve
the Preservation of the Force and Families, or POTFF, program
to address SOF-unique challenges and to optimize physical,
psychological, social, spiritual, and now cognitive
performance.
We also continue to prioritize a diverse, capable force by
removing barriers to participation and advancement in SOF, an
operational imperative if we are to succeed in an ever more
complex geopolitical environment.
Recent publicized challenges remind us that we must
continue to evaluate our approaches to force employment,
accountability, and, most importantly, present and engaged
leadership.
A healthy SOF culture that reflects our Nation's values is
essential to readiness and core to ensuring we remain the most
lethal SOF enterprise the world has ever known.
Investing in our people is the cornerstone of ensuring your
SOF are ready to take on our Nation's toughest challenges,
because it is not a question of if but when the call will come.
Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of this committee, I
thank you again for your partnership and support, and for the
opportunity to testify today. I look forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Maier and General
Fenton can be found in the Appendix on page 29.]
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Secretary Maier.
And, General Fenton, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF GEN BRYAN P. FENTON, USA, COMMANDER, U.S. SPECIAL
OPERATIONS COMMAND

General Fenton. Thank you. Chairman Bergman, Ranking
Member, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I thank
all of you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
I'm honored to testify alongside the Honorable Chris Maier
and I'm equally honored to be here on behalf of the dedicated
men and women of U.S. Special Operations Command.
Joining me today is Command Sergeant Major Shane Shorter,
USSOCOM's senior enlisted leader. Command Sergeant Major
Shorter is representative of the incredible USSOCOM team,
particularly our noncommissioned officer corps.
Our noncommissioned officers are the backbone of our
military and a decisive advantage within your special
operations community and they make us the envy of every
military around the world.
We are thankful for the leadership and support of Congress,
particularly this subcommittee. Congress had the vision and
determination to establish USSOCOM almost 36 years ago. Thank
you for this subcommittee's steadfast support ever since.
Your special operations forces remain a national advantage
as we enter a decisive era, an era where strategic competitors,
such as the PRC [People's Republic of China] and Russia, seek
to reshape the rules-based international order.
In response, your special operations forces strengthen and
sustain deterrence globally as part of our approach to
integrated deterrence.
With SOF's World War II origins and DNA rooted in decades
of experience in strategic competition, now building upon 20-
plus years of hard-won combat credibility, your SOF provide
creative, tailorable, and asymmetric options for our Nation
while create dilemmas for any competitor.
As part of the broader joint force your SOF campaign every
day to deter and prevent aggression, counter coercion, close
warfighting gaps, and tackle shared challenges alongside allies
and partners, all in support of accelerating strategic momentum
towards NDS objectives.
Yet your SOF also remain vigilant in protecting our
homeland and U.S. interests from the persistent threat posed by
global terrorist networks. In doing so your SOF work tirelessly
alongside a trusted network of allies and partners, U.S.
interagency counterparts, and our joint force teammates to
disrupt VEOs [violent extremist organizations] wherever they
may be.
And while we campaign for integrated deterrence and counter
violent extremists, your SOF's capabilities to respond to
crisis represent a critical strategic hedge and advantage for
our Nation.
Agile, tailored, modernized capabilities enable us to
undertake sensitive, high-risk missions crucial to safeguarding
and, when necessary, rescuing our citizens and protecting vital
national interests.
Foundational to all these efforts remains our collaborative
partnership with ASD(SO/LIC) [Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict] Chris Maier
and his team. The oversight, policy guidance, and advocacy
provided by ASD(SO/LIC) are essential for the modernization,
readiness, well-being of SOF units and our families, and
together we are committed to placing people as our number one
shared priority.
We're preparing for the future by investing in them and by
leveraging our Nation's diverse talent to solve diverse
challenges. And to those listening today who might be
considering service to our Nation, know the profound sense of
calling and purpose those of us serving in uniform and SOCOM
share.
We know that a deeply rewarding journey lies ahead for all
those who choose to join. You will be part of an incredible
team of men and women tackling the toughest challenges for our
Nation.
Earlier this week I had the great privilege of hearing from
Colonel (retired) Paris Davis, our Nation's most recent Medal
of Honor recipient and a Green Beret. At Monday's ceremony to
induct him into the Pentagon's Hall of Heroes, he summed up his
military service and special operations service in three words:
purpose, opportunity, and pride.
And as we speak here today, more than 5,000 service members
of USSOCOM are deployed who share his sense of purpose and
pride defending our Nation and standing shoulder to shoulder
with allies and partners in over 80 countries to make our world
a safer place.
The courage and commitment of our special operations
community and our military inspires the Command Sergeant Major
and me daily.
We are immensely proud to serve with them, and we look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, General Fenton.
Mr. Jackson, you're recognized.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
to both of our witnesses for being here today. Appreciate your
time.
The special operations community is, obviously, one of our
greatest assets in defense of our country. For the past 20
years, special operators have carried a heavy burden during the
war on terror, fighting not against uniformed soldiers under a
defined flag but, rather, against networks of non-state actors
uniting under a loose ideology.
While terrorism remains a threat warranting our vigilance,
we must focus on state actors with significant economic,
political, and military influence now, namely China, Russia,
Korea, and Iran.
The demands on our operators in the SOF community and,
frankly, on their families are intense. The training is
demanding, the ops [operations] tempo is high, deployment tempo
is high, and often the objectives are no-fail missions.
There's no doubt that while rewarding, working in the
special operations community is stressful and even chaotic at
times. Yet, recruitment and retention in the SOF community
remains high, especially when compared to the services as a
whole who are either barely meeting or missing their recruiting
and retention goals.
General Fenton, what are you guys doing differently in the
SOCOM community to continue to recruit and retain your
personnel? You hit on this a little bit at the end of your
statement.
But how do you think the Department of Defense could
replicate some of the success you're having and is there any
things in particular that you're doing that are leading to this
success?
General Fenton. Congressman, thank you very much for that
question. I would start that your Special Operations Command
team takes in its personnel from across the services from the
service components.
We have a very small recruiting effort that goes external
but we are the recipients of Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines,
and Space Guardians into the SOCOM team and in that effect we
work very closely with the services to assist all of us in
recruiting goals, certainly, and retention and that we
recognize as well while there are recruiting challenges for
services out there we won't be immune even though our
recruiting numbers right now are very good.
And at some point that bubble will hit us so it's in our
best interest and, certainly, as a teammate in the Department
to work with all the services on anything that we have that we
would find as best business practices.
I would also mention that our retention, along with the
Department's retention, is at an all-time high. My sense in
many ways would be first to say thanks to this Congress for the
work that's gone into BAH [Basic Allowance for Housing]
increases, pay increases, as you think about your troops, and
those certainly assist in recruiting and retaining our
teammates.
I would say in SOCOM I don't know if these are the best
of--the best business practices but, certainly, each and every
day, and the services do as well, we make sure our people know
they are our number one priority.
I think that has a heck of an impact on folks knowing that
they're empowered, embraced, experienced, and absolutely cared
for and educated as we go forward. And I think we offer very
rigorous standards that are meant to be combat and, certainly,
a great team of teams to be a part of.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you for that. I hope--that
helps. I appreciate that. I hadn't thought in terms of
recruitment having your own farm team in place but I guess
that's kind of what you have going on.
So one more question. When special operations really came
into its own the career field was primarily geared toward
kinetic actions executed by physically fit individuals
possessing mental fortitude and the ability to problem solve in
real time.
No doubt that those attributes are going to continue to be
of huge importance to the SOF community. But with each passing
day the realities of warfare continue to evolve. Technology is
developing at a breakneck speed and every day we hear more
about artificial intelligence, autonomous weapon systems, and
cyber issues and cyberattacks.
So, General Fenton, my question is, BUD/S [Basic Underwater
Demolition/SEAL], obviously, the Q Course, the Ranger course,
they're not going anywhere. But how is SOCOM also addressing
the reality that expertise in technology is going to be
essential to special operations going forward, and do you
foresee any changes or additions to the training pipeline or
integration of new forces into SOCOM to augment your mission
set that we haven't seen previously?
General Fenton. Congressman, I'll begin by saying we always
want to be ready for whatever challenges lie ahead and,
frankly, stay ahead of those.
In this instance, I'd say we create talent to solve those
challenges to congested, certainly increasingly complex
challenges that we get in the world. And I think it starts,
first, as it always has, even in World War II, when we had the
OSS [Office of Strategic Services] and people willing to
parachute behind enemy lines, raise a resistance, and do
sabotage and subversion.
If I take that all the way from Korea, Vietnam, and then,
we want that person first and foremost that desires a
challenge, desires hard challenges and problems to solve and
coming up with creative solutions.
And I think in this day and age that looks like teammates
from cyber and space, tech, software engineers, technologists,
folks who understand autonomy and uncrewed systems as much as
it does the folks that came to us in those days that when that
didn't exist it was about grit.
It was about determination, motivation. We need all that
now in our operational layer and, certainly, with critical
enabling expert layer.
So you'll see us chase all that talent and more as we look
to, certainly, address adversaries and create dilemmas for
them.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you, sir. My time has expired.
Thank you.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you.
And, Representative Slotkin, you're recognized.
Ms. Slotkin. Great. So, you know, I think most people
understand or they think they understand the role of SOF in the
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and against the al-Qaida threat
and affiliate threat.
But I think it's less commonly understood the role of SOF,
going forward, in great power competition. And I'm just
conscious that this committee supported SOCOM and actually
bumped up the budget request from fiscal year 2023 and gave you
more in every single category than was requested.
Help explain in English what the different--how it's going
to be different and what you're going to be investing in
differently so that we understand sort of in colloquial terms
what has changed now that we're sort of through this 20-year
period and into a different period.
Mr. Maier.
Mr. Maier. Thanks for the question, Representative Slotkin.
So I think it's kind of the fundamental question that we
spend a lot of time working on. So I think I would say there's
an element of continuity in this. We still will continue from
the SOF enterprise to do counterterrorism and crisis response
and there's some lessons from that are very applicable.
We will continue to work by, with, and through partners. We
will continue to focus on placement and access, sometimes
through those partners, sometimes through our own exquisite
capabilities unilaterally.
But I think what we will need to focus on more is if we
are, indeed, working across all domains, some of those domains
have broadened from what was applicable in the fight against
al-Qaida and ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria].
So space, cyber has already been mentioned; the ability to
recognize that the world is one that operating without being
seen is particularly challenging so we need more tactics,
techniques, and procedures that allow us to do that.
We also need more technology that allows us to do that in a
very technologically enabled world.
Ms. Slotkin. Yeah. And on that issue, so I always remember
being at the Pentagon and being incredibly jealous of SOCOM's
acquisition authorities and the ability to go from either
commercially available tech or just a concept.
I mean, even just watching it in Syria was amazing, right,
that something was needed and SOCOM always had the ability to
quickly move to contact.
Can you tell me if you, A, feel like you still have all the
acquisition authorities that you need for that and then, B,
kind of give me an example if you could of how you've gone from
concept to a piece of tech in the life cycle sort of from
beginning to end. From idea to fielding, how long is it taking
you to field new concepts?
Mr. Maier. So I think, Representative Slotkin, we still
benefit immensely from that capability. In some respects, it's
going to be even more applicable as we deal in a more
complicated environment.
Some of this is probably better handled in a closed
session. But I think if--broadly speaking, if you think of some
of the capabilities that are so critical for more advanced
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, so we have long
depended on the same sort of platforms.
We're going to need capabilities that dwell for much longer
and are able to operate in non-permissive environments. So
there's tremendous amount of investment in the SOF enterprise,
also, across the Department, frankly. But we think in many
cases we're able to field these faster and operationally test
them more quickly because we do have that ability to have an
AT&L [acquisition, technology, and logistics] component within
the--within the command there.
Ms. Slotkin. And what would you say, just back of the
envelope from--you know, if you have a crew that's come to you
with an idea, if you were going sort of full steam ahead how
long would it take to go to fielding, at least a test product?
Mr. Maier. So I think we have cases where we have been able
to do it within a fiscal year. Other cases, depending on the
complexity, will take multiple years. But I think benchmark
we're much faster than the services are.
But we're also doing much smaller things. So we have an
advantage there and benefit immensely from the small--many of
the small businesses we're able to work with in some of the
flexible ways and some of the authorities that this Congress
has given us, ma'am.
Ms. Slotkin. So you all should speak up if you feel like
there's additional authorities that would help turn the crank.
I mean, one fiscal year is lightning speed for the Department
of Defense. But if there was something else that you were
missing, you should let us know, particularly because you do
smaller scale stuff, and you're not looking for, like, a new
fixed-wing airframe or something like that.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. Mr. Mills, you're recognized.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen,
for coming here today.
General Fenton, we had a very long discussion just the
other day, which I'm very appreciative for and thank you so
much for talking about the priorities of where SOCOM is looking
to go and how you're looking to lead that. Having been in this
role now for just 6 months, can you share with everyone what
your command priorities are?
General Fenton. Congressman, thank you very much for that
and thanks as well for the session with you the other day. I
can. When I think about it at the enterprise level--at the
SOCOM enterprise level--those priorities are, first and
foremost, people, followed by win, and then transform. And as
we think about our number one priority, our people are our
competitive and comparative advantage.
We have seen that time and time again in the special
operations community. With just a very little guidance and a
whole bunch of initiative and training and skill, very complex
problems are solved quickly and we rush to those problems.
So each and every day as the Command Sergeant Major and I
are part of this formation we see it and, certainly, in full
display, that our people are our number one priority and
everything we do really focuses on that because they'll take us
to the win, our second priority, across the spectrum of
strategic competition, integrated deterrence, counterterrorism,
and crisis response, and have done that since the origins.
And I keep going back to World War II and right afterwards
with the beginning of special forces and UDTs [Underwater
Demolition Teams] that have become the SEALs, Air Commandos,
Marine Raiders, and many others in our formation even today.
And they've won for decades for this Nation, and we'll stay
focused on that across those three missions of strategic
competition, crisis response, and counterterrorism.
The third priority for the enterprise is transform and it
goes, first and foremost, to our people. It's about this
continual education of what we will require as we enter any era
or decade and, certainly, in this one as we think about the PRC
and Russia it'll be a continuing educational start with our
Joint Special Operations University.
In addition to having an acquisition executive, we have our
own Special Ops University at the Special Operations Command
that stays on top of that and can turn that very fast. And then
that's followed by tech, data, the things that we need to
compete; and not big items very often, almost a Moneyball-type
approach, many littles in order to get after the challenge that
the PRC and, certainly, the Russians present.
But those would be the priorities, Representative. Thank
you for that.
Mr. Mills. Well, thank you so much, General Fenton, and for
having talked to you earlier I have no doubt that you'll be
able to achieve in all those and that SOCOM's in a great
position under your leadership.
Switching to you, Assistant Secretary Maier, in 2020 the
National Defense Strategy had an irregular warfare annex and in
this it talked a lot about great power competition and upcoming
strategies.
Have we continued to fulfill that 2020 annex and have we
continued to put that into the field in a strategic way?
Mr. Maier. Congressman, it is a really important question,
I think, as we talk about the tools from a more policy and
framework perspective that we will need, going forward.
So I think the answer to your question is, yes, we have
done a number of things. There is no more irregular warfare
annex. It's integrated into the 2020 National--2022 National
Defense Strategy.
We have a process underway that's bringing the Department
across the spectrum from doctrine to policy to operations and
resourcing, training, all those tools that make the world go
round in the Pentagon and in the joint force to actually not
only apply irregular warfare but look for new opportunities to
apply it in other cases.
So I think this is one of my priorities. I have three. It's
one of those three, and we're very much pushing in conjunction
with Special Operations Command on that.
I would just add that we think irregular warfare is the
responsibility of the joint force. SOF may be in the lead for
it but it can't be a SOF-only endeavor, sir.
Mr. Mills. Yeah, I absolutely agree. And in knowing that,
you know, we do have the geopolitical alignment of China,
Russia, Iran, North Korea. We see what Chairman Xi is doing
with advancing his Road and Belt Initiative, which is more
focused on an economic resource cyber-based warfare.
We know that the one thing that Chairman Xi and Russia
lacks is our noncommissioned officer corps. This is something
that every one of our adversaries try to build up and become
robust but they cannot meet the United States when it comes to
this.
The second thing Chairman Xi said is that he can outpace us
militarily and economically. But innovation is a real key.
Do we look at things like quantum entanglement for AI
[artificial intelligence] autonomous drone systems with regards
to communication platforms and also how we would be able to
field those more accurately with the SOCOM communities?
Either.
General Fenton. Representative, I'll take that because I'm
going to start. I absolutely agree with your description of our
noncommissioned officer corps. Throughout our entire military
and, in particular, I've lived in this formation for almost 30
years in your special operations community.
I spoke a bit about it in the opening statement, and if I
could pull it a little tighter, every military in the world
looks towards the U.S. military because of a very key thing
and, more often than not, not our equipment. It's not a number
of other things that folks might think. It is our
noncommissioned officer corps. They want to be the U.S.
military because of our noncommissioned officer corps. Always
have been, always will be.
Any military we engage with one of their first requirements
is build us a noncommissioned officer corps. Give it mission
command type orders, initiative, all the tactics, techniques,
and procedures, and they ask that because they know they'll be
incredibly better off as a result and we, certainly, appreciate
when they ask that.
On your technology discussion, we absolutely are pursuing
those type of technologies. I would say in the acquisition
priorities area for me and has been stated thus in the 2023,
certainly, in my--our 2023 budget was anything--AI, autonomous,
uncrewed, and much of that really revolves around an artificial
intelligence application that could sit on the data, give us a
decision advantage, and then on top of that really work to get
these systems in the right place to achieve the right effects.
And as quantum comes into our radar screen to be more
usable we'll absolutely pursue that as well. Anything that
gives us an advantage, a comparative and competitive advantage.
Already we're the best military in the world, but we're not
satisfied. We want to continue to strive and your SOCOM team is
right there with them.
Mr. Mills. Thank you so much for your service and I really
appreciate it. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. And just so you know, I know that,
Secretary Maier and General Fenton, you cannot see the time
clock.
So what's going to happen is as we move forward here, Mr.
Green, when there's a minute left will stand up and do the old
hand and arm signals. So in the--you know, respecting time
that's how we'll do it in the old manual way.
Representative Jacobs, you are recognized.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Assistant Secretary Maier and General Fenton, for testifying
before us today.
You know, as a representative of San Diego, I have to say I
am always so proud of the SEALs, of our Delta troops. I think
they are the best in the business and it's clear that they are
willing to do the most dangerous missions with very little
notice and I think we should all be incredibly grateful for
that.
I think part of our job on this committee is to make sure
that we're asking them to do the right missions when we're
sending them out into harm's way and so I wanted to pull us up
a little bit and ask about the strategic level.
You know, we have talked a lot about the pivot to great
power competition and how when we're going to do
counterterrorism, moving forward, it's going to be more by,
with, and through, more over the horizon, smaller footprints,
lighter counterterrorism.
I would argue that's actually how we have been doing
counterterrorism in sub-Saharan Africa for the past 20 years.
And, you know, in sub-Saharan Africa U.S. Special Operations
have been conducting counterterrorism training for over two
decades and we have provided over $3 billion in related
equipment, training, and logistics.
And, General Fenton, I want to ask you, would you
characterize this effort in sub-Saharan Africa as a success?
General Fenton. Congresswoman, I'm in--certainly, in
constant contact with Africa Command, as they look at this
through their lens and a number of other whole-of-government
efforts. I think it's necessary because as we have put in our
written posture statement, the counter--the VEO threat still
persists even though it's been disrupted and we have got to
remain vigilant as we think about ISIS, al-Qaida, and,
certainly, al-Shabaab and their desires, certainly always, to
attack homeland and partners and allies.
Ms. Jacobs. Yeah, and I certainly agree with you that
getting our counterterrorism mission right, especially in sub-
Saharan Africa, is really important.
But I actually want to point out that despite our billions
of dollars in investments and the incredible bravery and
professionalism of our tier one operators we have actually
seen, and it's just a fact, that violent extremism has
increased over threefold since 2013, as you can see on this
poster. And just in the last year, according to the Africa
Center for Strategic Studies, which is a research institute
within DOD [Department of Defense], just in the last year
violent extremist violence has increased by 22 percent with
fatalities surging over 50 percent and just in the Sahel alone
violence has seen a 130 percent increase since 2020.
So I guess as we're talking about using these strategies in
other parts of the world, how is SOCOM thinking about the
lessons from this clear lack of success so that we're not
recreating it both as we move forward in sub-Saharan Africa and
in other parts of the world?
General Fenton.
General Fenton. Representative, thank you very much for
that. I'll start.
As we continue, we'll do it the way we have been doing it,
which is one part of the whole of U.S. Government effort that
gets after countering VEOs. That's in concert with the
combatant command.
So where we as a SOCOM team operate they have special
operations elements there that campaign, contest, and
coordinate all of our activities in that arena and as well with
our Department of State and the intel and interagency
colleagues, and partners and allies. So we'll continue that as
one part.
Second, I think I would say across all the various domains,
information operations to get after an unconstrained ideology
that still exists out there in the violent extremist way and
use capability tools and, certainly, partner and allied
thoughts as we go forward that can contain, in some ways, the
physical terrain in places, Syria and Iraq, that we have been
able to do against ISIS. But----
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. I don't mean to cut you off. I just
want to make sure I get to my last question for Assistant
Secretary Maier.
I think, as we have talked a lot, one of the main lessons
is that the over military-first DOD-led approach to violent
extremism is clearly not working. You are the point person for
DOD on the bipartisan Global Fragility Act [GFA] and a part of
that law is, quote, ``that all DOD activity in priority
countries will be in joint formulation and with the concurrence
of the Secretary of State.''
Given that that is part of the law, will you commit today
to ensure the Department abides by that and only implements
policy or conducts activities in all GFA priority countries
that have been developed through joint formulation with the
State Department and through Secretary of State concurrence
including as it relates to all title 10 and section 127 Echo
and 1202 programs?
Mr. Maier. So, Congresswoman, it's a very important thing.
I think, the Global Fragility Act, because it gets at your core
question of trying to do things differently than we've done in
the past to attrit some of those trend lines you showed. I
think as a matter of practice on GFA we are aiming as much as
possible to be that three Ds concept: the development,
diplomacy, and then our defense piece.
All the plans and programs are developed jointly, all three
agencies--USAID [U.S. Agency for International Development],
State, and DOD--and I think, as we've talked about in the past,
both our 127 Echo programs and other title 10 programs are done
in concurrence with the State Department. The chiefs of mission
concur on those programs as do other elements of the U.S.
Government.
So I think that's an important safeguard against any
perception that DOD is doing things that aren't in concert with
the President's priorities and the interagency's concerns and
also perspectives, ma'am.
Ms. Jacobs. Well, thank you. And I'll just remind you that
that joint formulation is part of the law, and so I will look
forward to working with you as we move forward.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, and point noted here that we have
two Representatives named Jackson on this subcommittee. So,
henceforth, it'll be Mr. Jackson of Texas and Mr. Jackson of
North Carolina.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina, you are recognized.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Good afternoon, General.
Sir, you've been on the job for about 6 months, which is
long enough to learn your way around but not long enough so
that any problem is necessarily of your making. It's kind of
the sweet spot for reflecting on leadership and vision and sort
of where you plan on taking things.
And my first question is, what do you know now that you
didn't know the first day you assumed this command?
General Fenton. Congressman, I think I know more now about
how important SOF's role is going to be as we go forward in
this new--this era of increasingly dangerous challenges in the
strategic competition space with the PRC and Russia, and that
we still have to absolutely stay and remain vigilant on the
counterterrorism mission, getting after the C-VEO [counter
violent extremist organizations] threat while the sacred
obligation to, certainly, rescue our U.S. citizens and
safeguard them around the world remains.
I don't think before I got this job I recognized the
totality and how we will probably be needed more-fold going
into the future.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. I've listened to your
remarks and I've read the memo here. This is a simple question.
But is there anything that you need--truly need--that you just
don't have? Are there any glaring deficiencies on which this
subcommittee should be focused in the short term?
General Fenton. Congressman, I don't have any glaring
requirements right now that we need except the continued
support of this Congress; your ability to understand how
important your special operations team will be, going forward;
that your special operations forces, in my estimation, as we
proceed in this era will be--and our capability very decisive
in preventing aggression, deterring, and really addressing
coercion because it's in our DNA.
We've done this for almost 70-plus years before the global
war on terrorism. We never stopped and we're [inaudible] needed
to continue that even now. The key to that is, certainly,
partnerships--partnerships and allies and the training and the
combat credibility we bring into that mission area.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. I don't know exactly how to
phrase this question, but I know you mentioned that one of your
top three priorities was people and I don't know if everyone
fully appreciates the extent to which the service members under
your command just participate in an op tempo that is not
necessarily experienced by all of our service members, that
you-all deal with an elevated op tempo and you certainly did
for the last two decades.
With the conclusion of Operation Enduring Freedom, has
there been an intentional, deliberate effort on the part of--
the part of--on your part or your immediate predecessor to give
some breathing space to some service members who just got
pulled as tight as any could ever be pulled for the last
decades? Some of them served in excess of a decade. You said
that retention rates exceed standard. So that tells me
something good.
But there are just a ton of horror stories that come out of
this space, in particular, because of the level of stress
derived, my understanding, is from the op tempo.
Has there been--this is a unique period where we are,
perhaps, in between major contingency operations. Are we
working on giving these folks some mental health and a bit of a
breath?
General Fenton. Congressman, thank you very much for that
question. It does hit at the heart of our number one priority,
our people. As I think about this, my sense is there has been a
slowdown in the tempo, how we've been addressing both
counterterrorism and crisis response for the last 20 years.
That's allowed us to do a number of things. Reeducate in
terms of how we will go forward in the future, and that is
often an opportunity for folks to be at home to do that
education in not only our Joint Special Operations University
but also in the schoolhouses throughout all of our components
in Special Operations Command.
We've had an opportunity to experiment and exercise and
that's really important as we think about the challenges that
PRC and Russia will throw at us. And that's been extremely
helpful in figuring out some new options for combatant
commanders and dilemmas for the adversary that we didn't have
when we were going at a pace in the CT fight.
I think it's given us a chance as well for--to really fold
around our service members our POTFF program that looks at a
number of domains, not to mention the cognitive and the
behavioral.
I think all that has been a very good thing for this
formation as we think about being needed manyfold more as we go
forward in strategic competition through crisis response and
counterterrorism.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Thank you, sir. I yield
back.
General Fenton. Thank you.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you.
And, Representative Mace, you're recognized.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Gallego, for this hearing today.
General, it is good to see you. Again, we appreciate both
of you being here to answer our questions today.
I just had my first hearing--I'm a subcommittee chairman on
Oversight of Cyber, Technology, and Innovation, and I just had
my first hearing on Oversight yesterday with Dr. Eric Schmidt
on the subject of AI and emerging technologies.
And this is a guy who was one of the original folks at
Google--original CEO [chief executive officer], a former CEO--
and he said that AI--the advent of AI, what's going to happen
is going to transform the world and it's going to be epic. It's
going to happen fast.
And, in my sense in being here--I'm just over 2 years in
now--but it feels like DOD, Pentagon, military, you all are
going to have it together better, faster, more, before the rest
of the Federal Government.
But I have great concerns just at what some of our
vulnerabilities may be both from a defensive and offensive side
of things. And so I just wanted to ask--sort of just pick your
brain a little bit today, if you can share with us a little bit
about SOCOM and some of your investments in emerging
technology.
How do we retain our competitive advantage? What I learned
yesterday is that the country of China--the largest nonprofit
that's invested in AI in the world is in China. And so I'd just
like to hear a little bit from you all sort of your perspective
just kind of high level and some of the emerging technologies
that you all have seen us invest in and kind of get your
perspective on that, too.
Mr. Maier. So, Congresswoman, it's very important. I think
we often throw out AI and there's a lot of different components
of this. I'll give you a couple examples and then I know
General Fenton has actually had Eric Schmidt out to the command
and could probably talk in even greater detail.
But especially as we look at it in the information space,
we are not, as a department, despite your hope for us, very
fast in that space. And our adversaries use AI to generate
things like deepfakes and all kinds of other things that have
the benefit of distracting and misleading, and sometimes that's
just enough space to be able to do what they want to do.
So we have to think about this on the defensive side as
much as we think about this on the offensive side. I think some
of what we envision using AI for is to reduce the--some of the
delays of human beings in the loop or on the loop. Some of that
might be in the information space. But some of that could be in
traditional warfighting capabilities or the ability to take in
large quantities of data and gain situational awareness.
But still, at some point, probably there's going to be a
human being that makes a decision, especially as we talk about
things that may be lethal or kinetic in that process. So
there's an ethics piece of this.
There's a functional man-machine interface that's going to
have to be worked out. And there's also the--I think, the
question of which types of technology do you invest in to
actually get the biggest bang for the buck because if you
choose wrongly you may end up being even further behind. But
maybe General Fenton----
Ms. Mace. Yeah. And to your point, it's not just software.
It's hardware, too. I mean, there are multiple components.
There has to be----
Mr. Maier. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Mace [continuing]. You know, human intelligence
involved.
General.
General Fenton. Congresswoman, thank you very much for
that. I'll go--it hits at the heart of where we're working to
transform in our--transform priority and we have had a number
of meetings with Dr. Schmidt and many of his teammates----
Ms. Mace. He's brilliant on this, yeah.
General Fenton [continuing]. And many others in that
community. And I would start on a couple fronts.
Artificial intelligence and what it brings in terms of the
applications, first and foremost, for us is about putting those
applications over oceans of data that we have in the
Department, certainly from our counterterrorism years but even
before that, understanding of locations we've been in
previously, all of that, and using those applications to crush
that information, synthesize it for us, and get it to us with
speed.
And in special operations we add an extra S to that with
speed speed--SOF speed--so we can make a decision, faster
either for our teammates on the ground or at the mission
command nodes.
I think the second reason is that decision is important is
because it allows us to not only make a decision but put the
effects to be achieved in the right place faster than any
adversary, and that could be in the information operations
domain or it could be a kinetic domain or any number--cyber and
space.
So I think you will absolutely see us continue to pursue it
in that arena, and if folks asked even more it would be natural
language processing and things like picture generation. All of
this is important not only----
Ms. Mace. Yes, generative. It's machine learning. I mean,
it's all these things. It's all-encompassing, we're learning.
And I apologize for cutting you short. But to piggyback on that
intersection of government and industry, like, how is that
going? Has that been more efficient in trying to make those
decisions?
General Fenton. Your SOCOM team is routinely reaching out
to all those: academia, industry. We even go overseas to
partners and allies. We just don't look here. So we're in
search of that technology with anybody that has it, both to use
it and understand how the adversary uses it.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, General.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. And, Representative McClellan, you
are recognized.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and vice--I'm
sorry, Ranking Member Slotkin for putting this hearing
together, and I want to thank our witnesses for being here
today.
This is my first hearing since being sworn in as a Member
of Congress and I look forward to working with this
subcommittee to strengthen and improve our special forces and
maintain American leadership in this space.
And I have a couple of questions for--a few questions for
both of you. First, we are now 1 year into the war in the
Ukraine--the war in Ukraine, a conflict that has seen immense
conflict in the information and digital sphere.
What has U.S. Special Operations Forces and Command learned
from this conflict and is SOCOM ready to implement those
lessons learned?
Mr. Maier. So, Representative McClellan, welcome. I wish it
was my first hearing but it's not.
So I think there's a lot of lessons learned, some of these
probably better handled in a different session. But I'll give
you a couple off the bat.
First off, we've had a long-standing relationship with
Ukraine and, I think, goes to that fundamental principle,
invest early and be prepared, because you can't manufacture
partnerships or teaming when crisis hits.
So you asked specifically about the information space.
We've had long-standing relationship with not only the
Ukrainians but others in the region to help share lessons
learned and really expand on our ability to deal with
misinformation, disinformation, that we know Russia is apt to
use, but also be able to get the message out for our own forces
and I think Ukrainians have demonstrated a tremendous aptitude
to do that.
I think also the long-standing investment in the personal
relationships that we have had through our 10th Special Forces
Group with the Ukrainians and in Europe is really something you
can't replicate when you have a situation of a crisis as the
Ukrainians have experienced.
So there's lots of elements to it, lots of lessons learned,
I think, that we are actively looking at from the SOF
enterprise. But I give you those as two pretty clear ones.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you.
General Fenton.
General Fenton. Thank you very much, Congresswoman.
I would echo that and just pull a little tighter on invest
early. It is the power of partnerships with allies and nations
around the world.
We started in the 1990s but we got--it spiked in earnest in
Ukraine--spiked in earnest in 2014 when the first invasion, and
that partnership, the relationship, the speed of trust that had
already been worked through allowed us to get to the place we
are now where the Ukrainian SOF have done a phenomenal job
against the Russians.
Second would be the power of investing in partners and
allies around that--around Ukraine. For us, special operations.
We worked very closely with European SOF up and down and in the
Baltics and that has paid off.
They are doing it the U.S. Special Operations way of
warfare as either they're inside of Ukraine or they're training
alongside us, and that makes us exponentially better and
certainly more powerful.
And then, lastly, the power and the increasing advantage--
competitive advantage of technologies like we just spoke
about--open source, one-way strike drones, counter-UAS. All
this is very important. We've seen it in previous incursions
and we're seeing it front and center right now.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you. And in your statement for the
record you discussed the importance of investing in the men and
women serving in SOF--and you mentioned several times here the
importance of the people--your people. Can you expand on the
work that SOCOM is employing to develop a highly trained and
diverse workforce?
General Fenton. Congresswoman, I can. It's my favorite
thing to talk about. I'll probably get the signal in the back.
But, number one, it's about talent in our people as a
competitive comparative advantage. It's about we seek talent
any domain and in our instance we talked about cognitive,
experiential, and demographic.
We want talent in the formation because we know what
happens when we get it. We win. We think about it in terms of
announcing to anybody and anyone, please come to the SOCOM
formation and give us a shot.
We want that. Embrace it, empower it, and educate so that
our people, at the end of the day, continue to be the winning
recipe for the SOCOM team.
The number of efforts, I'd be happy to take that for the
record and give you a more fulsome piece just in the interest
of time.
But we absolutely believe it's a mission imperative and an
operational requirement to continue to invest in our people and
have, certainly, across cognitive, experiential, and
demographic domains a talented force to solve the complex,
diverse challenges we'll have in the future.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you.
Mr. Panetta, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Outstanding. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, good afternoon. Thank you for being here.
General Fenton, after Crimea was annexed in 2014 we
established a joint multinational training program to bring
conventional and special operators across NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization] to train Ukraine's military.
We also then established a qualification course--a Q
course, as they call it--to train the Ukrainian troops.
Obviously, I think as we're seeing, that training has been
pretty decisive on the battlefield.
I was wondering if you can give an update as to what
exactly is in those trainings and then any particular lessons
that we've learned watching it take effect on the battlefield
today.
General Fenton. Congressman, thank you very much for that.
I speak just to the special operations piece of the
entirety of training that was going on in European Command at
the time, but I'll start with the qualification course.
The qualification course at its very nature is designed to
build someone who has an approach that has cognitive, physical,
and other domains in its very nature, that can go through
hardships, continue to do as the Ukrainians are doing, fight
this existential threat, who shoot a very high proficiency
level, communicate with the equipment that we're able to bring
them, and certainly can maneuver in a way that avoids the type
of work that the Russians are trying to--and certainly the
ammunition and armor that the Russians are bringing.
We also taught a bit about a resistance concept, this idea
of how sabotage, subversion, the things that would be in a
resistance type of kit bag, would be very important if and when
something like this happened.
The Ukrainian special operations forces not only embraced
all of it, they engulfed it, and are certainly the superb force
that I spoke about--have spoken about before that they are
today and admit, certainly, taking it to the Russians.
I think in information operations there was an important
piece to ensure that the Ukrainian military and then they, with
their government and others, understood the misinformation
campaign coming at them from the Russians even before 2014, but
certainly 2014 and even now, and then on the other side an idea
how to really harness the power of the Ukrainian people towards
that existential threat.
I think there are--and the last one I would really
highlight, Representative, is we built a noncommissioned
officer corps. We took them from a Soviet-style military. You
can see what happens to those right now.
Russians are not even the second best military in Ukraine.
The Ukrainians are the very best and not even near in the world
anymore that the Russian had--the Russians had at one time.
But I'll tell you, the NCO [noncommissioned officer] corps
is the difference maker and we built that as well.
Mr. Panetta. Outstanding. Switching continents, I've had
the fortunate opportunity to visit at our operators from
Baledogle to Bamako to Agadez to Ouallam to Diffa to N'Djamena,
and what I found is that they do a hell of a lot with very
little, unfortunately.
Now, obviously, in many of those places imminent [danger]
pay is afforded to service members across the Sahel including
those in Chad, Mali, and Niger, but not in Burkina Faso,
despite the country witnessing two coups in less than 1 year
and an uptick in violence from VEOs and we now have reasons to
believe that Wagner has already made a presence in that area
with French forces being expelled from that country.
We know that there's been a submission by AFRICOM [U.S.
Africa Command]--USAFRICOM--to request that the SECDEF
[Secretary of Defense] has--puts imminent danger pay afforded
to these service members in Burkina Faso, and their spillover
threats from neighboring Mali and Chad.
And why--if you can add--let us know why it's important to
provide them with that imminent danger pay, especially when you
have that--and affording that for Mali and Chad as well to
those service members.
General Fenton. Congressman, I've personally been in the
African continent, everywhere from East Africa and Somalia all
the way through Mali, Mauritania, and Niger locations you're
addressing.
The work our teammates do is at the front edge of very
often not only the challenging conditions that you find in an
austere base logistically, communications, and a number of our
different operating systems and base support, but the very edge
of what they may encounter when they're in support of AFRICOM
addressing the ISIS threat and other threats that are out
there.
I would be--Congressman, I'll take this for the record and
look into the fact that that hazard pay has been addressed by
AFRICOM.
Mr. Panetta. Please.
General Fenton. I'd like to take that one for the record
and certainly get back to you on that one.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Panetta. Please do, and I look forward to working with
you on that. Thank you, gentlemen. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you.
Mr. Luttrell, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luttrell. Good afternoon, Mr. Secretary, General. Great
to see you again, sir, Sergeant Major. Always great to see you,
sir.
Mr. Secretary, I'm going to ask you a question. Earlier
today I was briefed by Secretary Sherman, the Chief Information
Officer, and Mr. Martell, the Chief Digital and AI Officer for
the DOD, and the question was asked multiple times if we are in
lockstep or behind or in front of China when it comes to our
artificial capabilities--artificial intelligence capabilities--
and the doctor said not only are we in stride with but we are
most likely ahead of. But I'm pretty sure I just heard you say
that we're not.
Mr. Maier. So, Congressman, I think I would defer to them.
They're the experts on this. I think what I was saying in
responding to Representative Mace's question is that we're in
competition with them in the application of AI. So technology,
that is absolutely John Sherman and others' job to know on.
We just have anecdotal examples in the operational space
where, in some cases, it's less about the AI technology and
more about their risk acceptance and ability to do things in a
disinformation-misinformation way than we might be inclined to
do, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Here's my concern is--so they gave an example
from sensor to shooter. And General, this is where I'm going to
need your help. This is a request. Okay. And, Mr. Secretary,
I'm not coming after you. Okay.
I just want to make sure that we're very clear on this
because this--from what I understand this organization of Mr.
Martell's is a new organization inside the DOD which we've had
two to three of these similar organizations, correct?
Mr. Maier. It is an amalgamation of previous organizations.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. So from sensor to shooter the idea is
that we take quality data in order to better enforce and inform
and train our shooters.
Now, my question was, who's setting the criteria? Where's
the data coming from? Because if the inclusion is information
from the shooter to the scientist, I would hate for the
bureaucrats here at DC to not--to sit up and brief us but our
operators are completely in the dark.
So my request is, General, is that you need to keep them
honest because this is a great idea, a great concept. I'm 100
percent behind artificial intelligence, machine learning, and
advancing our opportunities for our--for the individuals on the
ground.
But my concern is, like I said, is that it won't come to
fruition. So, General, would you help us out on that?
General Fenton. Congressman, I absolutely will. I will--
I'll stay on it, and what I would tell you we are absolutely
integrated with Secretary Maier and the Department on this. We
recognize that, first, our challenge is a couple-fold.
We've got to get data from all the services, all the COCOMs
[combatant commands], and, frankly, anywhere, even as it
relates sometimes to a personnel action. So that idea of how
that data comes in, the structured, unstructuring of it, we are
absolutely pursuing that right now.
When it comes to operations, we assess it will be the same
challenge. So you've got my commitment, Congressman, to stay
absolutely integrated on this and to be a key part of it as it
pertains to special operations, sensor to shooter, and,
frankly, taking care of our people and that people is the
number one priority space.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir, because I'm sure you
understand the silos that each individual service, especially
in the special operations. Like, I would never talk to a
Ranger. No offense. Just not my thing.
But you can understand that the silos that we work in. So
it's going to take you, sir, from the top to break those silos
down and make sure the information is being shared for Mr.
Martell so he can do his job effectively. So thank you.
I yield back, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So, now, you know, Mr. Luttrell, we're
going to talk to everybody.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bergman. Okay. No--I know. The point is, number one,
thanks to all the members of the subcommittee for the focused
nature of your questions. Secretary Maier, General Fenton,
thank you for the focused nature of your answers. Because, as
we try to communicate and do the right thing here on the
subcommittee, we need to be listening, and I was--I mean, if we
can't throw some friendly jabs in the inter-service [inaudible]
nature of things, then shame on all of us. We've lost our
ability to actually be adaptable in the fight, and that's what
makes us successful.
But, from the higher level point here, Secretary Maier, how
can Congress better enable the SOF enterprise to compete in
great power competition? For example, do we need to permanently
authorize irregular warfare authorities and/or strengthen other
authorities or, you know, add some, reduce some?
How do we, from the congressional point of view, really
kind of streamline what we're doing to help you downstream
streamline? I know that's overuse of the word stream. But the
point is, any thoughts on how--what we might do authorities-
wise?
Mr. Maier. Chairman, thanks for the question. I think, as
been highlighted by Representative Mills in my opening
statement here, irregular warfare is going to be a very
important tool, going forward, and I think with that there's
probably some maturing in the authorities framework.
So section 1202, which is--this committee has worked on in
the past, I think, is one that we could use your help on. I
think at a staff level we're already working on that.
But it's an area where having that authority then allows us
to introduce some concepts and also do experimentation in some
respects, but most importantly, allows us to get tight with our
partners who want to work with us against the PRC and Russia
but don't want to do that in a--as an overt way as some of our
other authorities prompt us to do. So that would be one, sir.
And then I think the continued support from this committee
for my office, ASD(SO/LIC), not because it's a nameless,
faceless element of the bureaucracy in the Pentagon but because
of the authorities we have to really be that articulator of the
SOF value proposition, that advocate in the Department.
The fact that I sit with the Secretary of Navy, Secretary
of the Army, and Secretary of the Air Force when the Secretary
of Defense calls together service secretaries, I think is an
important role that allows us to do some of the things that
your committee members have asked today are we doing and we can
continue to keep that top-down pressure on the enterprise, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Yeah. What I heard you say was, you
know, a seat at the table, or said a different way if you're
not at the table you're on the menu, so to speak?
Mr. Maier. Sir, I think there's a lot of competing interest
in the Department. If there isn't a voice for one, it is really
at the mercy of where it falls in the prioritization for very
busy senior people, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. And, General Fenton, you know,
we've talked a lot about people--recruiting, training,
retention--you know, the ability to execute the mission. We can
build a lot of really cool things, tools. But those tools
ultimately in most cases have to be used by human beings, your
operators.
Can you explain how any potential manpower cuts to SOF
could restrict SOCOM's ability to operate in nonpermissive
environments when shaping the environment for the joint force
to operate against strategic adversaries--you know, putting
where you are in the fight in the lead, whatever it happens to
be, its manpower is critical.
Thoughts? Comments?
General Fenton. Chairman, thank you for that. Certainly, a
couple comments.
I'd start with anything that degrades or impacts or
decreases either personnel or fiscal resources would have a--
would hurt. It would impact your special operations team and I
say that through the lens of we certainly have a wide array and
remit for very high-priority missions.
Counterterrorism still--as we--still persists in the VEO
space and we've got to stay vigilant--crisis responses,
strategic competition. And as a, I would say, a very small
portion of both personnel and fiscal resources--maybe 3 percent
of the population and 2 percent of the budget, your SOCOM
team--any degradation of that capability, Chairman, would
absolutely hurt and I would assess, and I'd have to do
additional study, impact our ability, going forward.
And I think about it in terms of not only our operational
teammates who are incredible across the array of Army, Navy,
Air Force, Marines, but our critical facilitators in terms of
communications, electronics, logistics. It all makes up your
SOCOM team.
So I'll just wrap it up, Chairman, by saying any of that
would hurt and impact your SOCOM team.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Thank you very much.
Basically, the open portion of the hearing is now adjourned
and we will reconvene in room 2337 for a closed session as soon
as people walk in, but in the next 8 minutes. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 2:23 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT

Mr. Scott. What are the unique challenges and possible mitigations
for SOF operating in a sparse electromagnetic signal environment?
General Fenton. Challenges. In environments where the operational
electromagnetic spectrum capacity is sparse, units can expect to run
into a variety of information exchange challenges. These range from
low-level tactical problems, such as Intra team/unit communications to
operational and strategic friction induced by loss of Command and
Control with higher headquarters elements. These conditions would also
influence communications between partner forces and surrogates, which
may yield a higher overall mission impact depending on the operation.
Technology is another factor when considering how to operate in
this environment. Adversaries have incorporated spectrum dominance as a
key enabler against the United States. Their rapid innovation in this
field has given them opportunities to outpace dated capabilities while
continuing to generate tempo against upcoming technologies, which may
be slow to field due to acquisition processes, and test and evaluation
requirements.
Another challenge that studies identified relates to an organic
increase in the need for usable spectrum. As commercial entities,
allies, and adversaries continue fielding capabilities and expanding
their need for capacity, spectrum segments have become increasingly
congested.
Mitigation Strategies. New technologies are continuously developed,
which provide reliable, low probability of intercept, and anti-jam
communications for Special Operations Forces (SOF) within a contested
environment. Spectrum survivability may be obtained through asset
diversification. Leveraging a combination of systems in a threat-
informed theater allows SOF operators to build a wider and more
resilient spectrum presence. Using multiple satellite-based transport
options creates a scenario where you have diversity in frequency bands,
satellites, and even space vehicle orbits.
From a terrestrial perspective the use of adaptive networking radio
technology that maximizes spectrum use while avoiding interference is
becoming more common. By emphasizing more traditional methods, such as
High Frequency radios with enhanced data rate capabilities provide an
option to enable information exchange in challenging environments.
Additionally, the SOF enterprise is currently conducting numerous
exercises annually to replicate contested communication environments.
During these exercises, we focus on masking transmissions using Low
Probability of Intercept/Low Probability of Detection solutions and
using red teams to attempt to locate and intercept blue force
communications. The lessons learned from these exercises inform our
acquisition and future training to improve tradecraft.
Mr. Scott. How can the U.S. Space Command and U.S. Cyber Command be
better integrated with USSOCOM as part of the new trinity of multi-
domain conflict that consists of space, cyber, and SOF?
General Fenton. USSOCOM can best integrate with the U.S. Space
Command and the U.S. Cyber Command through consistent and deliberate
engagements to achieve tangible effect within the SOF-Space-Cyber
Nexus. We hosted the first of one of these sessions at Headquarters,
USSOCOM to seek synergy and opportunity across concepts for either
operations and/or employment. Our U.S. Army Special Operations Command
led part of the discussion on a unique and mature proposal for the
``new trinity of multi-domain conflict'' to achieve an integrated
deterrent effect. How we ``routinize'' this integration within the
Department of Defense and across the Combatant Commands is the end
state through our Nexus exploration efforts over the next year.
Through the SOF-Space-Cyber Nexus effort, we seek to improve upon
the foundation of solid tactical and operational teaming. The U.S.
Strategic Command is also a key member of this willing Nexus effort. In
addition to concepts for operation or employment, we are collectively
seeking solutions to overcome any impediments for coordination and
synchronization in terms of policy, authorities/permissions, command
and control, and technical challenges. This is a nascent but important
effort.
Mr. Scott. How can JSOU enhance their ability to play a unique role
in helping to link U.S. national security interests and objectives to
SOF capabilities at all levels? What additional resources in terms of
personnel and dollars are needed by JSOU?
General Fenton. The USSOCOM Joint Special Operations University
(JSOU) is in the process of reorganizing into what I refer to as JSOU
Next, which will focus on not only JSOU's traditional teaching and
learning, but also research in action and outreach, as well as
engagement to enable the future force to support the priorities
articulated in the 2022 National Defense Strategy. This will include
fostering critical thinking and analytical skills, and generating deep
expertise in understanding key technologies, as well as about our
competitors and the future of warfare. Utilizing the title 10 (U.S.
Code) hiring authority granted by Congress in the Fiscal Year (FY) 2019
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), JSOU Next would rely on a
blended mix of faculty comprised of both academics with specific
subject matter expertise and highly qualified SOF practitioners. This
hybrid mix of faculty will enable JSOU to achieve its goal of becoming
the premiere polytechnic university for the study and application of
special operations in a near peer competitor environment.
Mr. Scott. Does USSOCOM have all of the authorities needed to train
resistance fighters in occupied countries? If not, what authorities do
you need?
General Fenton. U.S. SOF (USSOF) could apply Section 1202 of the
FY2018 NDAA (as amended) to provide training and other support to a
resistance in an occupied country--assuming administration policy and
operational authority are aligned in favor of such support. However, to
leverage the full utility of 1202, the current definition of
``irregular warfare'' in 1202 must be modified to allow for the
provision of support to resistance elements that are in armed conflict.
Furthermore, codifying 1202 into statute and expanding the cap would
broaden the aperture, increase opportunities, and provide greater
flexibility, thus enhancing the USSOF value proposition in support of
Combatant Command irregular warfare requirements.
Mr. Scott. Is there a role for SOF in countering illegal,
unreported, and unregulated fishing (IUUF)?
General Fenton. Although many of the skill sets normally attributed
to special operations (i.e. Direct Action, Unconventional Warfare, and
Counterterrorism) are not currently exercised directly in the
countering illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing (IUUF) effort,
there are three noteworthy categories of contributions from USSOCOM:
Military Information Support Operations (MISO) and Counter Threat
Finance (CTF), Intelligence and Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance (ISR).
USSOCOM is the Joint Proponent for Counter Threat Finance. In this
capacity, the CTF Cell at Headquarters USSOCOM is actively working to
support the counter-IUUF efforts by linking and illuminating the
various global financial entities tied to the People's Republic of
China (PRC) IUUF enterprise. USSOCOM CTF provided the strategy,
strategic art, and operational design for a law enforcement operation
entitled JADE SPEAR (starting in 2020) under the Customs and Border
Protections' National Targeting Center. A multinational effort that
also included 29 different U.S. departments, agencies, and offices
contributing more than 70 action officers, JADE SPEAR was the largest
strategic competition operation since the cold war. The operation was a
`greenfield' pilot program to test means and methods against the stated
problem: IUUF by a Chinese state directed company on the high seas.
SOF's ability to integrate disparate institutions, both domestic and
allied, apply campaign planning to hold at risk elements of China's
political-economy in a de-risked manner, and deliver significant costs
to a malign predator was a first of its kind operation. Two notable
successes included the revocation of visas for Pingtan Marine
executives (2020), and the imposition of sanctions against Pingtan
Marine resulting in them being dropped from the NASDAQ Composite Index
(2023).
Additionally, USSOCOM supports the Combatant Commanders through
regionally aligned Theater Special Operations Commands in a variety of
missions including countering illegal fishing and other illicit
activities through the employment of Identity Intelligence (I2)
exploitation capabilities to deny national security threat actors
anonymity. In the maritime domain, I2 is extremely effective while
collaborating with Partners to positively identify persons of interest
involved in illegal fishing and other illicit activities.
SOF Intelligence assets provide unique capability in identifying
IUUF activities and compelling compliance with international fisheries
conservation and management enactments (e.g., Southern Pacific Regional
Fisheries Management Organization). These illegal activities also
include piracy, narcotics smuggling, and human trafficking, and human
rights violations. In many cases, maritime vessels conceal their
location, which is a key indicator of vessels conducting IUUF and other
illegal activities. SOF utilizes Airborne Intelligence, Surveillance,
and Reconnaissance assets to gain visual fidelity on vessels who
conceal their location by turning off their with Automatic
Identification System (AIS) transponders. This intelligence is used to
support international law enforcement operations and investigations.
Additionally, the SOF Intelligence Enterprise can leverage Digital
ISR capabilities to enable collection, enhancement, and analysis of
unclassified data on IUUF. Publicly and commercially available
information (PAI/CAI) can be collected and merged with exquisite
intelligence through the SOCOM Intelligence Data Science Team's DIAMOND
architecture. Data can then be visualized using data-agnostic tools on
Top Secret systems for analysis. Using collected unclassified data to
inform intelligence assessments can provide opportunities for improved
partner nation engagement to counter IUUF activity.
As a recent example, the Joint Interagency Task Force--South
assigned to U.S. Southern Command, commissioned a ship to conduct
maritime interdiction operations with Partner Forces. USSOCOM I2
capabilities allow for 24/7 match comparison against the larger
Department of Defense and Interagency holdings. Access to these
holdings allows the addition of persons of interest to the Department
of Defense ``Watchlisting'' for enterprise level alerts during future
encounters, and supports partner prosecutorial finishes.
USSOCOM MISO organizations, including the USSOCOM Joint MISO WebOps
Center (JMWC) and Theater Special Operations Commands (TSOC), focus on
messaging to affected populations that highlights the negative
consequences of un-checked IUUF by PRC. Informed by intelligence and
ISR provided by the US Coast Guard, interagency partners and partner
nation forces, TSOC and WebOps messaging has reached populations in
SOUTHCOM, CENTCOM, INDOPACOM, and AFRICOM. Additionally in FY21,
USSOCOM, as the synchronizer of the Senior Military Engagement Program
(SMEP), coordinated a global effort to address IUUF. This continues to
be a recurring theme, on the SMEP platform, in SOUTHCOM, INDOPACOM, and
AFRICOM AORs.
It should also be noted that SOF engagements with other countries
that focus on more traditional SOF-peculiar skill-sets have second and
third order effects by enabling those countries to counter IUUF on
their own, or in cooperation with U.S. Government assets.
Mr. Scott. Does USSOCOM need any enhanced authority for provision
of support to partner nation liaison officers assigned to Headquarters
USSOCOM?
General Fenton. Headquarters USSOCOM was structured to facilitate
SOF leaders' access and maximum utilization of exquisite intelligence
to prepare and deploy fully capable and informed SOF to meet national
and geographic operational needs. The Office of the Undersecretary of
Defense for Intelligence and Security (OUSD(I&S)) policy currently
places significant limits and processing delays on non-indoctrinated
foreign partners being approved or permitted escorted access to high-
level secure facilities, limiting our liaisons' ability to directly
engage with U.S. personnel. Our request is to engage with OUSD(I&S) and
the Office of the Director of National Intelligence to allow for
greater latitude for foreign partner integration. Understanding that
information sharing with partner countries is done on a case-by-case
basis, updates in the Department of Defense policies, directives, and
authorities overseeing information sharing will improve integration and
interoperability in support of the National Defense Strategy and
National Disclosure Policy. In addition, the department working with
Congress to ensure the Arms Export Control Act meets Congressional
security requirements, while improving the timely export of defense
articles and services in support of SOF missions.
Mr. Scott. Does USSOCOM need an increase in the micro-purchase
threshold for purchases by USSOCOM in support of operations overseas?
General Fenton. Yes. Given the enduring nature of USSOCOM missions
abroad, USSOCOM lacks permanent authority for all Special Emergency
Procurement Authorities under 41 U.S.C, Section 1903 for SOCOM missions
overseas. This includes increased micro-purchase thresholds, Simplified
Acquisition Thresholds (SAT), Simplified Acquisition Procedures (SAP),
and the expanded use of Standard Form 44s (SF 44s).

[all]
