- [H.A.S.C. No. 118-61] TOO CRITICAL TO FAIL: GETTING SOFTWARE RIGHT IN AN AGE OF RAPID INNOVATION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-61]

TOO CRITICAL TO FAIL:

GETTING SOFTWARE RIGHT

IN AN AGE OF RAPID INNOVATION

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 13, 2024

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-071              WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin, Chairman

MATT GAETZ, Florida                  RO KHANNA, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
PAT FALLON, Texas                    WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
NICK LaLOTA, New York                PATRICK RYAN, New York
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
Pennsylvania

Joshua Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Michael Hermann, Professional Staff Member
Brooke Alred, Research Assistant
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Khanna, Hon. Ro, a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and
Innovation.....................................................     2
Luttrell, Hon. Morgan, a Representative from Texas, Subcommittee
on Cyber, Information Technologies, and Innovation.............     1

WITNESSES

Lord, Hon. Ellen M., Former Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition and Sustainment, Department of Defense.............     2
Murray, Richard M., Professor of Control and Dynamical Systems
and Bioengineering, California Institute of Technology.........     3
Patt, Daniel, Senior Fellow, Hudson Institute....................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Lord, Hon. Ellen M...........................................    23
Murray, Richard M............................................    37
Patt, Daniel.................................................    47

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Fallon...................................................    66
Mr. Gaetz....................................................    65
Mr. Gallagher................................................    65
Mr. LaLota...................................................    67
Dr. McCormick................................................    67

TOO CRITICAL TO FAIL: GETTING SOFTWARE RIGHT IN AN AGE OF RAPID
INNOVATION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and
Innovation,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 13, 2024.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Morgan Luttrell
(a Representative from Texas) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MORGAN LUTTRELL, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM TEXAS, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES,
AND INNOVATION

Mr. Luttrell. The subcommittee will come to order. I ask
unanimous consent that the Chair be authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
Without objection, so ordered.
Good morning, everyone. Thank you for attending. We are
here today to discuss one of the most critical enablers within
the U.S. arsenal, and that is software. Software that the
warfighter uses is crucial to our ability to conduct operations
in the air, the sea, on land, in space, and obviously in
cyberspace. Similar to our expectations the aircraft carriers
will be able to leave our pier and the F-18s can deliver a
payload over its target. We expect that the systems and code
that we rely on will work when needed.
Despite this criticality, we see a Department that
collectively struggles in procuring, operating, and
prioritizing software. Congress [does] know when something is
wrong and something is right or when something is working or
not working. We see the reports, we read the studies repeatedly
noting that the Department struggles with software findings
that are remarkably consistent from the 1980s to today. We know
that some things are fundamentally amiss.
My hope today is for the witnesses to not only describe the
problem but contextualize, where possible, what is being done
to date and what the largest barriers have been for addressing
these issues in a truly meaningful manner. I can't think of a
better set of witnesses in front of us today to help with that
task than the three that I am about to introduce. Ms. Ellen
Lord, the former Under Secretary for Defense for Acquisitions
and Sustainment; Dr. Richard Murray, professor of control and
dynamic systems and bioengineering at Caltech [California
Institute of Technology] and co-chair of the 2019 Defense
Innovation Board's Software Acquisition and Practices study.
And Dr. Dan Pratt, senior fellow at the Hudson Institute. Thank
you all for being with us today.
I will now recognize the ranking member for his opening
remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. RO KHANNA, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to our
three excellent witnesses, looking forward to hearing from you.
The Department of Defense and U.S. Government has been
critical in the development of software and technology in this
country. As a Representative of Silicon Valley, I remember that
it was our mission to the Moon that led to the acquisition of
semiconductors, and that is what spawned Silicon Valley. Had we
not had the U.S. Government buy semiconductors in the scale
they did, you would never have seen the development of Silicon
Valley and the technology. Now, a lot of the innovation is
happening in my district and in the private sector. And we need
to figure out how we continue and strengthen the collaboration
between our Department of Defense and private sector,
recognizing the dynamic nature of software, how quickly it
changes, how much we need that innovation to keep us the
strongest military and country in the world. So I am looking
forward to your comments and your suggestions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Khanna. We will now start with
the witnesses. Ms. Lord, you are recognized for 5 minutes for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. ELLEN M. LORD, FORMER UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR ACQUISITION AND SUSTAINMENT, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Ms. Lord. Thank you very much, Congressman Luttrell, for
chairing this hearing and thank you, Mr. Khanna, and members of
the committee to allow me to come and talk with some of my
former colleagues and now current colleagues.
In an era of strategic competition among technologically
advanced powers, software will shape the nature of deterrence
and define national security advantage. The urgency to empower
our defense and national security apparatus across all domains
with both the best existing and emerging technology is critical
to not only preserve our freedoms, but also those of our
partners and allies.
Our Nation has developed an operationalized technology
solutions that have transformed our commercial sector, and in
turn, our everyday lives. Now we must harness and apply this
ingenuity and innovation to bolster U.S. military superiority
in the digital age. Given current geopolitical conditions, the
stakes could not be higher.
Software development and implementation in support of our
country's defense and intelligence infrastructure needs to meet
the challenge of the moment. To fall short now would not just
be a bureaucratic debacle but a source of imminent risk to our
ability to deter, fight, and win. The ability to quickly
develop and deliver capability to close the gap between
information discovery and mission response is a defining
differentiator in emerging global competition.
Defense and intelligence agencies must develop, acquire,
execute, and maintain software to meet current mission needs,
while also having the agility to quickly respond to future
threat environments. The statutory, regulatory, and budgetary
framework for these agencies are ripe for streamlining, to
build and maintain the Nation's software advantage.
The Department of Defense procurement process is one of the
greatest challenges and opportunities to software acquisition.
Often, software's purchased using the same approach that is
traditionally employed for major hardware systems purchases.
Typically, this entails setting rigid requirements, conducting
lengthy solicitation processes, and ultimately, years later,
facing costly sustainment contracts to adapt software that is
often obsolete upon delivery. Although alternative acquisition
pathways exist, they are only as effective as an acquisition
professional's ability to implement them.
Funding professional training and development for
acquisition professionals to ensure they have key skills for
implementing the full spectrum of acquisition approaches will
enable the best and most innovative software and technology to
be quickly provided for our national security workforce. DOD
[Department of Defense] must operationalize policies and
procedures to support the use of modern software development
and delivery practices, such as agile software development
lifecycle, software-as-a-service delivery, human centered
design, DevSecOps [development, security, and operations], and
modern technology stacks.
Training the acquisition workforce is necessary but not
sufficient to modernize software development and deployment.
Resourcing must be available to provide flexible budgeting,
rapid and continuous authority to operate, and leadership must
demand that all relevant authorities, procedures, and processes
are employed. My submitted testimony goes into more details on
these items.
I would like to close by acknowledging three efforts that
are producing actionable recommendations that might be useful
to this subcommittee. One is the Commission on Planning,
Programming, Budgeting, and Execution, who just last week
produced our final report. Chairman Rogers and Ranking Member
Smith held a hearing in which we talked about recommendations
that could be employed; many would help our software
initiatives.
Two, the Software [in] Defense Coalition that is led by
Jane Lee is producing actionable recommendations for the
subcommittee.
And finally, the Atlantic Council Commission on Software-
Defined Warfare, on which I serve, is again producing
actionable recommendations.
I urge the committee to follow up on these. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lord can be found in the
Appendix on page 23.]
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ms. Lord.
Dr. Murray, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD M. MURRAY, PROFESSOR OF CONTROL AND
DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS AND BIOENGINEERING, CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Murray. Mr. Luttrell, Mr. Khanna, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak
with you this morning on the topic of software development in
the Department of Defense.
From 2016 to 2021 I was member of the Defense Innovation
Board and I co-chaired along with Michael McQuade the DIB study
on Software Acquisition and [Practices] which we call SWAP.
This was established in the 2018 NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act], and our report was titled ``Software is
Never Done'' and it was released in May of 2019.
One of the key findings of our report was that Congress and
DOD had been talking about the importance of software and
struggling with how to make better use of software in support
of national security for decades. In many ways the DIB report
of 2019 was just a rephrasing of the 1987 Defense Science Board
task force on military software written 32 years earlier, which
identified itself over 30 previous studies on that same topic.
As we described in our report, ``Chapter 3: Been There, Said
That,'' we know what we need to do, we just need to figure out
how to actually do it and get to it.
In our 2019 report we identified three themes that I
believe are still the most important points to make about
getting software right. The first is that speed and cycle time
are the most important metrics for software. Being able to
develop and deploy faster than our adversaries means that we
can provide more advanced capabilities, respond to our
adversaries moves, and be more responsive to end users. Faster
reduces risk, leads to increased reliability, and gives us a
tactical advantage on the battlefield by allowing operation and
response inside our adversaries' OODA loop--observe, orient,
decide, and act.
Second, software is made by people and for people so
digital talent matters. DOD resource policies are often not
conducive to attracting, retaining, and promoting digital
talent. Talented software developers and acquisition personnel
with software experience are often put in jobs that did not
allow them to make use of those talents, particularly in the
military, where rotating job assignments may not recognize and
reward the importance of software development experience.
Today, in DOD and the industrial base that supports it, the
people with the necessary skills exist. But instead of taking
advantage of their skills, we often put them in environments
where it is difficult for them to be effective.
Third, software is different than hardware and not all
software is the same. Over the years, Congress and DOD have
established a sophisticated set of statutes, regulations, and
instructions that govern the development, procurement, and
sustainment of defense systems. But software development is
fundamentally different than hardware development. And software
should be developed, deployed, tested, and continuously
improved using much different cycle time, support,
infrastructure, and maintenance strategies.
Software is never done, and must be managed as an enduring
capability that is treated differently than hardware. In
preparing for this meeting, I took the opportunity to read
recent GAO [U.S. Government Accountability Office] reports on
the implementation of some of the recommendations from the SWAP
study which we partnered with Ms. Lord on when she was in the
DOD.
I was pleased to see that Congress and DOD have made
substantial progress in implementing many of our
recommendations, including establishing new acquisition
pathways for software and exploring new appropriation
categories that allow software to be funded as a single budget
item. These are important steps and they should be continued
and accelerated if we are going to get software right.
In addition to these important actions that focused on the
acquisition process, DOD implemented many actions on other
primary and secondary recommendations from our report. Some of
the most important are developing guidance on authority to
operate, ATOs, including ATO reciprocity and continuous ATOs
which enable continuous integration and deployment pipelines.
As of April 2023, it appears that guidance for continuous
ATOs has not yet been published, and I would encourage the DOD
to do so if it hasn't already.
Another area of high importance is recruiting digital
talent. DOD reports progress in establishing software factories
that combine personnel from specialized teams, but it appears
they have yet to establish a separate career track for software
developers, something that we recommended.
A well-defined career track for software developers,
including service members, will allow DOD to train and retain
the skilled workforce necessary to design, build, and test
modern software systems.
Finally, an area that is completely different today than it
was 5 years ago when we did the SWAP study is the role of
artificial intelligence in military systems. The implications
of AI will be profound across all areas of society and the
field is changing so rapidly that it is impossible to predict
how AI is going to progress over anything more than the next
few years.
In the context of software development, AI is poised to
revolutionize the way we write, test, and deploy code. Modern
large language models, LLMs, are already writing code based on
descriptions of the desired function, and are being used in
industry to speed development. In the future they will be
integral to testing, deployment, and protection of software as
well. These developments will democratize software development
in ways that have a potential to drastically reduce cycle time,
both for the U.S. and for our adversaries.
At the same time software that is used for military systems
is too critical to fail, and so we must find ways to harness
those tools that fit the increased levels of security and
safety that are required in safety and mission critical
systems. DOD must stay on top of these developments and take
advantage of current U.S. leadership being developed in the
commercial sector.
Congress working with DOD plays an essential role in moving
forward and breaking us out of the cycle of repeating for the
last 32 years.
Thank you for your attention. And I look forward to our
discussion.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Murray can be found in the
Appendix on page 37.]
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Dr. Murray.
Dr. Patt, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL PATT, SENIOR FELLOW, HUDSON INSTITUTE

Dr. Patt. Thank you for inviting me here to speak on such
an important topic.
I am here in an individual capacity, but I serve in diverse
roles offering me perspectives on the cutting edge of national
security technology and threats, the broad techno-economic
shifts which are reshaping the global order, and the vibrant
commercial tech ecosystem.
As you all know, software is ubiquitous, its powerful
implications for economic productivity, for government
effectiveness, for cybersecurity, and the character of national
security. And these technological changes are overlaid on the
geopolitical context of our time, strategic competition between
the United States and the People's Republic of China [PRC]. And
the crux of the problem for national security is this: In a
sustained competition, in a long-term competition, advantage
ultimately depends on the ability of one side to adapt, move by
move, year by year, mitigating weaknesses and building
advantage.
The kinds of questions that we end up with in the military
dimension of competition are things like are our weapon systems
relevant against a relentless pace of new threats? Can
commanders access data to control highly distributed forces?
Can we invent new ways of fighting that put the PRC on the back
foot and dissuade aggression?
These are the issues that the Department of Defense must
tackle if it wants to compete and now every one of these issues
now depends on software. Even changing a military unit's
tactics now depends on a software update, not just a whiteboard
planning session. And we need look no further than the
battlefields of Ukraine to find evidence that units which are
able to change their software more quickly see better outcomes.
So we face a choice. We can be victims of software, cursing its
bugs and delays and overruns, or we can harness it for
competitive advantage by leveraging American ingenuity, a
robust talent base, and leading technology. That's our
question, can we create a defense system built for evolution
and adaptation, a defense system built to compete?
My central message is this, and it will echo those of my
fellow witnesses here: The process of getting code from a
programmer to an operational system is critical. This is what
is so different about software, we blur the lines between what
is development, building something, and what is operations,
using that same thing. So making this quick and robust is a
necessary condition for competition. And there are a handful of
forward-leaning trailblazers in the Department doing this well
today, but they remain in the minority and they face daily
struggles against organizations and processes built for another
era.
So I call your attention to two actionable items for
oversight. First, enabling rapid software deployment and
updates through the ATO process, as we have discussed, where
again ATO refers to the process of how the Department decides
that software is safe to deploy and use.
The second item, talent, attracting qualified technical
expertise to guide DOD's software development and procurement.
On the first topic, I will introduce an analogy. In many ways
making software resembles a potter molding wet clay and forming
it into some finished piece. When an engineering team works
with source code, it acts like wet clay, they can quickly
adjust it, make fixes. But once the code is compiled, built,
shipped, it becomes fixed and brittle. The executable code only
works on one particular type of processor, as many fixed
assumptions about those operating conditions. And what we find
is modern software is so complex and has so many dependencies
that you need to feed the results back to the engineering team,
you need a cycle. And unfortunately our ATO process often makes
this quite difficult. So this is addressed in greater detail in
my written statements.
On the second topic, technical talent, software is a
complex and technical subject matter, details matter, the bits
matter. So we hear these clickbait headlines sometimes, like
one simple trick can solve DOD software like use Kubernetes or
get to the cloud or one software factory to rule them all, or
just hire Silicon Valley, or it's all about agile. Those are
all great tools, those are useful things, but navigating that
complexity requires judgment and organic technical talent on
the part of the Department.
The DOD needs a few top tier technical leaders driven by
mission, it doesn't need armies of CAC [common access card]
badge coders. And it can attract this talent, if given the
right tools, using things like term appointments, and giving
these people autonomy to make a mission impact. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Patt can be found in the
Appendix on page 47.]
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Dr. Patt.
We will move into questioning. I will open up. Authority to
operate, you all three hit on that. It seems--I hate to say it
seems almost as--you guys shouldn't leave, I am going to talk
to you guys if you want to hang out. Yeah, totally cool. Sit
back down. The authority to operate, I don't necessarily mean--
it seems like it is the improper medium for software innovation
into the Department because software is updated every half
second of every second of every minute of every hour of every
day, correct. I mean, it just moves so fluidly.
For the past 40 years, the authority to operate seems to be
a bogging the system down. I am asking three subject matter
experts, we will start with you Mr. Patt. Or Ms. Lord, we will
start with you, ladies first. What is the fix? I don't want
something hanging on the wall that we talked about. I don't
want a report that we never read. What is the actual fix to fix
this problem? This is the way that we--forward leaning in front
of our adversaries and we seem to be bogging--the system is
failing itself it sounds like. Ms. Lord.
Ms. Lord. The challenge is the need for speed. And I
believe there are two things that we need to do, is one, move
to continuous ATOs. There has been a lot written and a lot
discussed, but continuous ATOs are not yet implemented. And I
would suggest that [inaudible] posture hearings, this would be
a very good thing to ask DOD leadership about.
Secondly, we are repeatedly across even programs, military
services, agencies, not allowing reciprocal rights for ATOs, so
the same software is being reauthorized again and again. Those
are the two key things that I think you should push on.
Mr. Luttrell. So breaking down the silos between the
multiple departments.
Ms. Lord. Absolutely, and not looking at discrete,
repetitive approvals. Right now, in fact, there is only a
requirement to approve 12 systems a year, which given the fact
that most of our systems run on hardware, software, and data,
is frightening.
Mr. Luttrell. Dr. Murray.
Dr. Murray. Yeah, I would completely agree, I think when
you think about continuous ATO in particular, right? What do we
need to be able to do? We need to be able to say this software
needs to be updated, it needs to be updated now, the longer we
wait, the more risk we put our warfighters in by not giving
them the code they need to do the job they need to do.
So how do we get to the point where we are an industry,
right, where if a zero day comes out, that is some attack on my
cell phone, that is going to going to break into my cell phone,
there will be an update in the next day or two, right? And that
means they have already figured out how do we put an update out
there that is not going to break all of those [inaudible], it
is going to satisfy all of our own security things. We need to
do that within the DOD. We need to define what that is. I think
you should be asking on every program what is the cycle time
that is going into the software? How much of that cycle time is
the ATO process, right? And if that ATO process, if that is
more than sort of a day, there is a problem, right, because it
needs to be a continuous ATO. It needs it be something where we
automatically check, does this satisfy the security
requirements? This is important code, we have got to be careful
about it. But we need to be able to get out there quickly, or
we're putting our warfighters at risk.
Mr. Luttrell. Mr. Patt.
Dr. Patt. I agree very much with those comments. It is
useful to talk about--the ATO is about the risk of using the
software, about deploying the software, and this gets aligned
with mission risk. And sometimes I feel this point gets lost.
If it's buying body armor you can really separate these
decisions of did I buy the body armor and does it meet the
spec, and, you know, is it safe to use this on a mission, does
this help support the mission. With software though, again,
these lines get blurred.
I will say that one of the places where you see progress in
the Department is where they try to put these risks together,
so if you look at, in the Navy, PEO IWS [Program Executive
Office Integrated Warfare Systems], or PMW [Program Manager,
Warfare] 150. There are program offices and program managers
which both own the risk of use of the software on the
operational network, and the development of the software. And
you move those things together, you tend to get these more
mission-focused outcomes. These are the organizations which
have been successfully able to use continuous ATOs. And I would
expect that, you know, that same characteristic to carry us
forward. You know, as Dr. Murray said, you know, we often focus
on ATOs like this old-fashioned boxed software model, and we
forget the risk of not updating the software, of not deploying
new features which will make us more successful in our mission.
And we have become too focused on compliance, checking the
boxes of, you know, did we meet the boxes that we said we would
when we shipped that software, and we forget the underlying
problems of we are trying to conduct a mission here. And the
most important thing is the cycle time that we keep coming back
to, so you can keep updating, adding features and mitigating
problems.
Ms. Lord. If I may have one quick followup on that.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Lord. I think we need to differentiate in the
Department between risk management and risk elimination. We are
never going to eliminate all risk and these tradeoffs are what
take human judgment calls and what Dr. Patt is talking about.
Also he called out PEO IWS. I think it is very important for
Congress to recognize those individuals in the Department who
are leaning forward and demonstrating, embracing authorities,
policies, procedures. And I would say Admiral Seiko Okano, who
was, I think, she is just moving along PEO IWS, has done that
admirably.
Thank you.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ms. Lord.
For all the young men and women sitting behind the
witnesses, they are talking to you. You are the next generation
that will keep this country ahead of nefarious actors across
the globe. So I highly recommend you play this tape back
because we are counting on you. Do you understand? Outstanding.
Mr. Khanna, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Khanna. [Inaudible]
In my district when you have a software challenge at Apple
or Google, they don't just go out and buy new software. In
fact, that is the last thing they do. They have a mission and
they figure things out.
I have heard from people who sold to the DOD or worked at
the DOD that they just buy new software to check off the box
that they have complied, but this isn't actually innovating in
the way that the private sector does. Could you comment on how
we change that culture, other than getting Tim Cook to run
these things?
Ms. Lord. I think it comes down to investing in the human
capital at DOD. If individuals are not trained to be smart
buyers, and we cannot attract contemporary coders and so forth,
we will not change that culture. Right now we have a huge issue
and this is mentioned in our PPBE [Planning, Programming,
Budgeting, and Execution Reform Commission] final report with
modernizing a lot of our business systems. We are pretty good
at talking about innovating from a warfighting technology point
of view.
We typically do not talk about innovating business systems.
We need to digitize those systems. And we have to attract
individuals who want to work on contemporary COTS [commercial-
off-the-shelf] systems. Right now we have a hard time
attracting a lot of software specialists in the Department
because we are working on 10-, 20-, 30-year-old software. And
frankly, there is not the knowledge of the art of a possible as
to what could be done. So I suggest working with DAU [Defense
Acquisition University], training the acquisition professionals
on what a digital environment really is. Thank you.
Dr. Murray. I would say that, you know, I completely agree
with you. We can't sort of say, hey, this software is not doing
what it is supposed to do so let us go specify and put a bunch
of requirements into finding a new piece of software that is
going to do that and go buy that somehow, and 5 years later
this thing comes along.
I think what you see in Silicon Valley and other places is
that we say we need a platform, and that platform is an
enduring capability. We are going to be doing search forever.
We are going to be delivering apps to cell phones forever. And
so, we are going to be tracking satellites and tracking debris
in space forever. There is an enduring capability there. And
there is software that is going to do that. And we need to
think about that platform as something that is going to get
updated, new features are going to be added and other things.
And we are not going to say, let's, you know, sort of write
down the requirements for that, buy it, and then it's done and
it's going to sit there for 10, 20 years.
It needs to be something we say every year, we are going to
invest a certain amount of money in that software and a
development team that is going to do that. And we need to
create a system in which we sort of think of software as an
enduring capability. And get into that that mind-set. It is
absolutely possible. We have seen it in the commercial sector.
It is part of the reason that the U.S. commercial sector is so
far ahead is that we are just able to jump on all of those
things.
And so, we have to do that within the DOD. I think there
are spots that are doing that. We need to again, as Ms. Lord
said, we need to amplify those, we need to recognize those, we
need to do that more.
One other thing I'll say is, you know, I think that we see
some of that starting in the software acquisition pathway, but
it's for things that are pure software, so much software is
sitting on top of hardware and the hardware mind-set dominates
the software that is part of that hardware. We have got to
break out of that. That software also needs to be updated.
If you are looking at an F-22 there is software in that.
Some of that software should stay there for a decade or more.
But much of that software is things that should really be
updated on a regular basis.
Mr. Khanna. I had one more question, so I will give you the
chance to answer it. If there is a company and they are awarded
a second phase SBIR [Small Business Innovation Research] grant,
a lot of the startups do, then they often are waiting for a
year, year and a half to get the SBIR III. And this is the
valley of death in Silicon Valley for a lot of startups. Is
there a way that you could authorize the contracting officer to
a least give a letter of intent to possibly give--that they are
going to get the grant because so many of these startups don't
make it at the SBIR III phase.
Dr. Patt. Yeah, so this question on acquisition policy is
there are a variety of tools that the government can use.
However, there are also limits. For example, a frequent limit
that comes up with SBIR III awards is an anti-deficiency thing,
often you have to wait for funding to become available from a
future year so that the government can't just indicate advanced
notice of award.
Some of the things that the PPBE Commission has done in its
report, its recommendations, could create additional
flexibilities which could be delegated down to program managers
and contract officers, which could allow flexibility, allow in
the same year flexing of priorities of being able to maybe move
some money that isn't being put to good purpose to advancing,
say, an SBIR Phase III award.
Ms. Lord. Following up on that a little bit, I think it is
important to note that right now the National Academies is
running a study on recertification of the SBIR/STTR [Small
Business Technology Transfer] process for just this very
reason.
And as Dan mentioned, we in this PPBE report talked about
how if we didn't have so many discreet budget line elements,
but had more capability elements, we could allow the PEOs and
PMs [Program Managers] to have more agility, especially in the
year of execution, to move money towards emerging technologies
and these smaller companies.
Right now, unfortunately, in my opinion, the SBIR/STTR
process is an afterthought for most PEOs and PMs. There is not
a lot of education on it, and it is a little bit trickier to
use. So again, educating the workforce is critical.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Khanna.
Mr. Gaetz, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. March 7 of this year, AviationTimes.com reported
that the TR-3 [Technology Refresh 3] software delay could force
the DOD to combat-code F-35s. I don't know what it means to
combat-code something, sounds dangerous. So maybe, Ms. Lord, we
could draw on your experience and you could explain what
combat-coding is and whether that is a good idea?
Ms. Lord. I am not sure I totally know the definition of
combat-coding, but it sounds like coding on the go. I will say
the F-35 is the perfect example of a program that looked to our
major primes who are absolutely critical for our national
security, but frankly to a large degree has excluded the small
companies where the predominance of innovation in this country
takes place. And that is where the coding capability is. And I
think having lived through the TR-3 drama, if you will, we need
to decompose this and make sure when we are awarding these
large contracts that we are reaching out to the companies who
know how to do this coding, and again, manage risk, don't
eliminate risk, and find a way to bring them in.
Mr. Gaetz. So here is our challenge that we have with a lot
of these companies. They are dying to get the contract, they do
all sorts of things to get these big old contracts, to get
these, you know, $180 million-a-copy F-35s. And then they want
to protect their source code, and not allow other innovators to
be able to be able to access it to kind of springboard and
innovate off of it.
Dr. Murray, is the F-35 one of these kind of hardware
dominated paradigm systems where the upgrades that are needed
for the warfighter are now being executed through this combat-
coding system.
Dr. Murray. I don't know whether or not the combat-coding
system is being used there, but, you know, it is certainly the
case that it is a large hardware program that has used, from
what I can tell, a very traditional DOD process to decide----
Mr. Gaetz. And you mean that as a critique?
Dr. Murray. Yes, as a critique. I agree. And the software
components of that again, some software components, the
embedded flight control code is not something you should be
changing every day. Other parts that are doing the logistics
change and other things are things that we want to be agile
about and we want to take advantage of. And so, how do we, in
those programs, say, not that we should break the rules because
now there is a crisis and so we are going to do it differently,
but rather, we have a well-defined way of putting software in
there, checking, doing continuous ATOs. Part of our process is
we know what is the frequency at which we are going to update
the different pieces of software. I think when you look at----
Mr. Gaetz. And what they love to say to us is, oh, you need
to update it frequently, and we need to be sole source. And of
course, we can't share our source code with anyone else so that
they might be able to participate in that update. So how do I
break through that?
Dr. Murray. I think it is great question, you know, and I
will let Dan say a little bit about it, you know. I do think
that you have to think about where the pieces of software are
going to come from, and they don't all have to come necessarily
from one manufacturer.
Mr. Gaetz. Oh, we will have to wake Lockheed Martin up with
smelling salts, that not every update to the F-35 has to come
through Lockheed Martin.
Dr. Patt. So first, let me just add some operational
context to this. Sometimes I think that in peacetime it is hard
to understand how important delivering software updates is. But
if you just look at the conflict playing out in the Ukraine,
one of the things is you see Ukrainian radios only last about 3
weeks before some countermeasure comes along and they have to
reprogram the radio or change a wave form. We see the Excalibur
munition, its targeting system dropped from 70 percent
effectiveness to 6 percent effectiveness over a matter of a few
months as new EW [electronic warfare] mechanisms came out.
If we expect our major weapon system programs to follow
these waterfall processes where we spend years planning a tech
refresh, how do you ever hope to adapt in competition?
Mr. Gaetz. But that is what we are doing now.
Dr. Patt. That's right. This is the problem.
Mr. Gaetz. Help us liberate ourselves from this.
Dr. Patt. So, much of it is going to go back to--there is
two principles, and Congressman, you introduced--so one, we've
talked a little bit about ATOs already, that is one. The other
principle you just brought up is this notion of vendor lock.
One, I want to point out that an ATO is another mechanism by
which one can achieve vendor lock, we are beginning to see this
already. Some companies get a continuous ATO, and then they
seek to use that to lock themselves in because it is so
expensive. Companies can spend $1 million just getting through
an ATO process.
But there are a set of principles, and these are known as
the MOSA [Modular Open Systems Approach] principles and
actually, Congress put this in place, and Ms. Lord oversaw a
number of efforts. But these are poorly used. What MOSA
principles do is they say, the program manager, who is in
charge of the acquisition, shall define modules and interfaces
and make those interfaces available to qualified contractors to
the government. And what this does is this allows other
companies to come along, they see the data, they see the
interface, and they can make new software that works with that.
If the government has the right infrastructure, it can
figure out how to test this and make sure that it works
effectively in context. So the principles exist; in fact, put
in law. They are just poorly adopted.
Mr. Gaetz. Well, yeah, that is because people are
protecting their turf. I greatly appreciate that.
I have got further questions for you, Dr. Murray, about AI
and hypersonics, but I see my time has expired and so I will be
submitting those for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Ms. Slotkin, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you. Thanks for being here. You know, I
was at the Pentagon for 7 years and in the 5-ish years that I
have been here we have done a ton of hearings that kind of
looked at this issue from one way or another, just our cultural
problem of speeding up decisionmaking, particularly as it
relates to tech. And to the point where I feel like, to use a
Pentagon term, we are admiring the problem, like, we're just--
we just love a hearing about it. And actually there is deep
bipartisan agreement on the need to spin up and to speed up
that string on going from concept to fielding of the technology
of any kind, obviously software being some of the most
complicated.
And it has led me to believe, even as someone who, you
know, cares deeply about the Pentagon and our national
security, that it's not, you know, any one program or any one
authority, it is truly culture, culture across administrations,
culture across leaders. And I am not, like, a burn-it-down kind
of person, you know, saying like, okay, the system doesn't work
so we need to destroy it and start from zero. But if separating
yourself from the tech, if you could make--and some of you have
served inside the Pentagon--if you could be queen or king for
the day, on one cultural change, what would that be?
And I would say, you know, aware of the fact that the
Pentagon has a lot of rules and restrictions when they use
taxpayer dollars that Google and Silicon Valley and everyone
else doesn't have to adhere to. And the responsibility of
stewarding those dollars is different than a small startup in
Palo Alto, it is never going to be the same thing. Comparing
the two is apples to oranges. But speaking from culture as
people who have been either in the inside or adjacent, what is
the one thing you would change, starting with Ms. Lord.
Ms. Lord. I would ask leadership to demonstrate that smart
risk management benefits the warfighter and the Nation.
Therefore, I believe there are many more motivations and
rewards that can be given to those individuals, whether
civilians or in uniform, who lean forward and take smart risks.
They manage risk, they don't try to eliminate it, and they move
at the speed of need here. And I believe that leadership needs
to speak up and make rewards and highlight those individuals
who are doing the right thing and recognize that people will
falter and not to blame them, if you will, when everybody is
looking for perfect being the enemy of good enough.
Ms. Slotkin. Yeah. I certainly know, in Silicon Valley,
when I have the chance to visit, it is like people wear their
mistakes as a badge of honor. I started a company, it didn't
succeed, but I learned these important lessons, and now I am on
my third company and look at all this amazing stuff.
It was so strange as a Pentagon official to visit Silicon
Valley and hear people talking about their failures because at
the Pentagon, you would never talk about your failures, right?
Ms. Lord. Well, and with all due respect, I think Congress
has a piece of this.
Ms. Slotkin. For sure, for sure.
Sir, we will just go down the line here, Mr. Murray.
Dr. Murray. Yeah, so I think it is a great question and I
think you are right, changing that culture is going to be hard
and how do we do it. I think there are lots of things we could
do. If I could sort of be king for a day, I think one of the
things I would do is change the way we think about the teams of
people that are working on software. If you look at what
happens in Silicon Valley or other places, you see a lot of
this turnover, right. People are not there for 10, 20, 30 years
doing this, right. They come in for 2 years, they do this part,
they go out, they start another company, they go to another
place. How do we take advantage of the commercial sector, bring
them into government for a short period of time. Put them in a
position that is skipping a couple of GS levels and other
things because they are super talented, they know what to do,
we get them in there.
I think they will help change that culture because they
will ask why. Why are we doing it this way? Why don't we do it
this way? I know how to do it that way. So I think that is what
I would do, right. We have to change the culture. We are not
going to change the culture by just taking the people who are
there and saying change. I think we do that by bringing people
in who look different and think about things differently,
right, and that is one way to do it.
Ms. Slotkin. Very quickly in my remaining time, Dr. Patt.
Dr. Patt. Yeah, I think fostering a culture of doers is
really the key here, which is encouraging the accountability
down to an individual program manager for the outcomes they
achieve. When you run a decades-long development, and you only
serve in a position for a few years, it is very hard to have a
sense of accountability or responsibility or pride in the
outcomes that get delivered. But the great thing about software
is you can compress these delivery timelines and suddenly, you
can start to celebrate this. And, you know, combined with the
suggestion that Dr. Murray just made of bringing in people for
short tours of duty from commercial industry, I think you can
get a vibrancy and dynamism in the perspective and talent to
drive to results.
Ms. Slotkin. Thanks very much. My time--I yield back.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Ms. Slotkin.
Mr. McCormick, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
I am going to start--it is fascinating, I love the variety
of questions. It has kind of been all over the map and you guys
have been such great subject matter experts.
I am going to go a little off the chart of things that I
was supposed to ask today because I am fascinated by this
topic, and we have a couple doctors in technological fields. I
am a doctor in medicine. And it is interesting to watch how AI
has been developed and how it has taken these columns, very
similar to the way the brain is-- this is kind of fascinating
for the kids out there and how AI is developed. And different
parts of your brain affect different parts of your body.
Specifically, it is designed for this part of the brain for
your arm, this part for your leg, this part for your eyesight,
this part for your hearing. This is your decisionmaking, this
is your personality. And we have done the same thing in AI
since we can no longer rely on Moore's law to shrink the size
of these chips. And there is one atomic structure of thinness
per layer, which is fascinating to me, that we can actually
design software to go in this hardware and fit into these
capacities to do specific functions just like we do in our
brain. It is fascinating that after all this technology and all
this science, we are getting back to the way that God designed
the brain. It is fascinating to me.
My question is, and this is for my two technology experts
is, as we do this, and we are designing software into--to match
the hardware, and we are going forward, and AI accelerates that
process, how does that affect cybersecurity and our enemies'
ability to combat us and how do we unleash that potential as we
design the software going forward?
Dr. Murray. I will give it a start. So as I said earlier I
think it is hard for us to predict the impact that AI is going
to have. It is clear it is going to be huge and we have figure
out how to take advantage of that. Our adversaries are going to
take advantage of that. And so, if we are not on the front end
of that, we are in trouble. I think one of the things we have
to do is start saying, we need to be using AI to design
software. We need to be using AI to test software. We need to
be using AI to try and attack software internal to what we are
doing, right? Where is that happening now, right? What are the
AI programs that are saying, hey, we write code with AI, we
test code with AI, and other things. Why? Because if we are not
smart at that, we are not going to be able to take advantage as
that technology goes so quickly.
It is fascinating, I think, because AI is one of those
areas, I heard a talk by John Hennessy, former president of
Stanford. And he said, AI is one of those areas where the
developers of the technology were legitimately surprised by
what it could do. They didn't know that it would be able to
code. They didn't know it would be able to do these things. It
is amazing, right, to have that, you know, John Hennessy has
been involved in a lot of things but it did what they designed
it to do. AI is something that truly is moving faster than we
thought it would move. I think it is going to be huge. I think
the DOD needs to take advantage of that. I think we ought to be
asking where are the AI efforts that are happening in use of
large language models for coding and other things.
Dr. McCormick. Dr. Patt, before you get started, one of the
things I also want you to consider as a university kind of guy,
too. Georgia Tech has three different columns of AI
development. But we all said 250,000 students from India just
alone here in the United States studying. We have got a ton of
kids from China studying. And we have all of our AI production
over in Taiwan at TSMC [Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing
Company], right? So we have production overseas, we have our
technologies going back overseas, that is another consideration
I want to--you know, how do we protect this stuff from being
used against us when we are training those people and producing
the chips overseas in a nation that we said we are going to
take over. I am just concerned about the security measures of
that.
Dr. Patt. Yes, this is an important question. The
complexity of our software and our hardware and the codesign is
absolutely exploding. I will say, though, that you can use this
complexity as a tool. For example, one of the things you can do
is you can create a chip, you can produce the hardware, and
then you can set features of it later. You can defer some of
that, and you can build in forms of defense.
But at the same time, you know, I don't think it is
possible to prevent all vulnerabilities beforehand. This is one
of the reasons why being able to go back and drive updates,
detect anomalies, detect problems, and drive updates is so
important. And we begin to see this now, for example, in some
of the Navy operational networks of automated anomaly
detection, and then they are able to go push a patch before any
users see a problem. So tools like this, of figuring out how to
use this exploding complexity that we see to the advantage of
the U.S. is how we stay ahead.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you. Ms. Lord, I am going to just kind
of push that question back on you. Again, we always talk about
securing our software as we develop. We are the leaders in
technology as far as developing software, but we don't create
our own hardware when it comes to AI. How do we protect our
technologies from the bad guys.
Ms. Lord. I think what we have to do is look at this from
both a defensive and offensive point of view. And it is
absolutely critical that we have standards that are held to
when we look at the system level, that we also understand the
provenance of all hardware and software that we include. Right
now, we don't always understand the beneficial ownership of
some of the companies in our supply chain. And frankly, AI has
done an incredible job in illuminating supply chains just
scraping publicly available information to really understand
where items began.
So the Department of Defense has begun to put some
contracts in place to use that technology. And cybersecurity
standards are already, to some degree, in the acquisition
policies, but that needs to be followed up on.
Dr. McCormick. Thanks. I yield. Thank you.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. McCormick.
Mr. Ryan, sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you all for being
here and really appreciate your input and also your service in
many various hats to the country. Despite my desire to ask
about TikTok, I am not going to do that this morning. I am sure
many in our audience would be curious, myself included.
I want to follow up on my colleague Ms. Slotkin's sort of
line of questioning and something specifically you said, Ms.
Lord. You started to say, Congress has a role in this
discussion about culture and risk--changing the risk sort of
appetite, if you will, and tolerance. Could you talk a little
bit more about that, any specific ideas you have and we will
turn it to others, too.
Ms. Lord. Absolutely. I think often it is easy to look at
what has gone wrong in DOD and pound on that a little bit, if
you will. But I think, perhaps, if thoughtful questions about
what did you learn from this? How did it happen? How do we do
things differently in the future? That line of discussion would
be very useful. Also, I think asking questions about what is
holding you back from taking more risk. And I think that there
is an incredible fear of failure. And if you could engage
senior leadership in the building relative to discussions about
that and ask them how you motivate and reward them to act more
like the commercial sector where we do things quickly, we pull
the patches, you know, in a day or so. I think that would be
really, really useful.
Mr. Ryan. Just in setting up others to answer, too, and
somewhat leading, but is there--not to overly formalize it, but
do you think it could ever make sense for there to be some more
public, or more broad assessment of which programs, which
leaders, which individuals are accepting risk, sort of holding
them up in a somewhat more formal way.
Ms. Lord. Absolutely. For years, when I was in the building
we talked about holding hearings to showcase these types of
individuals. And I believe the reality is that scheduling does
not allow you to do that type of thing. There are things like
TikTok that you need to work about--to talk about and work on.
But there is so much you can do just with recognition with
letters, with talking to the media, showing--inviting people up
to your office for an hour or so. It just doesn't cost much,
would go a long way, and it would cast a very long shadow.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you.
Dr. Murray. So, you know, I think Congress does play a role
in shaping the culture of the DOD. And it is the way you ask
the questions, I think in part, right? If you do something
where you say, here are all the requirements, why didn't you
meet these requirements, why is it over budget, et cetera, you
are forcing us into a system in which we are looking at the
requirements and checking all the boxes, and that may not be
the right answer. If you look at speed and cycle time as your
main metrics, and for software programs that is what it is, how
quickly can you get something out into the field. That is
fantastic. Can we get a leader board going, to your point,
right, where we sort of say, this program they have got their
sort of time down to 1 week or 2 weeks, you know, why is it
that they are doing better? Maybe we get people in a friendly
competition, right, for saying we have got the best speed and
cycle time, right. Can we make those things public? Can we say,
here's how quickly these different software-dominated programs
can get things out into the field and working.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you. Love the leader board.
Dr. Patt. One of the most remarkable technological
achievements is just how safe civil air travel is. It is
remarkable how few fatalities come out of this. And the reason
that it became so safe and so successful is there was a strong
culture around a blame-free debrief, which is if you step
forward and you talk about the problem, then it is about
learning, it is not about failure. This is the same principle
that we need to apply here as we figure out collectively how to
do software right.
Just to call out two specific examples. Many of you have
heard of this Air Force project called Kessel Run which is
about software delivery. Many of you have also heard about the
Air Force's ABMS, the Advanced Battle Management System, that
is run by PEO C3BM [Program Executive Office, Command, Control,
Communications and Battle Management] in the Air Force, General
Cropsey. Both of those efforts are efforts which did deep hard
introspection about their early efforts, and they said, you
know what? We need to pivot. The early choices that we made
around architecture and how to approach this or how we think
about managing this effort aren't right and we need to pivot.
Those are the kinds of people, the kind of decisions, and that
sort of blame-free culture, that focus on learning that you
need to make this work.
Mr. Ryan. I appreciate that. And I think just with the 20
seconds I have left, I think recognizing that that has to start
from the very, very top, and has to be a principle of all the
senior, senior leadership is just something that I think we can
hopefully all agree.
So thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back the balance.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Ryan.
Mr. Khanna, closing statement?
Mr. Khanna. I just want to thank the excellent witnesses
and your very concrete recommendations. And appreciate your
time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you again as well, coming in--shedding
light and amplifying information of--again, we have talked
about it. We learn more from our failures than we ever will our
successes.
To your point, sir, in the military, we often never spoke
about how well the operation went. We always talked about how
horrible the small things, or in order to capitalize that on
the next op. I have been sitting back here trying to--I think I
have it, but I am not going to say it out loud. I think I know
why the reason why we are so risk averse in the House of
Representatives. And I will just keep that to myself since I am
on TV right now. But my colleagues and I will definitely
discuss that behind closed doors. But again, thank you.
So, members will have 5 business days to submit their
questions for the record. This committee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 9:52 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 13, 2024

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 13, 2024

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 13, 2024

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER

Mr. Gallagher. Ms. Lord, you are very familiar with the ``authority
to operate'' or ATO process from your time as Under Secretary. As you
know, the process is extremely slow and inefficient. However, software
evolves at the speed of war; in Ukraine for instance, their software-
defined platforms can be updated in hours or days, while updates
through our ATO process takes several months, at best. As a result, the
ATO process makes it impossible for our forces to field the best
software at the speed of war. How do you suggest we fix this process to
ensure our service members can leverage the best software on the
battlefield?
Ms. Lord. I recommend continue working with the OSD CIO, John
Sherman, as well as each of the Military Service CIO's to prioritize
scaling the current continuous ATO projects to encompass an increasing
percentage of software programs on an annual basis with a three year
goal to move to 100% continuous ATO implication. (I have personally
spoken with John Sherman about the need to accelerate this process.) As
the technology exists, there appears to be more of a cultural and
leadership challenge to cATO implementation. Requiring six month
updates from the OSD CIO would provide visibility to Congress, as well
as industry, to the progress.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GAETZ
Mr. Gaetz. On February 19, 2024, Interestingengineering.com
reported that EpiSci was chosen for U.S. AI hypersonic missile tracking
system software:
EpiSci has won a $1.6 million contract with the U.S. Space
Development Agency to flesh out its AI-powered, hypersonic missile
tracking system.
The U.S. Space Development Agency (SDA) has officially chosen
California-based EpiSci to develop its planned cutting-edge software to
detect hypersonic missiles in flight. This initiative marks a
significant advancement in missile defense capabilities, leveraging the
power of artificial intelligence (AI) to analyze extensive data from
low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites.
A key factor of developing hypersonic defense is knowing when and
where they might be deployed.
Are you familiar with the Hypersonic detection program and the
development of AI based software to detect the deployment of weapons?
What roadblocks has the DOD faced when developing software to
deploy and detect hypersonic weapons?
Are there software related complications preventing our hypersonic
weapons from hitting a moving target?
How far away are we, not a specific date, FY25 or 29? I'm just
trying to get a sense of how much more it'll take from Congress to get
our capabilities on par with our adversaries.
https://interestingengineering.com/military/episci-us-ai-
hypersonic-missile-tracking
Ms.  Lord. I am generally aware of the challenge of tracking
hypersonic missiles, but have not worked on this issue for three years.
The challenge is not only the software, but establishing a network of
space-based sensors to provide sufficient fidelity to cover incoming
missiles and then providing the electronics to transmit the target data
in real-time. The real-time integration of sensors, communication
electronics and software is a complex task.
Mr. Gaetz. On February 19, 2024, Interestingengineering.com
reported that EpiSci was chosen for U.S. AI hypersonic missile tracking
system software:
EpiSci has won a $1.6 million contract with the U.S. Space
Development Agency to flesh out its AI-powered, hypersonic missile
tracking system.
The U.S. Space Development Agency (SDA) has officially chosen
California-based EpiSci to develop its planned cutting-edge software to
detect hypersonic missiles in flight. This initiative marks a
significant advancement in missile defense capabilities, leveraging the
power of artificial intelligence (AI) to analyze extensive data from
low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites.
A key factor of developing hypersonic defense is knowing when and
where they might be deployed.
Are you familiar with the Hypersonic detection program and the
development of AI based software to detect the deployment of weapons?
What roadblocks has the DOD faced when developing software to
deploy and detect hypersonic weapons?
Are there software related complications preventing our hypersonic
weapons from hitting a moving target?
How far away are we, not a specific date, FY25 or 29? I'm just
trying to get a sense of how much more it'll take from congress to get
our capabilities on par with our adversaries.
https://interestingengineering.com/military/episci-us-ai-
hypersonic-missile-tracking
Dr. Murray. Unfortunately, I am not familiar with the Hypersonic
Detection Program.
Mr. Gaetz. On February 19, 2024, Interestingengineering.com
reported that EpiSci was chosen for U.S. AI hypersonic missile tracking
system software:
EpiSci has won a $1.6 million contract with the U.S. Space
Development Agency to flesh out its AI-powered, hypersonic missile
tracking system.
The U.S. Space Development Agency (SDA) has officially chosen
California-based EpiSci to develop its planned cutting-edge software to
detect hypersonic missiles in flight. This initiative marks a
significant advancement in missile defense capabilities, leveraging the
power of artificial intelligence (AI) to analyze extensive data from
low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites.
A key factor of developing hypersonic defense is knowing when and
where they might be deployed.
Are you familiar with the Hypersonic detection program and the
development of AI based software to detect the deployment of weapons?
What roadblocks has the DOD faced when developing software to
deploy and detect hypersonic weapons?
Are there software related complications preventing our hypersonic
weapons from hitting a moving target?
How far away are we, not a specific date, FY25 or 29? I'm just
trying to get a sense of how much more it'll take from congress to get
our capabilities on par with our adversaries.
https://interestingengineering.com/military/episci-us-ai-
hypersonic-missile-tracking
Dr. Patt. I am not directly familiar with the specifics of the
Hypersonic detection program and EpiSci's software. However, based on
my general knowledge of defense software development, I would
anticipate that the software challenges for hypersonic tracking are
similar to those faced in fielding other advanced sensor or weapon
systems. As outlined in Appendix A, the attached policy memo
``Compiling Advantage'', co-authored with the Honorable Ellen Lord, the
Department of Defense faces several key roadblocks in rapidly
developing and deploying software, including onerous Authority to
Operate (ATO) processes, talent gaps, lack of access to data and
interfaces, and inflexible resourcing. Overcoming these challenges to
enable greater software adaptability will be critical for the DOD to
outpace adversaries in areas like hypersonic detection and defense.
While I cannot comment on a specific timeline, continued Congressional
support and funding will be essential to ensure the DOD can attract top
technical talent, reform cumbersome processes, and drive the
innovations needed to achieve parity with competitors in critical
technology areas. The attachment provides a detailed analysis of the
roadblocks and potential solutions.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON
Mr. Fallon. Ms. Lord, during your time as Under Secretary of
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment the Department of Defense
decided to replace the Defense Travel System (DTS), a twenty-year old
legacy software that was found to contribute to almost $1 billion of
improper payments, with a commercial travel and expense system. The
decision to use commercial technology solutions is in line with decades
of precedence in statute and regulation and supported in the recent
PPBE Commission Report. Unfortunately, following your ten-year in the
DOD, the current administration decided to turn its back on
modernization and to stick with DTS because the military services were
not adopting the solution as mandated by the Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness. In June of last year, the GAO testified
that DOD does not have the power to reform business operations when the
services do not agree.
Is the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness the
best office to implement enterprise-wide software transformation and
modernization for travel? If not, what office within the Office of the
Secretary of Defense should take on the modernization of defense
travel?
Ms.  Lord. I would send a letter to SecDef Austin, copying the
DepSecDef Hicks, directing Hon LaPlante as UnderSecretary of
Acquisition and Sustainment to contract a new commercial travel system
within the next six months with support from the CIO. The effort
supports the need to upgrade multiple business systems with
commercially available software versus contracting for a bespoke
system. An update on progress in three months should be requested.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LaLOTA
Mr. LaLota. During recent Congressional testimony before the Armed
Services Committee, Lieutenant General Michael Schmidt, overseeing the
F-35 Program, testified that the testing of new software in labs before
flight trials is a significant bottleneck, leading to unforeseen
challenges and delays. I suspect this issue isn't exclusive to the F-35
but prevalent across various weapon systems, illustrating a gap between
our rapid software development pace and testing capabilities,
ultimately hindering timely capability delivery to our forces. In an
era focused on innovation, it's critical we resolve this.
Could you shed light on whether software test capacity is indeed a
bottleneck in weapon system deliveries? What strategies can be
implemented to enhance DOD software integration labs' capacity and
efficiency? Additionally, considering the costs of acquiring necessary
physical hardware, how feasible is the development of a virtual test
environment to supplement our current capabilities and meet the DOD's
growing needs?
Ms.  Lord. Software testing is indeed a bottleneck. Making
developmental testing and operational testing a continuum is key to
speeding the fielding process. In other words, taking credit for
testing conducted during development should count towards operational
testing versus repeating testing. The Director of Operational Test and
Development should be tasked with establishing a process that not only
counts developmental test towards production testing, but ensures that
hardware in the loop testing at Patuxent River is conducted 24/7. The
JPO Director and PEO should be required to submit written updates on
software testing acceleration on a quarterly basis along with Lockheed
Martin.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. McCORMICK
Dr. McCormick. Secretary Lord, for quite some time federal law has
preferred the procurement and use of commercial business systems (10
U.S.C. 2222(b)(4)) and best practices (10 U.S.C. 2222(a)). The thought
being, if it works for industry the federal government should not have
to reinvent the wheel and can focus on solving problems that are not
found in the commercial sector. I was pleased to see that the final
report of the PPBE Commission, which you were the Vice Chair, supports
the use of commercial business systems. Yet, as the Commission
identified DOD's practices and digital culture result in the continued
use and investment in bespoke solutions (PPBE Commission Final Report
page 106--first two paragraphs under ``Shortfalls in DOD Practices and
Digital Culture). The report states that ``Business system reform
should be accompanied with the equally important streamlining of
business processes and practices'' (PPBE Commission Final Report--see
third paragraph on page 107) or change management. There is no clearer
example of failed change management than the DOD's decision to end its
transition away from the Defense Travel System to a modern commercial
solution.
If you may, who is in charge of digital change management within
the Department and the services regarding business systems?
Additionally, what can Congress do to empower these individuals to
ensure the law if followed and that those in uniform are not stuck with
legacy systems like DTS for another twenty years?
Ms.  Lord. The SecDef should receive a letter from Congress
directing the Undersecretary for Acquisition and Sustainment to procure
a commercial travel system, with advice from the DOD CIO, in the next
six months. The DepSecDef should be copied and a written update in
three months should be required. This issue needs to be elevated to the
SecDef level and Dr. LaPlante needs to be empowered to move forward
quickly with the procurement while SecDef must compel the Military
Services and Agencies to establish and implement a transition from
legacy systems to a new commercial system within the next fiscal year.
Dr. McCormick. Dr. Patt, in 2019, the Defense Innovation Board
issued a report encouraging the use of ``. . . commercial software
whenever possible . . .'' and that ``DOD should not build something
that it can buy.'' It went on to say that `. . . DOD should take
actions to ensure that both the letter and spirit of commercial
preference laws (e.g., 10 USC 2377, which requires defense agencies to
give strong preference to commercial and non-developmental products)
are being followed'' (SWAP Study page 47). Unfortunately, the DOD
continues to develop its own business systems rather than conform to
existing commercial solutions. Nearly five years after the publication
of this report, the DOD decided to maintain the Defense Travel System,
a legacy system more than twenty years old and responsible for
approximately $1 billion in improper payments rather than use a
commercial solution that was already available in the DOD system. In a
recent War on the Rocks Article, titled Software Defines Tactics, you
highlighted ``When a program can cleanly express a need, including its
reliability . . . the program's first instinct should be to outsource
that capability to a commercial or dual-use provider.''
Why is it that that the DOD is not incentivized nor managed to
outsource these capabilities and leverage commercial systems and
business best practices? What can the DOD do to heed your advice?
Dr. Patt. The DOD's challenges in leveraging commercial solutions
often contrast with the well-established ``Commercial Items
Preference'' outlined in sections 1906, 1907, and 3307 of title 41,
United States Code, and sections 2375, 2376, and 2377 of title 10,
United States Code. A key issue is that Department of Defense
requirements are often structured in a way that bundles unique defense-
specific features together with components that are readily available
commercially off-the-shelf. One potential acquisition approach feasible
today is to unbundle these aspects and use techniques like modular
contracting to gradually evolve the defense-unique features. However,
acquisition officials often perceive this unbundled approach as higher
risk compared to a single monolithic contract. Driving change at scale
would require either: 1) Continued training for the acquisition and
contracting workforce on how to structure procurements to maximize
commercial leverage, or 2) Rethinking how the DOD generates and
competes requirements, shifting from a ``build-to-spec'' to a ``buy-
and-evolve'' mindset. Today, practices around competitive procedures
often incentivize a lowest-price, technically acceptable (LPTA)
approach against a common specification, rather than allowing for
tradeoffs between features, timelines, and overall value. Enabling the
DOD to flexibly adopt commercial solutions may require consideration of
the risk that contracting officers face in interpreting acceptable
competitive procedures. The policy recommendations outlined in the
attached ``Compiling Advantage'' memo provide some guidelines to
address these systemic issues.
