[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-55]

A REVIEW OF DEFENSE SECRETARY
AUSTIN'S UNANNOUNCED ABSENCE

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

FEBRUARY 29, 2024

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-330                    WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Eighteenth Congress

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ADAM SMITH, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Vice    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
Chair                            RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
DON BACON, Nebraska                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            SARA JACOBS, California
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
PAT FALLON, Texas                    PATRICK RYAN, New York
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota              CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama                  Pennsylvania
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
NICK LaLOTA, New York                JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN, Virginia
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIMMY PANETTA, California
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia           MARC VEASEY, Texas
LANCE GOODEN, Texas
Vacancy

Chris Vieson, Staff Director
Forrest McConnell, Professional Staff Member
Jeanine Womble, Professional Staff Member
Logan Whelchel, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2

WITNESSES

Austin III, Lloyd J., Secretary of Defense.......................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Austin III, Lloyd J..........................................    47

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Kim......................................................    55
Ms. Jacobs...................................................    55
Mr. Deluzio..................................................    58
Ms. Strickland...............................................    58

.
A REVIEW OF DEFENSE SECRETARY AUSTIN'S UNANNOUNCED ABSENCE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Thursday, February 29, 2024.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here today. Let me start
by saying that we all here wish you a full and speedy recovery.
We understand you are still recovering and sitting for too
long is not the best thing for your health. So in consultation
with the ranking member we've agreed to your request to limit
your appearance today to 2 hours.
To get to as many questions as possible I ask unanimous
consent to reduce the time for questions to 4 minutes. Without
objection, so ordered.
So to members if we can't get to you today please submit
your questions for the record and the Secretary has assured us
he will get answers to those back in a timely fashion.
Also, the Secretary will be back in about a month to
testify again so you will have another opportunity at that
time.
Mr. Secretary, the reason we've asked you here today is not
to discuss your health. We're here today to determine why the
President was not immediately informed of your incapacitation.
The timeline, as we understand it, is this.
On the evening of January 1st Secretary Austin was
transported to the hospital via ambulance for complications
stemming from a surgical procedure he had on December 22nd.
On the afternoon of January 2nd the Secretary's authorities
were transferred to Deputy Secretary Hicks without her even
being informed as to why.
On January 4th, 3 days after the Secretary's
hospitalization, Deputy Secretary Hicks and the President were
first informed that Secretary Austin was in the hospital.
On January 5th Congress was informed of the Secretary's
hospitalization. It's totally unacceptable that it took 3 days
to inform the President of the United States that the Secretary
of Defense was in the hospital and not in control of the
Pentagon.
Wars were raging in Ukraine and Israel, our ships were
under fire in the Red Sea, and our bases were bracing for
attack in Syria and Iraq, but the Commander in Chief did not
know that his Secretary of Defense was out of action.
Even the Deputy Secretary, the person to whom your powers
were transferred, didn't know that you were in the hospital.
Our forces conducted a preauthorized strike on Iranian-
backed militia in Iraq during this period. Had something gone
wrong with the strike, or worse, if there was an attack on the
United States precious time would have been wasted while the
President sought in vain to find his Secretary of Defense.
The chain of command doesn't work when the Commander in
Chief doesn't know who to call. That's why we want to know who
made the decision to withhold that information from the
President, and although you've publicly stated you are solely
responsible you've also informed this committee that it wasn't
you who decided to withhold the information from the President.
We were led to believe your 30-day interval--internal
review would shed light on that matter but it includes no
explanation of why the President and his staff were left in the
dark.
It makes no recommendations to improve communication with
the White House and, unsurprisingly, it holds nobody
accountable.
We appreciate your desire to protect your subordinates but
it's important in democracy that public officials are held
accountable when mistakes are made.
This administration has gone to great lengths to avoid
accountability whenever possible. But this is a matter of
national security, and someone needs to be held accountable.
Furthermore, I find it very concerning that the Secretary
could be hospitalized for 3 days without anyone else in the
administration even noticing. That suggests Secretary Austin's
advice is not sought or heeded in the White House even while
military operations were ongoing in the Middle East.
It also implies that the White House politicals, not
seasoned defense professionals, are in the driver's seat on
matters of national security, which is very disturbing.
Finally, beyond the immediate need to inform the President
Congress also has a right to know of secretarial absence or
transfer of authority. Ironically enough, none of this would
have come to the attention if the White House hadn't demanded
that the Department come clean to Congress and the public.
Ultimately, our goal today is to understand how and why
this happened so we can ensure it never happens again.
With that, I yield to my friend and colleague the ranking
member for any statement he may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for joining us today.
And I will point out to members that in a little more than
a month the Secretary will be back and he will be here for the
full posture hearing which will go on considerably longer than
2 hours.
So that accessibility I do appreciate from the Department
of Defense. This is an opportunity to address an important
issue, and I will say I agree with much of what the Chairman
said.
I think the lack of transparency and clear communication
about what was going on with the Department of Defense [DOD],
certainly, with the White House but also with Congress and
others is--should not be repeated.
We need clearer, more transparent information about what's
going on at the Pentagon. I do want to disagree with just one
thing the Chairman said about how during the time period when
you were in the hospital the Commander in Chief didn't know who
to call.
He did. The transfer of power was made. It was made to the
Deputy Secretary and if that had--anything had come up that's
the way the system works.
When the Secretary of Defense is out of commission for any
reason the Deputy Secretary assumes those responsibilities and
roles and that was made clear throughout the Pentagon and to
the White House.
Now, the reason behind it was not and that's where I think
the lack of transparency is problematic. I think we need to
understand the importance of the role of the Secretary of
Defense responding directly to the Commander in Chief.
The Commander in Chief should have all the broad range of
information about what's going on with the Pentagon even
though, again, in this instance there was no question who was
in charge in that time. The transfer was done in accordance
with the law and done appropriately.
So I think it is appropriate that we have this hearing,
that we have this discussion, that we hear directly from the
Secretary. We have to work very closely with the Secretary as
well as the Department to exercise our constitutional role of
oversight of the Department of Defense.
So to have those open lines of communication is crucial. I
thank the Secretary for being here, being willing to explain
that and take those questions.
I do also want to emphasize that throughout this whole
process an incredibly complex threat environment--I think
that's one thing on this committee absolutely everybody agrees
to.
There have been few times in our history when we've faced
the set of challenges that we face right now--the war in
Ukraine, the war in the Middle East, trying to make sure that
it doesn't spread, the challenges that China continues to
present, North Korea as well.
Throughout that whole time there is no allegation
whatsoever that the Department of Defense was not completely on
top of all of those situations. There was no instance where
they were not doing their job to the utmost of their ability
and in the defense of this country.
In fact, I would point out that the coalition that
Secretary Austin has been very responsible for helping to put
together to stop Putin in Ukraine has been remarkably effective
and it's a testimony to Secretary Austin's leadership and the
way the Department of Defense has been run on a day in and day
out basis.
I would also be remiss if I didn't point out that it would
be helpful if the United States House of Representatives would
be willing to allow a vote on the much-needed aid for Ukraine
and the Middle East and to pass the appropriations bills the
Department of Defense could desperately use to better carry out
that job.
But there's no doubt that the coalition that has been built
has been incredibly successful. Two years ago when the war
started everybody assumed that Ukraine would be done in a
month.
Here we are 2 years later and they are a sovereign
democratic nation still, in large part because of the bravery
of the Ukrainian people but also because of the coalition that
has come together to help protect them that the Secretary has
led.
Even in the Middle East, a chaotic and difficult situation,
we have stopped that war from spreading. The response to the
attacks and the tragic death of three U.S. soldiers in Jordan
has for the moment blunted those attacks from the Shi'a
militia.
The Houthis are proving to be a much larger challenge in
Yemen, but we have once again built a coalition to confront
that challenge.
So as we look at this question of what happened while the
Secretary was in the hospital, and admittedly the lack of
transparency needs to be improved, let's not lose track of what
the Department of Defense is doing right now to meet the
national security challenges that we face.
And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the ranking member.
Mr. Secretary, you are recognized for 5 minutes for any
opening statements you may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. LLOYD J. AUSTIN III, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Secretary Austin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Smith, members of the committee. Good morning.
I am grateful to this committee for your continued support
for the Department of Defense and our outstanding troops.
The U.S. military is the most powerful fighting force in
human history and with your help we're going to keep it that
way.
The Department is deeply focused now on meeting the pacing
challenge from the People's Republic of China, on making the
Middle East more secure after the October 7th terrorist assault
on Israel, and on ensuring that Ukraine can continue to defend
itself against Putin's war of aggression.
So, as always, we are focused on the defense of our Nation.
But I know that Congress has some legitimate concerns about
some issues around my illness. So let me start by thanking all
those who've offered me well wishes after my recent cancer
treatment and hospital stay.
I very much appreciate your kind words and I received world
class medical care at Walter Reed, and I want to again publicly
thank my doctors and the outstanding nursing staff. They expect
me to be completely cured of my prostate cancer, which was
caught early, and I continue to recover.
And now I want to be very clear. There was never any lapse
in authorities or in command and control. At all times either I
or the deputy secretary was in a position to conduct the duties
of my office.
But we did have a breakdown in notifications during my
January stay at Walter Reed and that is sharing my location and
why I was there.
Back in December I should have promptly informed the
President, my team, and Congress and the American people of my
cancer diagnosis and subsequent treatment.
Again, we did not handle this right and I did not handle it
right. As you know, I've apologized including directly to the
President and I take full responsibility.
I am also taking responsibility for some institutional
changes to make sure that this cannot happen again. It's not
enough for me to pledge to do better.
The system must be postured better to make the appropriate
notifications when authorities are transferred and my staff
must be ready to carry all of this out.
But let me be clear. I never intended to keep my
hospitalization from the White House or from anybody else.
That's why we immediately instituted changes to the way that
the authorities can be temporarily transferred to my deputy and
to the way that notifications get made.
That's also why we conducted a 30-day review of the entire
process. Now, because the review deals with a continuity of
operations its drafters wrote it as classified. But, of course,
we've shared that review with all of you.
The 30-day review made eight recommendations to me and I
have directed that all eight recommendations be implemented. We
put two in place already and we're moving out quickly on the
other six.
So let me quickly summarize them for you. We've made clear
that we expect full information sharing with the deputy or
another designated official assumes the functions and duties as
acting Secretary.
We've issued written guidelines for clear information
sharing between my staff and the Deputy Secretary's staff if
these scenarios arise, and we'll ensure that the Department
officials in the order of succession are familiar with and
supported for the relevant processes.
And we're moving quickly to develop a mandatory reporting
protocol for personnel who support me or the Deputy Secretary
in situations that might affect our ability to perform our
duties and functions.
Of course, we already have continuity of operations plans
in place and we'll continue to review and update those plans as
appropriate.
Now, even before the 30-day review we already had made some
changes. In the future if the Deputy Secretary ever needs to
temporarily assume the duties of my office she and several
White House offices will be immediately notified.
That includes the White House Situation Room and the White
House Chief of Staff. Key officials across the Department will
also be notified including the Deputy Secretary, the Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs, and the General Counsel and the reason for
that assumption of duties will be included in writing.
As you saw, these--and you saw these new procedures in
action during my hospitalization earlier this month. And,
finally, the DOD Inspector General is still working on his own
independent review, which we fully support.
Now, before I take your questions, I want to again make one
thing very clear. At no time during my treatment or recovery
were there any gaps in authorities and there were no risks to
the Department's command and control.
And from the time that I resumed my duties on January 5th I
fully participated in national security decision making on
events in the Middle East and about military operations in
self-defense to protect our troops in our facilities over
there.
Again, we're moving swiftly to put some helpful new
procedures in place to prevent any lapses in notification and I
am confident that we will not experience the same issues in the
future.
So let me again thank you for the opportunity to be here
today and for everything that this committee does to support--
to stand by the mission and the people of the Department of
Defense including their families.
I know you understand this but one of the best things that
you can do right now to support them is to pass a full year
appropriation.
In doing so it will ensure that our troops get paid, that
our civilian employees can stay on the job, and that we can
continue to procure and field the very best capabilities to
defend our country. We need the flexibility and stability that
full year appropriations provide.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, I appreciate your
leadership on that score and I stand ready to assist you in any
way.
And with that, I will be glad to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Austin can be found in
the Appendix on page ?.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
The chairman now yields his question time to the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Military Personnel, the gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, help us get this straight. At what point
during your hospital stay did you or your staff decide that the
President should know about your hospitalization?
Secretary Austin. As I understand it, my Chief of Staff
contacted the National Security Adviser and advised him that I
have been hospitalized on the 4th of January.
Mr. Banks. At what point during your stay was the 4th of
January?
Secretary Austin. I am sorry. I didn't hear.
Mr. Banks. How long into your stay was that?
Secretary Austin. Well, as we've pointed out--as has been
pointed out earlier, I was admitted to the hospital on the 1st
of January.
Mr. Banks. Days? Days after you were hospitalized?
Secretary Austin. Right.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Yes or no, did you tell your staff not to
inform the President--anyone on your staff?
Secretary Austin. I never told anyone not to inform the
President, the White House, or anyone else about my
hospitalization.
Mr. Banks. Okay. So the 30-day review summary lays a lot of
blame at the feet of your staff it seems that that would
appear, correct, for the breakdown in the process? You've told
us that you are responsible but the 30-day review seems to
blame your staff.
Secretary Austin. Well, the 30-day review pointed out that
there were some missteps and--but there was never any ill
intent or an intent to obfuscate. So----
Mr. Banks. One year ago you told me in this hearing room
you had no regrets about what happened in Afghanistan. Do you
regret what happened here?
Secretary Austin. I've said that we didn't get this right,
Congressman, and we put measures in place to ensure that the
notification process is improved, going forward.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Secretary, who will be held accountable?
Secretary Austin. The transfer of authority was----
Mr. Banks. Who will be held accountable for this, this
embarrassment?
Secretary Austin. Again, I take full responsibility and
we've put measures in place to address the shortcomings of
notification----
Mr. Banks. Are you surprised the President didn't call for
your resignation? I am surprised but are you surprised that he
didn't call for your resignation?
Secretary Austin. The President has expressed full faith
and confidence in me.
Mr. Banks. So you're not surprised that he didn't call for
your resignation?
Is it typical that the President would go 3 days without
talking to his Secretary of Defense? Is that typical or is that
a regular posture? Do you usually go days without talking to
the Commander in Chief?
Secretary Austin. I mean, that can happen. It depends on if
whether or not the President's on travel, if I am on travel.
There are times when we do go days without direct
communication.
Mr. Banks. So the big issue for me here is either the
President is that aloof or you are irrelevant. Which one is it,
Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Austin. It's neither.
Mr. Banks. That the President would go 3 days without
knowing that his Secretary of Defense is not on the job?
Secretary Austin. It's neither. The President is not aloof
and I am--I participate in all of the critical decision making
process.
Mr. Banks. Let me ask you this. On January 2nd while you
were in the hospital President Biden was vacationing in the
Caribbean. Your deputy, who the President didn't even know had
operational control, was on a beach in Puerto Rico. What kind
of message does that send to our adversaries?
Secretary Austin. The key piece is that, number one, the
deputy has the ability to--she has access to secure
communications. She has the ability to participate in decision
making processes for wherever she is.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Secretary, our adversaries should fear us
and what you've done is embarrassed us. Let me sum this up by
this.
A leading Chinese propaganda outlet said that what happened
to you exposed, quote, ``internal chaos.'' A leading Russian
propaganda outlet said that your disappearance, quote,
``effectively compromised the--``
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the----
Mr. Banks. They should be afraid of us. You have
embarrassed us----
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member.
Mr. Smith. First of all, let me say it is not remotely
surprising to me that the Chinese and the Russians are not
going to say anything positive about us. That doesn't come as a
surprise to me.
They seize on every opportunity to attack the United
States. So I don't really take their word for what was going
on.
And a couple things to drill down on. One is it is fairly
routine that the Secretary of Defense will be in places where
you are not able to do everything you need to do and that
authority is transferred.
I think a lot of people don't fully understand this. So can
you walk us through--I mean, how often does it happen that you
are in a place where you can't do--you can't be as responsive
as you need to be so you pass the authority on to your Deputy
Secretary?
Secretary Austin. Thanks. As pointed out in the 30-day
review there have been a number of times in the past where we
transferred authorities because of my inability to have access
to secure communications and then once I had the ability to
have access again to secure communications that was transferred
back.
So that--and the number of times that that's happened is
outlined in the 30-day review.
Mr. Smith. And was there--again, just to emphasize, was
there any time during this process in the first days of January
when you were in the hospital, anytime whatsoever when the
Deputy Secretary wasn't in a position to fully carry out the
responsibilities of the Secretary of Defense?
Regardless of whether she was in Puerto Rico or Mexico or
Mar-a-Lago or wherever she was in a position to carry out all
of the authorities that she had as the acting Secretary of
Defense in that instance, correct?
Secretary Austin. She is legally and logistically
positioned to assume the functions and she was, you're right,
in a position to be able to support the President as chief of
staff as he made decisions so--Commander in Chief.
So she always has secure communications with her just like
me and she has a situational awareness that's needed to be able
to make effective recommendations to the President and she,
working with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and also the
combatant commander, would propose options for the President in
any situation.
Mr. Smith. Certainly, and one of the things I want to
emphasize as this hearing goes forward is not to use this to
the advantage of our adversaries--to use it as a partisan
attack. There was nothing embarrassing about what happened
here. There was nothing that makes us appear weak.
The United States as all of this was going on, as has been
pointed out, was carrying out strikes against our adversary in
order to protect our force. We were doing everything that we
needed to do to meet the national security needs of this
country, and if members of this committee incorrectly imply
otherwise they are merely giving aid and comfort to those
adversaries that they claim to care about confronting.
And I will also one more time emphasize that if we care
about confronting our adversaries, rather than nitpicking the
Secretary of Defense about his precise process in this
situation we should go ahead and pass the national security
supplemental that the Senate has passed with 70 bipartisan
votes to precisely meet those national security needs.
Whatever Russia and Chinese propaganda machines may be
cranking out about this situation I assure you it pales in
comparison to what they're cranking out about the fact that
they think the United States is getting ready to abandon our
ally in Ukraine.
I would challenge any member on the other side of this
aisle to claim that the Secretary of Defense not fully
informing the President for 3 days is somehow more important
than walking away from that obligation that we have made and
that the whole world is watching us on.
And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from South
Carolina, Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Mike Rogers.
Secretary Austin, I first want to wish you a full and
speedy recovery.
And, sadly, we're here today because of the failure to
properly communicate Directive 3020.04 of the Department of
Defense which is critical information requirements through the
chain of command to President Biden.
As a grateful veteran myself along with you, the American
armed forces, we both understand the crucial role of the chain
of command to provide time sensitive information to make the
right decisions at the right time.
When communications fail there is an increased risk to
mission success but, more importantly, increased risk to the
service men and women.
This, to me, is personal as a 31-year Army veteran myself
having four sons who served in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Egypt and
currently my District Director is deployed in Africa. I just
take this personally with the South Carolina National Guard
that your service is just so critically important.
And I appreciate, having worked with you before, your
appointment and we need your proven capabilities more than ever
as we are in a war we did not choose of dictators with rule of
gun invading democracies with rule of law.
It began February 24th, 2022, with war criminal Putin
invading Ukraine. On October 7th, 2023, Iran puppet Hamas
invaded Israel, as the Chinese Communist Party threatens
Taiwan.
Sadly, Biden open borders for terrorists makes imminent
more 9/11 attacks across on American families and we need our
state National Guards to be ready for duty. Every family
actually should have a rally point when communications are cut
with an attack.
With the current global threats today their attacks on
America and our allies in--by Iran in the Middle East with the
lack of proper communications degrade our ability to respond.
Secretary Austin. Again, I would emphasize that there was
never a break in command and control. There was--we transferred
authorities in a timely fashion. What we didn't do well was a
notification of senior leaders and we put measures in place
to----
Mr. Wilson. And I--okay, I deeply regret the response we
had was ineffective by delaying a response and it should have
been an immediate response on launch sites and it should have
been very effective and there should have been no notice and
what was done really has put American families at greater risk.
And as I conclude I want to stress our sympathy for the
family of Alexei Navalny who was assassinated by war criminal
Putin. His widow Yulia is a hero for the oppressed people of
Russia.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Connecticut, Mr. Courtney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Rogers, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here today and for your 40-plus years of
service to defense of our country.
Again, just to sort of walk through one more time about the
fact that there was no gap in terms of authorities and who was
in control of the Department, you went into critical care on
January 2nd.
Your staff then executed the law in terms of notifying the
Deputy Secretary of Defense that she was in charge and as a
result, I mean, there was--it was seamless. There was just
never any moment where there was any absence of authority
within the Department.
Isn't that correct?
Secretary Austin. That's correct, sir.
Mr. Courtney. And, again, it actually was the Armed
Services Committee back in 1962 that passed the law that,
again, made this process happen, again, without any action--
special action of the Secretary of Defense.
It's different actually than the 25th Amendment of the
Constitution where if a President is going to go under
anesthesia or is incapacitated it actually says in Section 3 of
the of the amendment that there has to be a voluntary
surrender.
Again, going back to President Reagan, he actually executed
documents, filed it with the Congress, notifying that that was
going to happen. That's not the way the law works for the
Department of Defense.
Again, it happens. Again, if the Secretary is unable to
perform duties then that's it. The Deputy Secretary is in
charge. Isn't that correct?
Secretary Austin. That's correct, sir.
Mr. Courtney. And then on January 8th before even the 30-
day review or any of the recommendations you already moved to
put into place a regulation that basically states that this now
will be communicated in all instances to the President of the
United States so that the--whatever confusion surrounding the
lack of communication now has been now codified at the
Department to make sure it doesn't happen again. Isn't that
correct?
Secretary Austin. That's correct, sir, and we had the
opportunity to put those procedures in play when I went back to
the hospital on February 11th and it was a timely notification
in a seamless fashion.
Mr. Courtney. So speaking of gaps let's talk about the
supplemental because on February 13th the United States Senate
actually by a vote of 77 to 21--it was more than the 70 votes
that my friend Mr. Smith cited--overwhelmingly endorsed a
package which will provide $60 billion to Ukraine, who is in a
very dire state today.
So 16 days later we're here in this room. We're thankfully
going to--looks like we're going to move forward on a fiscal
year 2024 final package soon.
But the fact is is that nothing has happened in the House
to follow up with the Senate. The Speaker explicitly said he
will let the House work its will in terms of next steps with
the supplemental package.
I think everybody in this room knows if the bill was
brought to the floor we would get an overwhelming majority vote
pretty darn close to two-thirds. I've talked to some
Republicans who said it would be 300 votes.
What's the risk--what's the risk of that gap in terms of
our national security and helping our allies?
Secretary Austin. Well, we're seeing the risk play out on
the battlefield each and every day as the Ukrainians fight
valiantly to defend their sovereign territory and I would
remind everyone that with our support and providing security
assistance they've taken back half of the territory that Russia
seized.
But each and every day we see the Russians continuing to
push and make incremental gains and that's very troubling, and
without our support the Ukrainians will be outgunned in terms
of artillery and they will also be at risk because of lack of
adequate air defense----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Turner.
The Chair now recognizes gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this
hearing. Mr. Secretary, we do wish you a speedy and full
recovery.
I would concur with the points brought up by the Chairman.
I believe most members of this committee are bewildered at how
these events could transpire.
I am primarily concerned with the effect of your actions
and the actions of your closest advisor on the confidence of
the American people.
At a time when overall trust in the government is declining
Americans must still believe that the government can protect
them from the growing threats in this world and one of the most
serious threats is that of a missile attack from Russia, China,
or North Korea.
I chair the Strategic Forces Subcommittee and I am charged
by the Chairman with the oversight of our entire nuclear
arsenal including the command and control of our nuclear
forces.
Every day our service members who maintain and operate the
weapons systems that employ these destructive weapons are ready
to act within minutes of receiving a valid order from the
President that flows down through you or your designated
representative.
Today many on this dais will speak about disruptions in
chains of command. I will say that the most dangerous chain of
command to break is that which communicates orders to our
missile silos, ballistic missile submarines, and strategic
bombers.
We will only deter attacks on our homeland if our
adversaries are assured that we are capable and willing to
respond in kind, massively if necessary.
Not only is our homeland threatened by adversaries'
ballistic missiles but will increasingly be threatened by
hypersonic missiles. So all of these attacks are a matter of
minutes, not hours.
We can't afford to have the continuity of our nuclear
command and control fail for even a minute. My district of
Colorado Springs is home to the Cheyenne Mountain Complex which
is the primary site of our missile warning center.
The missile warning center maintains an unblinking eye that
buys the President and the Secretary of Defense critical
minutes.
In a crisis they initiate the conference between the
National Military Command Center and those in the chain of
command.
So, Mr. Secretary, my question is when did the National
Military Command Center become aware of your hospitalization?
Secretary Austin. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs was
notified on--as I understand it, on the 2nd of January and so
the entire staff would have been notified at that time.
Mr. Lamborn. Was the Military Command Center informed that
the Deputy Secretary of Defense had had authority transferred
to her?
Secretary Austin. When a transition takes place there's a
message that goes out to all of the key stakeholders, and so
yes.
Mr. Lamborn. And when was that message sent out?
Secretary Austin. Second of January.
Mr. Lamborn. The 2nd of January.
Was there a--we talked about seamless. It sounds like there
was a gap between the 1st of January and the 2nd of January, or
am I mistaken?
Secretary Austin. No, the 1st of January while I was in the
hospital I could still--I still had the ability to access
communications and so I remained--I retained the
responsibilities.
On the 2nd of January as I was admitted to critical care it
was determined that I would not have--my communicators would
not be able to provide timely access to the communications for
me and so the decision was made to put the process that's in
place in play.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Just a very quick summary of the law. If the President
decides to launch nuclear weapons the Secretary of Defense is
not in the loop, which probably ought to come to our attention.
Maybe we ought to make so that the Secretary is in the loop.
But by law he is not.
With regard to the really important issues that face us,
Mr. Secretary, we wish you well on your cancer treatment and
your return to full health.
You have an extraordinary, extraordinary service record. We
note, if we cared to understand, that it was your work together
with the President's that assembled the support in Europe,
North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO], and the European
Union necessary for the Ukrainians to receive the support
necessary to repel the Russian invasion and you continue to do
that, and I thank you for that extraordinary work.
I will note that while we are spending our precious time--
at least I think it's precious--on taking you and the
administration to task we are failing in our responsibility to
fund the Department of Defense.
We are now 5 months late in the appropriation process. It
is the responsibility of the Congress to provide the
appropriations and we are not doing so. We are on our fourth or
fifth continuing resolution.
We are derelict, not you, sir. It is the Congress of the
United States and the leadership in this House that is failing
to meet the national security needs of this Nation.
In the appropriation process October, November, December,
January, and February have passed and we've not done our work
and we're spending our time here taking you to task.
That's wrong. We are failing. Let me put it this way. The
leadership in this House is failing. We have a supplemental
appropriation absolutely necessary for the defense of Ukraine.
That has been languishing for months. The Senate has acted.
This House and the leadership of this House has not acted.
Is it that we are abandoning Ukraine? Is it that the
Republicans in this House want to take responsibility for
Ukraine's defeat?
Apparently they do because they are refusing to provide the
necessary funding. Humanitarian aid, Israel, the replenishment
of our arsenals--all are at risk because this House has refused
to take action.
Mr. Secretary, it is not you that are the problem. It's not
what happened in your health emergency that's the problem. You
have laid out clearly that that has been resolved, that
standard operating procedures were followed and will be even
more so in the future.
Thank you for your testimony and thank you for putting that
in place.
When will this committee actually stand up for the defense
of this Nation? When will my colleagues on the Republican side
of this committee find the courage to get the job done?
Five months have passed. The dereliction of duty is not
yours, sir. The dereliction of duty is right here on the dais.
Mr. Secretary, in 17 seconds if you'd like to comment on
the necessity of getting the job done please do so.
Secretary Austin. Well, first of all, as I stated in my
opening comments, sir, that a full year appropriation is really
important and without that we lose time and money and----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time--the gentleman's time
has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Wittman, for any questions he may have.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, we wish you, again, a continued recovery
from your surgery.
I would like to go through a series of questions just with
your reflection and yes or no.
Is it standard operating procedure for your security detail
to notify in real time the National Military Command Center?
Secretary Austin. To my knowledge, the--my security detail
does not notify the National Military Command Center of my----
Mr. Wittman. So it's not standard operating procedure for
your security detail to notify the National Military Command
Center?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Mr. Wittman. Okay. Well, if it's not standard operating
procedure and you said earlier that you have mechanisms built
in to make sure that transference of power takes place from you
to the Deputy Secretary then how does your security detail then
close the loop and getting information to the right place and
how was the decision made that the Deputy Secretary was then in
charge?
Secretary Austin. Well, the decision is really about
whether or not we've reached a point where--you know, I don't
have the ability to continue to perform my duties because of
lack of access to secure communications for a period of time
and that triggers the process that's established of being
followed and that happened pretty quickly and I think they made
the right decision.
Mr. Wittman. So if it's not standard operating procedure
then for your security detail to notify the National Military
Command Center, which is the nexus for how information gets to
the right place, so when issues of national security come up
the White House is informed because it's the National Military
Command Center who's in charge informing the White House.
So that didn't take place, according to you, and the
standard procedure isn't there and nobody in your office or
your staff notified the White House then how is it that people
in critical decision making positions then know when
operational deficits take place like you being in the intensive
care unit that day and not being able to continue with your
duties?
Secretary Austin. Again, by law if I don't have the ability
to execute my duties because of any reason, and in this case it
was because of lack of access to secure communications, by law
the Deputy assumes the roles and responsibilities.
Mr. Wittman. Listen, I understand the law. The law is
clear.
But the law doesn't assure that there's continuity in
operations and that people in critical positions know the
current situation so if something happens the right decisions
can take place in real time.
The Deputy Secretary was in Puerto Rico. While she may have
been advised or notified of a transference of responsibility
she stayed there and it was a matter of if something really
happened was she in the right position to be able to do that.
The White House didn't know. The national security advisors
didn't know. People in positions that would need to make
decisions in case of--and we're glad that something didn't
happen--but in case of if that information isn't transferred
then there is, indeed, an issue of national security.
Secretary Austin. As I stated there was never a lapse in
authorities or command and control and, again, when the
transfer is made a message goes out to all the stakeholders
that the transfer has been made and so the communications
specialists are positioned to route any incoming communications
to the Deputy that would have come to me.
Mr. Wittman. Is it not correct, though, that the President
should have known that the National Military Command Center
should have known that the loop should have been closed and
making sure that everybody knew the standard operating
procedure should be that your security detail notifies the
National Military Command Center?
Secretary Austin. The Joint Staff, Chairman, did know on
the 2nd of January and----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman.
I appreciate you holding this hearing and to you, Mr.
Secretary, we--well wishes in your quick recovery.
You've stated publicly that it could have been and it
should have been handled better. That's clear. The 30-day
review has been concluded.
There was a number of recommendations which you had
publicly agreed to implement and you went further to talk about
the Inspector General is also conducting that and we look
forward to it, and there should be a robust discussion.
What there shouldn't be is partisan bickering that is
trying to turn this into a political football. The idea of
command and control of our military, of the defense of this
Nation, is of the highest priority to the men and women who
serve here in Congress, those who wear the uniform, and
certainly to every American who cares about that.
I want to make sure that we fully understand because,
apparently, there is some doubt that there might have been a
break in the command and control of our forces. Would you
clearly state for the record was there ever at any time a break
in that command and control?
Secretary Austin. There was never a lapse in authorities or
command and control.
Mr. Norcross. Because we understand that in the event that
there was a national emergency, if there was a kinetic conflict
going on, there are a set of policies that take place in the
event that there is ever a gap.
If something were to happen to yourself or those below you
there is an immediate way of addressing that, and to go one
beyond that when it comes to nuclear command and control there
is very specific--and I have sat on that committee where we
talked about in the event that the President is not available,
the Vice President, there are clear and very specific steps
that take place. Isn't that true?
Secretary Austin. That's correct.
Mr. Norcross. So here we are. If this were to happen in a
situation of somebody that you have control that you didn't
know how would you have handled the situation?
Secretary Austin. If something like this happened to a
subordinate of mine?
Mr. Norcross. Yes.
Secretary Austin. Well, first of all, I would be concerned
about that subordinate's condition and welfare and, again, I
would try to gain some understanding of what happened and then
I would ensure that we put measures in place that don't allow
it to happen again and that's exactly what we did here.
And I would tell you that, you know, the President was
foremost focused on my welfare and then, you know, and ensuring
that we had the right measures in place to streamline
communications and to make sure that we were able to respond to
anything in the future.
Mr. Norcross. So as we are reviewing this, as we should,
are there any other items that were not recommended to or
lessons learned that you could share with us?
Secretary Austin. You know, we are--we're a learning
organization, Congressman, and there may be things that we
encounter in the future or we consider in the future that need
to be adjusted or changed and as we encounter those things we
will adjust.
And but as a start I think putting these eight
recommendations in place will help. We'd already done some
things ahead of time to ensure that notification occurred in a
very timely fashion. But if things--if we learn more things,
going forward, we will adjust as needed.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I certainly wish you a speedy recovery.
I want to focus on the December 22nd date. That's the one I
have the most difficult time with understanding.
The other one was an emergency procedure where you were
taken by ambulance to the hospital, if I am correct. Is that
right? The January procedure was the emergency?
Secretary Austin. The January event was an emergency. I
took an ambulance to the hospital. That's right.
Mr. Scott. The December 22nd date--when did you know that
you were going to have surgery on December the 22nd?
Secretary Austin. Well, I scheduled that surgery about a
week prior to the actual surgery and I was--I took leave in
order to--in order to do that and I made sure that we
transferred authorities to the Deputy that day and I resumed my
duties the following day.
Mr. Scott. Okay. So you took leave and--but you knew that
you were going to take leave a week before the 22nd, correct?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Mr. Scott. Whenever you scheduled the surgery on the--for
the 22nd that would be when you knew. But she was not notified
until the day of the procedure. Is that correct?
Secretary Austin. This was coordinated several days before
so I don't--I don't know the exact date when she was notified.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Well, according to what we have it appears
that she wasn't notified. She was basically transferred the
authority but wasn't given the reason for the transfer of the
authority.
And I guess that's the thing I have the hardest time with
is not the emergency procedure but it is knowing a week in
advance that you're going to be under anaesthesia, out for 48
hours give or take some time there, and why she wasn't notified
at that time that she needed to be prepared to receive the
authorities at that stage.
My understanding is that she was in Puerto Rico, not in the
continental U.S. at that time. Is that correct?
Secretary Austin. That's not correct.
Mr. Scott. Okay.
Secretary Austin. The 22nd she was in the States.
Mr. Scott. Okay. She was in the continental--okay. I just
think when we know that you as the Secretary of Defense, the
435 members of the House, 100 members of the Senate, but
there's one Secretary of Defense--when we know that you're not
going to be capable of making the decisions that the sooner the
person who is going to be in the position knows what and why I
think the better we as a country are from making sure things
have happened or happened the way they should.
I respect you. I wish you a speedy recovery. That's my
primary concern, the emergency procedures. I think we've
lessons learned the hard way. Won't happen again no matter
who's in the seat.
I want to say this with regard to some of the comments that
have been made about Republicans and who we want to win in
Ukraine. Let me assure you we want the Ukrainians to win and we
want Putin to lose.
But one of the key things that many of us have asked for,
that have voted for the Ukrainians repeatedly, is the
enforcement of the sanctions against Russia, and simply sending
the Ukrainians weapons or money is not going to win the war
against Russia and Putin.
The sanctions have to be enforced. That is something that I
have personally asked for in the package that's coming to the
floor and something that I think those of us who know the issue
recognize it's more than just weapons and money that Ukraine
has to have to win the war.
With that, Mr. Secretary, I wish you the best and certainly
keep you in our prayers.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Austin, for joining us today.
Secretary Austin, I would like to thank you for your
service and steadfast leadership especially at this challenging
time and to express my wishes for you to have a full and speedy
recovery.
I recognize the deeply personal nature of your situation
and I am also thankful for the committee for arranging this
hearing.
Mr. Secretary, I was deeply troubled when I learned the
news that President Biden was not informed of your absence, let
alone your hospitalization, multiple days after entering
intensive care.
While authority surrounding the notification process for
the Deputy Secretary of Defense to carry out new functions and
duties is vague it's clear that the chain of command is not.
When I was an enlisted member the Marine Corps, a corporal,
I had to notify my superior if I could not report for duty.
Just like there is accountability for the enlisted I want to
ensure that we are all held to the same standards including at
the highest level.
So you can understand why the situation is very concerning
to me and why I believe strongly that Congress should conduct
robust oversight.
In fact, as ranking member of the Intel Special Operations
Subcommittee I understand the significant challenges that we
face around the world and the reality that anything can happen
at a moment's notice.
We and our senior Department leadership must always be
prepared. It is clear to me that there was a breakdown in the
Department and I appreciate the swift action that you took to
conduct a 30-day review to examine the situation.
I still believe that there are a number of important
questions to ask and lessons to learn from this experience.
Secretary Austin, your department just concluded a 30-day
review to establish the facts and to inform process
improvements.
What are your primary lessons learned from this experience
and what steps are you taking to ensure that this breakdown in
the chain of command never happens again?
Secretary Austin. Well, the key lessons--first of all, as
I've said the transfer of authorities I think we did what was
done as it's supposed to be done and very quickly.
What was not done right was the notification of key
leaders, and so the lesson learned is that everyone in the
environment and the process needs to be--needs to have a clear
understanding of steps to follow for notification when things
happen.
And so the processes that we put in place ensure that that
understanding is there and that when something happens that
notification takes place in a very timely fashion.
Mr. Gallego. And just to follow up, Secretary Austin, in
terms of transferring your position's authority do you believe
that there is room to grow in that area just to make sure it's
smoother and less opaque?
Secretary Austin. You know, I believe that there is--there
are things that we can do to make sure that the reason for the
transfer of authority is crystal clear to everyone and the
steps that we've taken, the things that we put into place,
ensure that there's written notification of why that transfer
of authority is taking place.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
New York, Ms. Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On the morning of January 4th, Mr. Secretary, you were in
the critical care unit, the acting Secretary of Defense was
vacationing in Puerto Rico, and President Biden was unaware
that you were not in the chain of command.
Now, as you know, I represent Fort Drum and the 10th
Mountain Division which you know well. Thank you for your
service there in the north country.
But on this same date of January 4th do you know how many
10th Mountain Division soldiers were deployed and are still
deployed today in Iraq and Syria in support of Operation
Inherent Resolve?
Secretary Austin. You know, I know that they are deployed.
I don't know what the number is.
Ms. Stefanik. It's just over 2,500. And on January 4th at
approximately 4:00 a.m. our time the U.S. carried out a
significant strike against a senior Iranian-backed leader in
Iraq, correct?
Secretary Austin. That's correct.
Ms. Stefanik. And because President Biden did not know you
were outside of the chain of command during this U.S. strike if
Iran or its proxies in Iraq or Syria had carried out a
retaliatory strike against 10th Mountain Division soldiers the
President's chain of command would have and could have broken
down, potentially delaying Presidential orders to protect lives
of American forces, constituents that I represent.
Do you understand why this is unacceptable to the American
people and to those military families?
Secretary Austin. Well, thanks.
First of all, I would say that when we're attacked we have
a right to defend ourselves and respond immediately if it's a
local attack. If a strike is warranted then recommendations
need to be provided to the President.
Those recommendations come through from me and after I've
consulted with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and also the
combatant commander. The Deputy Secretary would have done the
same thing and she has all of the capabilities and situational
awareness to do that and----
Ms. Stefanik. Except the President wasn't aware. The
President of the United States was not aware that you were not
in the chain of command. So God forbid there was a retaliatory
strike. That would have caused potential delays and it is
unacceptable.
Let me ask you this. What disciplinary action would a
junior service member face if he or she failed to properly
notify their chain of command and fail to report for duty?
Secretary Austin. If a service member was in a hospital I
think the chain of command would be concerned about why they
were in a hospital and make sure that they're doing the right
things to take care of them and their families.
Ms. Stefanik. But don't you think it's their responsibility
to notify their commanding officer?
Secretary Austin. I think----
Ms. Stefanik. The answer is yes.
Secretary Austin. Possible, yes. In my case, you know, I
would expect that my organization would do the right things to
notify senior leaders if I am the patient in the hospital.
Ms. Stefanik. It is unacceptable and you have admitted as
such that there was a breakdown in communication with the
President of the United States and I highlight the exact time,
4:00 a.m. January 4th.
When you consider 10th Mountain Division soldiers and the
potential for a retaliatory attack that breakdown is
unacceptable.
And you said something very important. You said there was
never a break in command and control. But yet the President of
the United States was not aware that you were outside of the
chain of command.
So is the President not a part of this command and control?
Don't you believe that the Commander in Chief and the Secretary
of Defense [SECDEF] that is critical for command and control?
Secretary Austin. He is, clearly, at the top of the chain
in terms of command and control but what's important is that,
you know, we provide him with credible options and that he can
pursue to address any situation and it would have happened in
this case because the Deputy Secretary----
Ms. Stefanik. Except he was unaware. So what's important is
the President was unaware of this breakdown in command and
control and you were not there in terms of who he would hear
from.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I came to know prostate cancer as a child
through my grandfather and so at a very personal level I hope
for your speedy recovery, and I know that's a sentiment shared
by everyone here today and we are heartened to hear you are
expected to be fully cured.
Mr. Secretary, you and I were both trained as infantry
officers and I spent most of my time in the Marines not as a
general but as a mere lieutenant. There are thousands of
lieutenants serving under you in the military today.
How would you advise a lieutenant to handle a situation
like this with his or her command?
Secretary Austin. A situation in which they had a--one of
their subordinates hospitalized?
Mr. Moulton. Or a lieutenant himself or herself were
hospitalized.
Secretary Austin. You know, I would advise the lieutenant
to make sure that they're doing everything to learn more about
the--what happened and also to ensure that we're taking care of
that particular soldier.
In terms of the failure to notify in a timely fashion, I
would make sure that the lieutenant worked to put the right
procedures and processes in place to ensure that his
organization was able to inform him and inform his higher.
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Secretary, I just returned from Japan and
Taiwan and I can't tell you how many leaders in Taipei and
Tokyo asked us if we would fund Ukraine. They said that failing
to fund Ukraine encourages Xi Jinping in China.
Can you explain for the American people why standing up to
Vladimir Putin in Russia alongside our European allies and
funding Ukraine in their fight for democracy affects America's
national security well beyond the borders of Ukraine itself?
Secretary Austin. Well, thanks. This really is about our
security and the security of our allies and partners and this
really is about a rules-based international order.
We don't want to live in a world where one country can
redraw its neighbor's boundaries and illegitimately take over
its sovereign territory.
And so we know that if Putin is successful here he will not
stop. He will continue to take more aggressive action in the
region and other leaders around the world--other autocrats
around the world--will look at this and they will be encouraged
by the fact that, you know, this happened and we failed to
support a democracy.
And so I think it's a very dangerous path to go down if we
don't support Ukraine.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr.--Dr. DesJarlais.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary Austin, very pleased to hear of your good
prognosis and hope that your recovery continues to be
uneventful and it goes well for you.
Just a couple questions. At the time you were in the
hospital there were several strikes carried out against
militias in Iraq. What was your role in carrying out these
operations? Were you calling the shots or was Deputy Secretary
[DEPSEC] Hicks making those decisions?
Secretary Austin. Well, on the 4th, as we have said
earlier, that strike--I delegated the authority to conduct the
strike when the conditions were right down to the combatant
commander.
On the 5th of January I resumed my responsibilities and I
fully participated in all of the decisions that led up to
subsequent actions.
Dr. DesJarlais. I believe the American forces were attacked
eight times during your stay in the hospital. Had one of these
attacks required a response on January 2nd who would have made
the call on that response?
Secretary Austin. It would have been--well, the President
always makes the call and it's based upon the input that he
gets from----
Dr. DesJarlais. So who would have informed the President?
Secretary Austin. It would have been the Deputy Secretary
of Defense as she conferred with the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs and the combatant commander.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. On the time line when did she know?
Did she know on January 2nd that she was in charge?
Secretary Austin. She knew on January 2nd that we had
transferred authority, yes.
Dr. DesJarlais. When did--she found out on January 2nd?
Secretary Austin. Yes. That information was clearly
provided to her staff and I am sure she understood that.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Now, there--a lot of times our staff
are very loyal as they should be and, you know, some of the
blame has been cast on your staff. Did you ever explicitly
direct anyone to keep your condition from the White House on
your staff?
Secretary Austin. As I said earlier, I never directed
anyone to keep my hospitalization from the White House.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Did you ever direct your staff or
others go keep the status of your condition from the public or
any other senior officials?
Secretary Austin. No.
Dr. DesJarlais. It's been reported that when you returned
to the hospital on January 1st an aide told the dispatcher,
``Can I ask that the ambulance not show up with lights and
sirens? We're trying to remain subtle.''
Did you direct the aide to say that?
Secretary Austin. What I told my assistant to do was call
an ambulance and that's all that I told him to do.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Has anyone been disciplined for doing
something that you did not tell them to do, namely, actively
suppressing information pertaining to your condition?
Secretary Austin. Again, as pointed out in the 30-day
review there was a lot of things that happened but there was no
evidence of an intent to obfuscate or, you know, willingly
conceal something.
And so at the end of the day, as I said earlier, you know,
I take full responsibility for this. We didn't get this right.
We put the procedures in place to ensure that this doesn't
happen again.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. I respect that you take full
responsibility.
Let me ask you this, Secretary, and I will finish with
this. If a member of the armed services fails to report for
duty and went missing for 4 days without informing their
superior they would likely face repercussions. Isn't that
correct?
Secretary Austin. You know, again, I would point out that I
was in a military hospital in the Washington, DC, area with----
Dr. DesJarlais. But--okay, but I am talking about somebody,
one of your subordinates, if they did that they would face
repercussions and perhaps even be dismissed depending on the
circumstances, correct? If they didn't report for 4 days.
Secretary Austin. Yeah.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. And so I would just finally ask why
shouldn't you face some discipline under these circumstances?
Do you put yourself above the men?
Secretary Austin. I do not and I have--you know, as you
know, I served 41 years in the military in uniform and so I
understand the challenges and I understand that, you know,
leaders have to set the example.
Again, I said that we didn't get the notification right.
Again, I was the patient and so I expect that my organization
would do the right thing and report to my higher.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Khanna.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Mr. Carbajal is here. I am sorry.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Austin, thank you for being here today. There's
no denying the situation regarding your health was not handled
perfectly and you've acknowledged that.
That being said, to my knowledge no laws were broken. There
was no lapse in your ability to carry out your duties as Deputy
Secretary Hicks was transferred authority in a timely manner,
and it does remind me of when Democrats were in charge in
October 2020 when then President Trump was telling the American
people downplaying COVID, telling the American people not to
take the vaccination, telling the American people not to take
certain treatments but, rather, maybe Clorox or something--some
things like that.
And then, lo and behold, he got really ill and was taken to
Walter Reed. Democrats didn't have a hearing to talk about how
serious it really was that got to take him to Walter Reed and
what that meant as Commander in Chief for our country.
So I would just point that little example how we didn't
have a hearing about that because we felt as important as it
was there were other systems in place.
And while the situation could have been handled better--
hindsight is 20/20--you have taken accountability, apologized,
and worked to make recommendations to ensure something like
this doesn't happen again.
As far as I am concerned as a veteran myself there's
nothing else to be said on this matter. I am satisfied with how
you have addressed mistakes made.
Since I have a couple more minutes I also think that I
would like to ask a few questions on the issues that are
actually pressing. Can you speak to how continuing resolutions
affect our national security and readiness?
Secretary Austin. The caused us to lose time and money and
again--sorry.
They caused us to lose time and money and, again, we work
hard to link our budget request to the strategy and without,
you know, the full appropriations we can't fully effect--fully
execute our strategy.
And so this will cost us probably--if it's a full year
continuing resolution it'll cost us somewhere in the
neighborhood of a $25 billion cut overall and that doesn't
allow us in some cases to fund critical programs and resource
weapons systems and munitions that are critical to not only
Ukraine and to replace the things that we're providing to the
Ukrainians and the Israelis but also allow us to build up our
stocks for contingencies, going forward.
So it is a serious thing that I think that hampers our
ability to execute our strategy.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. I think every member on this
committee is well aware of the threats we are facing globally
from Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine to terrorist attacks
against our ally Israel.
As we start writing this year's National Defense
Authorization Act [NDAA] in your opinion what do you think
should be the committee's top two or three priorities?
Secretary Austin. Well, you will always hear me say that in
terms of what we are focused on China is our pacing challenge.
Russia is an acute threat and, you know, we really have to
pay----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Mississippi,
Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Secretary, I also want to wish you a full
and speedy recovery.
That being said, I would argue that the protocols that were
in place on January the 2nd were adequate. It was a failure of
leadership in implementing the controls and protocols that were
already in place.
I've also served close to 40 years in the military service
and I can tell you that if the Chief of Naval Operations [CNO]
would have done this and just disappeared for 3 days there
would be actions and consequences. Maybe not to him or her but
to the person who did that.
If the Commandant of the Marine Corps did this without
reporting upward there would be consequences. If a private
soldier or a sailor or Marine would have done this, or an
airman, there would have been consequences.
They might not have been discharged from the service but
there would have been consequences, you know, and the fallacy
of this committee to sit here and say we should be talking
about other things let me tell you what.
When Senator Tuberville did the blockade of the service
chiefs and their stars I heard the administration, I heard the
Democrats on this committee, say it is a dire national security
risk if we don't get these people confirmed.
However, there was a chain of command at all times, at all
times, that we knew who the acting Commandant was. We knew who
the acting CNO was. So there was none.
I don't think there was a threat to national security
because of this, Secretary Austin. I don't think that there
ever was--the places and protocols are in things.
I do, however, think it was an extreme lack of leadership
at some level and I hope we identify that and there are
consequences.
With that, I yield the balance of my time to Mr. Morgan
Luttrell.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Secretary, I am glad that you're feeling better.
To my colleague's points, this is the military. Good order
and discipline and good communication is our baseline. It's the
profound foundation that we build ourselves off of, and I know
through your 40 years in the military you've obviously had to
relieve somebody of command.
You've had to remove people from leadership positions. I
think that--is that a fair statement?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, sir. And you've mentioned a few times
that an individual that would be most certainly in your
circumstances that are sick and put into--and taken to the
hospital--I've had that happen in the commands that I've served
in, and what the leadership did at any given level leadership
remove that individual from that leadership position, number
one, for the well being but, number two, for the continuity of
force in case you need to be forward deployed, in case
communication has to go by, with, and through you, sir.
And you say the notification is that proper individuals
were notified. I understand that. But as I play this out in my
head, if the President was to call you, which I am assuming he
calls you directly on your phone, and you don't answer and then
he calls somebody in the Pentagon and say, hey, where's the
Secretary at, and they say he's in the hospital, all right,
then the bubble blows up. Like, why is he in the hospital.
So you see how the spider web could fracture and go in a
thousand different directions, and my concern is that in your
position--you're at the highest level, sir. But anywhere
underneath you you would have written these guidelines to take
care of this problem set itself.
But, yet, now we sit in this position where the problem
lies on your shoulders. So when we talk about responsibility
and accountability this right here is setting a standard, sir,
because of how this itself played out.
As a lieutenant if I was caught in this position and my
commanding officer relieves me of duty the first thing I am
going to do is say, no, sir.
The Secretary of State went through the exact same position
I am in right now and I just--I need to stay in my position and
now there's a leverage point that doesn't need to exist in the
military at all.
And that's just the perspective I have. You can actually--
you can respond to this if you want. But remember at your level
it is a razor thin line of communication that cannot be broken
and that happened, sir. It did. And, again, you are setting the
precedent for everything down inside our vast organizations----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Khanna.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, about how many Palestinian women and
children have been killed by Israel since October 7th?
Secretary Austin. It's over 25,000.
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Secretary, last week the United Nations
[U.N.] High Commissioner for Human Rights warned that any
transfer of weapons or ammunition to Israel violates
international law. About how many precision-guided munitions
has the United States given Israel since the beginning of the
war?
Secretary Austin. I don't have that number at my fingertips
but we have endeavoured to----
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Secretary, it's about 21,000 precision-
guided munitions to Israel since the start of the war.
Secretary Austin, last week you spoke to Defense Minister
Gallant and you said clearly there needs to be a plan to ensure
the safety and support of those sheltering in Rafah before any
military operations proceed.
National Security Adviser Sullivan has said he has not seen
any plan yet. John Kirby said it would be a disaster to invade
Rafah.
If Netanyahu defies the United States and invades Rafah
will you commit today that you will halt any future military
sales to Israel?
Secretary Austin. Obviously, sir, that's a Presidential
decision. But, you know, we expect that--and by the way, I
spoke to Minister Gallant last night and I expect that when we
provide munitions to allies and partners that they'll use them
in a responsible way.
Mr. Khanna. But would you make a commitment that they've
defied what we're saying and they violate international law, by
the way, which is opposed to National Security Memorandum 18
and National Security Memorandum 20 that if they don't do what
we're saying that we would halt those arm sales or transfers?
Secretary Austin. Again, the bill--the decision to halt the
provision of security assistance would not be mine. It would
be----
Mr. Khanna. What would you recommend?
Secretary Austin. Well, I certainly--again, I really do
expect that they utilize the weapons that we provide them in a
responsible way and then if they don't----
Mr. Khanna. Well, sir, I just want to--for time purposes,
it seems to me if they're defying what you're telling them,
what Kirby's telling them, what Sullivan is telling them, that
wouldn't be responsible.
Cindy McCain, the head of the World Food Programme, has
said that the Palestinian children are starving. Extremist
settler Stomrich, Israel's Finance Minister, stopped American
flour which our taxpayers paid for to get into Gaza.
If Israel again ever stops American-paid aid from getting
into Gaza will you commit to not sending future arms sales?
Secretary Austin. Again, that's not my decision. I would,
number one, do what I've been doing and engage the leadership
and encourage them to ensure that humanitarian assistance is
getting----
Mr. Khanna. Mr. Secretary, I would just say, and I have one
more question, that you--we need some consequences when another
country is defying you, defying the National Security Adviser,
defying the President, defying National Security Memorandum 20.
There has to be some consequence.
And then I was surprised John Kirby said that Israel is
taking more precautions than the U.S. military would to protect
civilian life.
Mr. Austin--Secretary Austin, isn't that statement
inaccurate given Israel has used hundreds of 22,000-pound dumb
bombs when there were no place for civilians to go?
Would the U.S. Government ever target terrorists with
2,000-pound bombs in a densely populated area?
Secretary Austin. Well, I mean, it depends on the situation
and, again----
Mr. Khanna. But would we--have we done that? Used 45
percent of bombs that are unguided or a 2,000-pound bomb? Do
you really think that the Israeli government is taking--
military is taking more precautions than the United States
military would?
Secretary Austin. I think, you know, just based upon the
results in terms of the significant loss of life, you know,
there's more----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Gallagher.
Secretary Austin [continuing]. That should be done.
Mr. Gallagher. Mr. Secretary, to review, you went in for
the initial procedure on December 22nd. Your testimony says the
DEPSECDEF then, quote, ``assumed the functions and duties of
your office and was serving as acting secretary of defense,''
correct?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Mr. Gallagher. Did you then personally make the decision on
December 22nd to transfer authority to the Deputy Secretary of
Defense?
Secretary Austin. I did.
Mr. Gallagher. So does 10 U.S.C 132(b), which you cite in
your testimony, does it require you to make the decision and/or
is there any notification to the President required by statute?
Secretary Austin. It does not. You know, by law if I am
unable to perform the duties of the office then the
responsibilities and authorities transition to the Deputy
Secretary.
Mr. Gallagher. And you can assure us today under oath that
you and you alone, not a military aide, made the decision to
execute the Transfer of Authority [TOA] to the Deputy Secretary
of Defense?
Secretary Austin. On December 22nd?
Mr. Gallagher. Yes.
Secretary Austin. That's right, and I instructed my
assistant to put the process in place.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
What prevented you at that initial hospitalization, which
was a planned procedure, from telling the President, albeit
privately, about your condition that you had cancer?
Secretary Austin. As I said, you know, diagnosis of cancer
is a very personal and deeply troubling issue and it's one
that, quite frankly, you know, I described it as a gut punch
and, again, I didn't want to burden the President with one of
my personal issues.
But I have also said that I didn't get this right. I should
have informed him. I should have, you know, talked to him about
it and I have since talked to the President. I have apologized
and he responded with a warmth and empathy that anybody who
knows Joe Biden----
Mr. Gallagher. I have limited time. I am sorry.
You--I don't mean to be rude--you said you--you just said
you expect your organization in early questioning to do the
right thing and notify higher.
But when you initially went in it was not your intent or
expectation to notify higher. You didn't expect your
organization to notify the President, correct?
Secretary Austin. You know, as I said, I didn't get that
right and that was not done appropriately.
Mr. Gallagher. I appreciate that candor.
But just so I have clarity, your initial intent was to go
in, have the procedure, for there to be not any complications
and the White House would be none the wiser in the process,
correct?
Secretary Austin. We didn't--I didn't instruct anybody to
notify anyone. That's right.
Mr. Gallagher. So it is not the fault of your organization
or an aide not to notify higher, at least in that initial case?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Mr. Gallagher. You take full responsibility.
You went back to the hospital on January 1st. Your
condition worsened at which point you said earlier the decision
was made--the decision was made to transfer authorities, again,
to the DEPSECDEF.
Again, did you make that decision to transfer authorities?
Secretary Austin. I did not. The decision was whether or
not they had reached a point, a threshold, where I could not
communicate or have access to secure communications and so that
triggers the process----
Mr. Gallagher. So your condition was severe such that you
could not personally action the transfer of authority?
Secretary Austin. The issue was, number one, they could not
get to me but, number two, it was access to secure
communications. It had nothing to do with my physical condition
at the time.
Mr. Gallagher. And yet the decision was made. So who made
the decision?
Secretary Austin. Well, as the--as my assistants conferred
they agreed that we had reached that threshold and they should
put the process in place and they did and I think it was the
right decision.
Mr. Gallagher. So your military assistants made the
decision to transfer authority to the Deputy Secretary of
Defense?
Secretary Austin. The military decision--the military aides
made the decision to initiate the process, right.
Mr. Gallagher. Without any--in the chain of command?
Secretary Austin. I mean, the law says that if I am unable
to----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Pennsylvania.
Ms. Houlahan. Mr. Secretary, thank you for coming here and
for sitting with us, and I wish you good health and a speedy
recovery.
We had a conversation earlier this week where I expressed
my disappointment in some of the decisions that were made by
you and by your team and my personal experience being a young
lieutenant in the military and what I would have expected my
own self to do in those circumstances.
But that's not what we should be talking about today. What
we should be talking about is rather than your health or those
decisions that were made around them that are putting us as a
nation and us as a world in peril, rather the inactions of
Congress right now and specifically this House right now and
specifically the Speaker of the House, Mr. Johnson, right now
is putting us and this world in peril.
Last evening when I left votes it was dark and it was
raining and I was intercepted by some people with Ukrainian
flags and one held a sign that said ``It's 1939 again'' and it
really struck me and literally brought tears to my eyes because
it really genuinely is not an exaggeration to say that it is
1939 again.
When I was in Lithuania earlier this month with one of the
under secretaries of ministry of defense he also was near tears
with his concern about what would happen if Ukraine fell and
what would happen to places like Lithuania, Estonia, Moldova,
and Europe.
When I was recently in the Horn of Africa with a gentleman
who had served honorably in our military and was now a
contractor with our defense services he bemoaned--was worried
about the fact that he would not allow his now 15-year-old ever
to serve in the military for fear that he would die in combat
because I believe he was thinking that because it is, indeed,
1939 again.
So what are we doing? We're sitting here for hour upon hour
of time that the 50 of us and the 435 of us could be spending
voting on things like Ukraine and the Ukraine supplemental so
that we can prevent 1939 from happening again.
So my questions to you, real briefly, is whether you could
reflect on how our allies are perceiving this from a DOD
perspective and whether you are concerned whether Russia might
continue on in its war in the continent and whether Xi is
watching.
Secretary Austin. Our allies are troubled by the message
that we're sending in failure to--in a failure to support
Ukraine and, certainly, it has impacted the morale of the
Ukrainian troops. It is a--if we continue down this path it'll
be a gift to Putin and we certainly don't want that to happen.
And then as others look at this they will question whether
or not we are a dependable ally or a dependable partner and
that's very troubling for us as well.
Ms. Houlahan. So I only have a little bit more time and I
don't, frankly, think I need all of it because in hours, just
mere hours, this House will adjourn yet again having
accomplished literally nothing.
We will not have voted for the supplemental. We will not
have voted to support you and the DOD through proper
appropriations. History will and history should judge us, our
inactions.
I really don't want to be right. I really don't want this
to be 1939 again. I just want to be able to vote on the
supplemental and on funding our government.
And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Gaetz.
Mr. Gaetz. You didn't tell the President that you had
cancer, that you were being treated for cancer, or that the
treatment for that cancer had gone wrong because you saw it as
personal and medical, and I think a lot of us have empathy for
you in that regard.
But now that you see how personal medical decisions are
will you call for the rerecruitment, restoration of full rank,
and back pay for the 8,600 service members who were vaccinated
[vax] mandated out of the military?
Secretary Austin. No, I won't.
Mr. Gaetz. So on March 4th, 2021, you authored a memo. It
was entitled message to the force and in that memo you said
that there would be clear and swift accountability for anyone
who didn't meet the highest standards of the Department of
Defense.
Now, however this worked out, we all acknowledge that what
you did here didn't meet the highest standards, right? You made
a mistake.
Secretary Austin. I admitted to----
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah. Okay. So we got that. So then the question
is what becomes the clear and swift accountability?
Now, you're not going to be discharged, right? No?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Mr. Gaetz. Okay. You're not going to be suspended, you're
not going to be demoted, and you're not going to have your pay
cut. None of those things are going to happen to you, right?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Mr. Gaetz. Okay. So you come here seeking some grace and
some forgiveness, and I want you to know that one of the
service members who you vax mandated out of the military sent
me the parable of the unforgiving debtor and it's in the Book
of Matthew. It's verses 21 to 35.
The man fell down before his king and begged him, please be
patient with me and I will pay all the debt. Then his master,
filled with pity for him, released him and forgave him of his
debt.
But when the man left the king he went to a fellow servant
who owed him a few thousand dollars. He grabbed him by the
throat and demanded payment. His fellow servant sat down and
begged him for a little more time--be patient with me and I
will pay it, he pleaded. But his creditor would not wait. He
had the man arrested and put in prison until the debt could be
paid in full.
When some of the other servants saw this they were very
upset. They went to the king and told him everything that had
happened and the king called the man who had been forgiven and
said, you evil servant, I forgave you that tremendous debt
because you pleaded with me--shouldn't you have mercy on your
fellow servant just as I had mercy on you.
Then the angry king sent the man to prison to be tortured
until he had paid his entire debt.
Mr. Secretary, you come to us seeking forgiveness but you
offer none and it seems as though the pattern is repeated. You
make a mistake like on the vax mandate and here regarding your
notification. Then you get busted. President Biden had to sign
something into law reversing your vax mandate.
You got busted here not because you came forward but
because we learned of this through other means, and then after
you get busted making a mistake, you know, you want that
benefit but you don't want to extend it to others.
This isn't swift or clear. You're not meeting your own
standards that you set for yourself, and you say that the DOD
is a learning organization.
Haven't you learned yet that the military is weaker, not
stronger, with the 8,600 people that you vax mandated out of
the military?
Secretary Austin. Just one point, Congressman. The reason I
am here is because the Chairman requested that I appear to talk
about the circumstances surrounding my hospitalization.
Mr. Gaetz. But don't you see the hypocrisy in it? Because
you screwed up we fix your screw up and now you want grace but
these people who sought religious exemptions they got no such
grace. And also I just think it's ridiculous that we're in
three wars. You went Absence Without Leave [AWOL] for 3 days
and we get 2 hours with you.
If you can't spend more than 2 hours answering these
questions I don't know how you're really operating all these
wars.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts
who the Chair inadvertently skipped.
You are recognized, Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary,
thank you for sharing your success in your treatment with us.
Coming from a family that has seen the tolls of cancer take
their lives as well as cancer survivors, I've come to realize,
including prostate cancer I will take every opportunity to
encourage people to get screening and treatment themselves.
Mr. Secretary, I am the ranking member on the House Foreign
Affairs Committee on Europe and each week I see multiple
leaders--foreign ministers, ambassadors, colleagues in
parliament.
Not a week goes by where I don't literally see at least 20
of the--and talk to 20 of these people when we're here and I
want to assure you of one thing. Not one of those leaders asked
where you were for 3 days. What they were asking is where has
America been for the last 3 months.
Now, I assure them the votes are there to help Ukraine. All
that's lacking is for the Speaker of the House to put a simple
vote up or down on the floor.
Mr. Secretary, you've acknowledged your responsibility.
You've held yourself accountable. You've made changes to
rectify that.
We in this House right now have to be held accountable. If
we are to keep democracy alive abroad we can't have it die
right here at home in this House by not taking a basic
democratic vote.
The greatest threat to transatlantic democracy since World
War II is occurring right now. In World War II we lost over
400,000 Americans giving their lives--not even mentioning those
injured, those sacrificed from home, those whose marriages were
broken up--to preserve democracy in the transatlantic sense and
usher in the greatest period of peace and prosperity of modern
times.
Right now we are just mere stewards compared to their
sacrifice and it's a sacrilege to their memory and a danger to
young American men and women who might be deployed given our
Article 5 NATO responsibility in a future war not to act and
act immediately.
In the time I have remaining, there's a lot of
misunderstanding about this funding package, the $60 billion
for Ukraine, and one of the areas that I don't think most
people understand, even other colleagues don't understand,
we're in a period of modernization of our own military which
this committee knows and you know, Mr. Secretary, well and
we're phasing out the old assets.
We're bringing in the new up to date assets that we have to
do to compete with China and the other threats we have.
Almost half of this money, the $60 billion, that we're
giving in this supplemental budget under Ukraine is coming back
to replenish our own assets and bring them up to date here at
home.
It's really serendipitous. We're phasing out things that
are useful to them that we're not going to use. We're now going
to replenish our own with American manufacturing with American
jobs for American security.
Can you take a few minutes to just comment on that? I don't
think people realize where this money is actually going to end
up.
Secretary Austin. Ukraine matters because it's important
for our national security first. But, you know, you're right,
Congressman.
The investment--as we provide resources to Ukraine we
replace those resources with more up to date equipment in our
own inventory and that all flows through factories and in
various states around this country.
So there's billions of dollars that go into expanding our
production lines and increasing our capacity. So this benefits
us as much as it does----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Secretary, we wish you continued improvement to your
health.
But this hearing today isn't about you. It's not about your
privacy. It's not about what you desire. It's not about your
health.
This is about the chain of command and civilian oversight
of the most powerful military in the world that's charged with
keeping the American people safe.
So I want to be sure that as the American people watch this
we have a couple of things clear. According to your report, it
says given the inability to provide timely communications to
the Secretary while in critical care the Secretary's military
assistants agreed that the transfer authorities to the Deputy
Secretary was necessary.
Mr. Secretary, on January 2nd at that time when they made
that decision were you conscious?
Secretary Austin. I was conscious, yes.
Mr. Waltz. Okay. So you were able to make that decision
yourself. You were of sound mind to make that decision
yourself?
Secretary Austin. They did not have access to me to be able
to----
Mr. Waltz. So there was then a disconnect for your ability
to command the military through secure communications because
they couldn't access you, correct?
Secretary Austin. And it was determined that and they were
advised by the doctors that they wouldn't be able to access or
gain access to me. And so that's the trip wire to transfer
authorities and they followed the procedure.
Mr. Waltz. Okay. But let's talk about whether there was a
break because you've testified under oath there was no gap. Did
the President of the United States, the Commander in Chief,
know on the 1st of January you were going to the hospital in an
ambulance?
Secretary Austin. He did not.
Mr. Waltz. Did he know on the 2nd of January that you had
been admitted to critical care in the Intensive Care Unit
[ICU]?
Secretary Austin. He did not.
Mr. Waltz. The Commander in Chief elected by the American
people, civilian oversight of the military, didn't know on
January 1st, didn't know on January 2nd.
January 3rd comes around. Did the President know?
Secretary Austin. He did not.
Mr. Waltz. Yes or no. He did not.
Secretary Austin. Yeah.
Mr. Waltz. How long does it take--I mean, we could go
through a number of scenarios--how long does it take a
hypersonic missile as a first strike weapon to hit the United
States? Fifteen, thirty minutes max?
Secretary Austin. Well, you know, I----
Mr. Waltz. Intercontinental ballistic missile [ICBM]--I
mean, it's commonly out there--ICBM from North Korea 30
minutes. Make a decision.
Secretary Austin. So we've been clear that the notification
was not adequate but the----
Mr. Waltz. Mr.----
Secretary Austin [continuing]. Transfer of authorities
when----
Mr. Waltz. Right. But the President of the United States as
the Commander in Chief doesn't know for 3 days his Secretary of
Defense is incapacitated and in critical care, correct?
Secretary Austin. In critical care, not incapacitated.
Mr. Waltz. And the President of the United States doesn't
know that his Secretary of Defense can't access secure comms,
correct? He doesn't know.
Secretary Austin. But the Deputy is fully empowered and has
full access to everything she needs----
Mr. Waltz. Mr. Secretary, who made the decision--just in
the time I have remaining who made the--so your report says the
Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs was informed of the
transfer of authority. Who made the decision for that
individual to not inform the American people?
Secretary Austin. I can't answer that.
Mr. Waltz. Did he make that decision?
Secretary Austin. Did I make that decision?
Mr. Waltz. No. Did the Assistant Secretary for Public
Affairs make the decision?
Secretary Austin. I can't----
Mr. Waltz. You just had a 30-day review. You don't know who
made the decision to not tell the American people?
Secretary Austin. I know that he was--that he was aware on
the 2nd. I don't know what decision making processes that----
Mr. Waltz. To inform the public you don't know today? You
don't know who made the decision to not inform the public?
Secretary Austin. I am not sure that there was a decision
to not inform the public. I know that he had the information--
--
Mr. Waltz. Mr. Secretary, in the time I have remaining the
Commandant of the Marine Corps had a medical incident and
informed the American people and you, and here's what's missing
here.
This is not about process. You made this about process.
This is about judgment and poor judgment. My teenage daughter
knows to tell her supervisor if she's not going to work.
The American people, truck drivers, bartenders, know they
have to tell their boss or they get fired. But you've held
yourself to a different standard and that's unacceptable, Mr.--
--
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan.
Ms. Slotkin. Hi, Mr. Secretary. Thanks for putting up with
the outrage and the drama.
I would just say, look, you made a mistake. You admitted
it. You're taking steps to address it. And you want to know
what accountability is?
Accountability is having to come and sit in front of people
and their outrage and their drama in public about your health
issues and the mistakes you've admitted you made when the
entire world is wondering what the hell is going on with the
United States of America.
So if we want to talk about what's going on in national
security and the greatest threat to national security it's not
that the Secretary of Defense screwed up and is cleaning up the
mess.
The greatest threat to national security is the
polarization of the country and the fact that we can't explain
to the world who we are and what kind of leadership role we
want.
So in that context the whole world is trying to figure out
what we're going to do next. Are we going to fund Ukraine to
make sure that for the first time since World War II we don't
have an autocratic nation take over a democracy--first time?
Are we going to send a signal to the Chinese and the
Chinese government that we still want a leadership role in the
world and we're willing to back that up with strength, with
force, and with action?
We have got our soldiers being shot at in the Middle East
by the Iranians. We've got a lot going on and I would hazard a
guess that the people who are most stridently dramatic about
this issue are the very ones who have said publicly that they
don't intend to support protecting Ukraine against Putin.
They don't care about what's going on in Taiwan. They don't
want that strong role in the world. They want to distract us
with this and everything else that they're yelling about
because they are ceding our leadership role in the world.
And U.S. leadership is far from perfect but I would take
U.S. leadership over Chinese leadership or Russian leadership
any single day.
So watch the outrage and you can correlate that to how much
they don't want to talk about their sucking up to their
whoever, political masters, and denying the United States of
America its leadership role that it has held since World War
II.
We are also sitting here unable to get a budget done, a
budget for the whole government, not just the Pentagon. We're
living on these now one-week extensions, 2-months extensions
going on and on.
If we're worried about competing in the 21st century on
national security, if we're worried about drone attacks, you
know, using a $1,000 drone to hit our forces in places like the
Middle East we need to do things to adapt and fight.
By not passing a budget for next year the Pentagon is
unable to do anything new. They're unable to start anything
new. They're just holding on week by week, month by month,
while we screw up our national security because we can't get
our own house in order.
This committee has always been a real calm in the storm
when it comes to bipartisanship. So I would ask that when we
come back together in a month and have a hearing with the
Secretary we focus it on the things that are actually important
to national security instead of denying this man the apology
that he's made, the mea culpa that he's made, and get on to the
business of the American people.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I would make the point that the Chairman decided to call
this hearing and there is no stronger proponent of Ukraine
funding than the Chairman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
being here today.
I just want to clear up a couple things that I think is
really important because we talked a lot about changes to the
process. You spoke earlier you're going to make eight changes
to the process.
I think that's part of the problem is we spend all this
time putting together processes. But unless we're willing to
follow them the processes are really irrelevant.
So I guess my first question is you admitted that it wasn't
really the process that was the problem. It was you, correct?
Secretary Austin. I did not admit that.
Mrs. McClain. Oh, okay. Then I misheard. I apologize. So
what error did you make, if any?
Secretary Austin. Well, first of all, I said that I didn't
inform the President initially of my cancer diagnosis and that
was a mistake.
In terms of the hospitalization January 1st throughout,
again, I was the patient and so my expectation is that the
organization informed the right agencies that----
Mrs. McClain. Okay. So maybe I didn't understood it. So as
long as you informed somebody other than your boss to let the
boss know that is acceptable?
Secretary Austin. You know, certainly, informing the Chief
of Staff of the White House, the National Security Adviser, I
think they would immediately inform the President.
Mrs. McClain. So yes. So really it wasn't your fault. It
was the staff's fault. So you informed the staff. The staff
made an error not to inform the President. I am just trying to
connect the dots.
Secretary Austin. No. No.
Mrs. McClain. No? Okay.
Secretary Austin. The President--my Chief of Staff informed
the National Security Adviser on the 4th of January and then
that notification followed through to the President.
Mrs. McClain. So, in your opinion, you didn't make an
error? It was the process that was the issue?
Secretary Austin. We didn't get this right. Again, as a
patient that was in critical care at----
Mrs. McClain. Okay. I am just trying to find where the
blame lays.
Secretary Austin [continuing]. You know, from the 2nd to
the 4th----
Mrs. McClain. Okay. So it wasn't your fault. It was the
staff's fault.
Secretary Austin. Well, you know, I didn't have access to
any kind of communications during that time.
Mrs. McClain. You didn't have a phone? Nothing?
Secretary Austin. No.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. That's interesting. Maybe we should
reform the processes at the hospital to allow phones in there.
But okay. My question is, because it doesn't seem like
we're taking a lot of accountability which I thought I heard at
the beginning, so my apologies to the American people for that.
When you were a commander would you accept the same
behavior from your subordinates as you did? So let me play it
out to this.
You had an enlisted man, a soldier, person. They went in
for treatment and they didn't tell you, the commander. They
told their, you know, friend. That's cool, right? That's good.
We can follow. That's good.
You'd accept that and there would be no punishment, there
would be no ramifications from that person, correct?
Secretary Austin. Well, I don't know which part you're
referring----
Mrs. McClain. I am referring to--I am making a scenario.
Your boss is the President of the United States, no different
than an enlisted person. If you're the commander you're in
charge. You're that person. You're the enlisted person's boss.
If the enlisted soldier did the exact same thing as you did
you'd accept, well, it's really not the enlisted man's--
person's fault; it's really their staff's fault. And really
it's not even their staff's fault. It's really the process
fault.
No, I think that there would be some level of
ramification--consequence or punishment. I am seeming to not be
able to connect those dots with you. It's just different for
you.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New Jersey,
Ms. Sherrill.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for appearing today and I wish you continued health
and your speedy recovery.
I have spent the last several weeks meeting with allies,
partners, and stakeholders related to the current conflicts and
struggles around the world. I met with President Zelensky and
our European partners to discuss Russia's war of choice in
Ukraine.
I met with leadership in Egypt, Jordan, and Israel to
discuss the Israel-Hamas war. I've also met with the Jewish,
Palestinian, and Ukrainian communities in my own district to
hear about their concerns.
And, finally, as a member of the Select Committee on the
Chinese Communist Party I know all too well the challenges our
Nation faces in competition in the Indo-Pacific region.
And despite these and other challenges the Department of
Defense faces across the world this legislative body has still
not passed the appropriations needed to plan, to prepare, and
to act in our Nation's best interest.
And while the Biden administration has a plan for the
national security supplemental that was prepared months ago I
remain concerned that there's still no plan from the Speaker
and from the GOP majority to pass the desperately needed
supplemental, and I share the real frustration and anger you're
hearing today from my Democratic colleagues that as we face
conflicts across the world and as we on the House Armed
Services Committee hold this hearing my Republican friends on
House Armed Services Committee [HASC] who I would expect to be
the strongest allies in this fight to get the supplemental on
the floor are not addressing these huge issues.
So I will ask you, Mr. Secretary, as we near yet another
potential government shutdown--we've sort of kicked the can
down the road now for a couple more weeks and, hopefully, can
figure this out--but as we keep limping along with continuing
resolution [CR] after CR after CR and as we approach the fiscal
year now 2025 appropriations cycle even though we haven't
passed the 2024--as you know, we are now getting into hearings
for the National Defense Authorization Act for 2025--every
member of this committee continues to hear from senior DOD
leaders about how damaging CRs are for our national defense.
Can you speak in a little more detail about the practical
impact that our broken appropriations process has on the
implementation of our National Defense Security Strategy?
Secretary Austin. Again, you've heard me say a number of
times that you lose both time and money, and if we go for a
full year with a CR that'll be--we'll lose about $25 billion
dollars in discretionary funds there.
So this is a big deal because we go through a lot of effort
to link our budget requests to our strategy. I think we've done
a very good job of that and, of course, without, you know, a
budget we can't execute the strategy in its fullest.
And so that's a concern, and, again, as you look at the
challenges around the world our ability to keep--to do the
right things, to make sure that we maintain the edge in the
Indo-Pacific, to help Ukraine counter Russia's aggression and
to do the things in the Middle East that we're doing to support
Israel and to try to work to prevent the spread of a larger
conflict, again, we are supporting and doing a lot of things
around the globe in support of our strategy and without the
funding this doesn't--it hampers us. It hamstrings us.
The Chairman. The time is expired.
I would point out consistent with our agreed upon time of
ending this hearing we will have time for three more
questioners--Mr. Fallon, Ms. Escobar, and Ms. Mace. At that
point, we will adjourn.
I would ask all of the members to submit their questions
for the record and I would ask the Secretary to respond to
those in a timely fashion.
And with that, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Fallon.
Mr. Fallon. Thanks, Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to take you back to spring of
2021. It was in April of that year that you and other military
senior leaders were discussing a drawdown in the war with
Afghanistan--the war in Afghanistan with President Biden.
He didn't take your advice and--but like a good political
appointee you publicly remained supportive of his decision.
Would you describe the withdrawal from Afghanistan as
closer to a success or closer to a failure?
Secretary Austin. I would say that I am proud of the work
that our troops did in a very challenging situation and proud
of the support that we provided to Afghans who were--who wanted
to exit the country and we didn't--we were not able to support
all the folks that we wanted to support. But that effort
continues as we speak today.
Mr. Fallon. So let me ask you that question again because
it didn't get answered. Would you describe it closer to a
success or a failure?
Secretary Austin. I think, you know, again, it's very
challenging situation. I think we were successful in getting--
in retrograding our people and our equipment under a very
challenging--in a very challenging situation and we were able
to help a number of Afghans as well.
Mr. Fallon. In the 18 months prior to this administration
coming to office in January of 2021 how many American lives did
we lose in Afghanistan?
Secretary Austin. I am sorry?
Mr. Fallon. Prior to Joe Biden becoming President in the
prior 18 months how many Americans did we lose in Afghanistan?
How many military service members?
Secretary Austin. Very few. I would have to go back and
check the records.
Mr. Fallon. I think it's exactly zero, and then we lost 13
lives under this administration's watch. Five thousand
prisoners broke out of Bagram. We left billions of dollars
worth of equipment.
The Afghan army disintegrated within two weeks and General
McKenzie, General Milley, and I believe yourself as well when
we had a discussion in 2021 could not guarantee me or the
American people than any of those 5,000 scumbags that did
escape from Bagram weren't involved in the murder of the 13
service members that occurred under your watch.
And why didn't we maybe have a withdrawal when it wasn't
prime fighting season? I mean, all these questions. This, I
think, in large measure could have been avoided.
And then just a little walk through history here in the
last couple administrations. Vladimir Putin--a lot of my
colleagues have talked about Ukraine.
In 2008 Vladimir Putin stole a province from Georgia and it
was under George W. Bush's watch, and then in 2014 he stole all
of Crimea under Barack Obama's watch and then a Russian-
supported insurgency in eastern Ukraine kicked off as well.
And then, Mr. Secretary, the President of the United States
from 2017 to 2021 was? Are you aware who that was?
Secretary Austin. 2013?
Mr. Fallon. Seventeen to twenty-one. Who was the President
of the United States?
Secretary Austin. Of course it was President Trump.
Mr. Fallon. Donald Trump. Were there any new--did Vladimir
Putin embark on any new foreign adventures in those 4 years?
Secretary Austin. He didn't but----
Mr. Fallon. Thank you. And then in February 2022 what
happened?
Secretary Austin. You know, he--certainly, I mean, that's
when he attacked Ukraine and----
Mr. Fallon. Full-scale invasion, almost 200,000 Russian
troops.
Secretary Austin. Absolutely. Yeah.
Mr. Fallon. So I think that if we were more concerned with
our military projecting power and not worried about personal
pronouns it would be better for the American people and, quite
frankly, the free world.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the ranking member
for a statement.
Mr. Smith. I will be quick with this. But there was a peace
treaty negotiated by Donald Trump with the Taliban that had a
cease fire in place. It's a shame Mr. Fallon is leaving because
this could be educational.
On May 1st he--well, sometimes you can learn from
listening, too. I know it's a shocking concept.
That peace treaty expired in May of 2021. The reason there
were no casualties is because President Trump had promised the
Taliban that we would leave and therefore there was a cease
fire.
Come May of 2021 if we were not gone that cease fire would
have expired. So the rewriting of the history of Afghanistan in
this committee is deeply troubling to me.
Now, what would have happened in May if we were still
there? I don't think the Taliban would have honored that cease
fire and I don't think we would have had that zero casualty
list for too much longer.
So let's understand exactly what happened in Afghanistan
instead of rewriting history. I thank the Chairman for giving
me that indulgence and I yield back.
The Chairman. Certainly.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms.
Escobar.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
ranking member also for that very important recent history
lesson.
Mr. Secretary, good to see you. Thank you for being here
today and please know that we all wish you nothing but the best
as you continue on your journey toward absolute maximum best
health possible.
I also want to thank you for the acknowledgement of, you
know, in retrospect what could have been done better and for
the 30-day assessment.
I would like to give you the opportunity to assure the
American people who are watching what lessons were learned in
that 30-day review and, looking forward, what can and will be
done better?
Secretary Austin. The importance of the prompt notification
of key leaders of a senior leader being ill or being
hospitalized and the importance of everyone in the chain and in
the environment understanding the policies and procedures and
are able to put those into play right away.
And we put measures in place that ensure that, first of
all, people are aware of the policies and procedures and they
execute them. We had an opportunity to put this in play and on
February 11th when I went back to the hospital and prompt
notification was made. Transfer of authorities was made
promptly and, again, I reassumed my responsibilities on
February 13th.
So we'd already put things into place by February 11th
before the 30-day review came out and then when the 30-day
review made recommendations--eight recommendations to me--you
know, we're going to take those recommendations on. We've
already executed two of them and the other six we're promptly
pursuing.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Mr. Secretary. You know, I
think it's always so important for us to exercise judicious
oversight and make sure that we learn lessons and do better,
going forward, and I really appreciate that succinct
description of the lessons learned and the assurances to the
American people.
Like many of my colleagues I had the incredible privilege
of attending and participating in the Munich Security
Conference recently and was in the meeting with President
Zelensky as we discussed the situation in Ukraine and the fact
that this body has not done its job in ensuring that we vote on
and pass the supplemental request by the President.
I would like for you just in this last minute so that the
American people understand why this is so important for us to
provide support to Ukraine.
Three years down the line, 5 years down the line, if
Ukraine falls to Putin what is in that future for all of us?
Secretary Austin. Well, thank you, and thank you for your
support of the supplemental.
If Ukraine falls, again, Putin won't stop there. He will
just continue to move forward and attack and take on the
sovereign territory of his neighbors.
And so if you're a Baltic state you're really worried
about, you know, whether or not you're next and so they know
Putin. They know that--what he's capable of and, quite frankly,
if Ukraine falls I really believe that NATO will be in a fight
with Russia in a matter of----
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from South
Carolina.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Secretary
Austin, for being with us today. Cancer is a serious illness
and we wish you the best in your recovery.
I've been disappointed today in some of the responses. I do
want to ask a question. When did you first receive your
diagnosis?
Secretary Austin. It was early December.
Ms. Mace. And then who did you tell? Did you tell your
staff when you received the diagnosis?
Secretary Austin. I didn't--again, as I said earlier----
Ms. Mace. Did you tell your staff you received the
diagnosis, yes or no?
Secretary Austin. No, I did not.
Ms. Mace. Okay.
When did you learn that you needed surgery?
Secretary Austin. Well, as soon as that diagnosis was made,
you know, you have----
Ms. Mace. Okay. And then when did you tell your staff you
needed surgery? When you found out you needed surgery did you
then inform your staff that you needed surgery?
Secretary Austin. I didn't. I didn't tell my staff that I
needed surgery.
Ms. Mace. When did you schedule the surgery?
Secretary Austin. It was mid December.
Ms. Mace. Okay. And that was the December 22nd surgery?
Secretary Austin. Yes.
Ms. Mace. When you scheduled the surgery did you tell your
staff you had a surgery scheduled?
Secretary Austin. I did not.
Ms. Mace. When you go under surgery for prostate cancer do
you need to be, like, totally knocked out, right? You can't be
awake for the surgery--you have to be totally unconscious?
Secretary Austin. Right. You----
Ms. Mace. Incapacitated, right? Yes or no.
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Ms. Mace. Okay. Thank you. And then the date of the first
surgery was December 22nd. At what point did you tell your
staff you were going under the knife and were going to be
unconscious and incapacitated?
Secretary Austin. Again, I----
Ms. Mace. Did you tell your staff that you were in the
hospital and going to be under the knife?
Secretary Austin. I have admitted that I didn't get this
right. I should have notified the President of my cancer
diagnosis and my----
Ms. Mace. So you didn't inform your staff in December when
you had the December surgery that you were going to be
incapacitated at all?
Secretary Austin. I knew I was going to be incapacitated
and I transferred authorities to the Deputy Secretary.
Ms. Mace. Okay. And then they had this emergency event--
that was January 1?
Secretary Austin. That's correct.
Ms. Mace. What time of day did that happen?
Secretary Austin. Late afternoon.
Ms. Mace. And then did you tell your staff late afternoon
when it happened what was happening?
Secretary Austin. I didn't. My concern there was getting to
the hospital.
Ms. Mace. You did not tell your staff that you were on the
way to the hospital?
Secretary Austin. That's right.
Ms. Mace. Okay. When did your staff find out you were at
the hospital?
Secretary Austin. I don't know when----
Ms. Mace. You don't know when you told your staff that you
were at the hospital? Are you kidding me?
Secretary Austin. I--again, as a patient at a hospital
undergoing evaluations----
Ms. Mace. This is--this is--you're the--okay. Okay.
Let me just back up. I have a minute and a half. If any
American worker did what you did they would be fired, and they
aren't the number two in the chain of command of the greatest
and most lethal fighting force in the world.
And here you are. You're not informing anybody on your
staff that this is happening, let alone the President of the
United States, let alone the delay to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, let alone to the delay to the Deputy Secretary.
What happens? Now, I didn't serve. Most of my family has
served. So can you please tell me in just a few seconds when a
soldier goes AWOL--when they wear the uniform, when they put
their lives on the line for our Nation, for you, what happens
when they go AWOL? What is the punishment?
Secretary Austin. Well, I wouldn't equate my going to the
hospital and receiving treatment as going AWOL.
Ms. Mace. Being incapacitated as the Secretary here, yes,
is going AWOL. So you don't equate disappearing, being
incapacitated, with being AWOL?
Secretary Austin. I didn't disappear. I was in a military
medical facility in Washington, DC.
Ms. Mace. But you didn't tell--you didn't tell your--you
just testified you didn't tell your staff, did you not? You
just testified--what happens when a soldier goes AWOL? I have
20 seconds. What happens when a soldier goes AWOL?
Secretary Austin. Well, we have to realize that, you know,
I have a large--a fairly large team of communicators and----
Ms. Mace. Are they honorably or dishonorably discharged?
Are they put into the brig? Are they--what happens?
Seriously, you're not even answering the questions. I am
not going to rest until someone--we should not rest until
someone is held accountable. I am deeply disappointed in your
responses today.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member for any closing
comments he may have.
Mr. Smith. I am good, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the Secretary for making himself
available. I would remind members that didn't get to question
to submit them for the record and I ask the Secretary to
respond to them in a timely fashion.
With that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

February 29, 2024

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 29, 2024

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

February 29, 2024

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KIM

Mr. Kim. For Fiscal Year 2022, the Pentagon's annual report on
sexual assault in the military showed that reported incidents rose for
the Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps. Last December, a new system that
will put independent lawyers in charge of the prosecution of sexual
assault cases in the U.S. military was put into place. Have you seen
any positive impacts on the number of reported incidents of sexual
misconduct in the military since December?
Secretary Austin. I am committed to ending the scourge of sexual
assault and harassment in the force at every level. Sexual violence
will not be tolerated, condoned, or ignored within our ranks.
The Offices of Special Trial Counsel (OSTCs) achieved full
operational capability on time in December 2023. With only a few months
of full operational capability, it is too soon for the Department to
determine the impact of the establishment of the OSTCs efforts on
sexual assault reporting.
The Department is focused on implementing the recommendations of
the Independent Review Commission as approved by me. These
recommendations include foundational prevention efforts, improving
climate and culture, enhancing accountability, and increasing access to
victim care and support. The Department is also establishing an
integrated primary prevention workforce to enhance our ability to
address harmful behaviors.
These implementation efforts are a high priority. As part of
broader efforts to support victims and encourage greater reporting, we
are taking steps to increase resourcing for Sexual Assault Response
Coordinators and Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Victim
Advocates.
Cultural change of this magnitude will take time. But I and the
rest of the Department's leadership are laser-focused on it and
committed to investing in this work to ensure the changes we make are
enduring.
Mr. Kim. Mr. Austin: In August 2023, the President signed an
Executive Order that established new rules regarding the treatment of
sexual misconduct cases in the military based on recommendations made
in the Independent Review Commission on Sexual Assault in the Military.
Would you be able to comment on the implementation of the Executive
Order and any positive impacts it's had so far?
Secretary Austin. The President's Executive Order further
implemented the legal and process changes required to move prosecution
for sexual assault, domestic violence, and other covered offenses from
command to our independent military prosecutors in the Offices of
Special Trial Counsel.
However, lasting progress comes from more than just military
justice reforms. We must prevent these crimes from occurring in the
first place and build trust with victims and survivors by providing
them with world class services and support. This is why we are also
focused on the other recommendations of the Independent Review
Commission on Sexual Assault in the Military as approved by me. These
include foundational prevention efforts, improving climate and culture,
and increasing access to victim care and support.
I, and the rest of the Department's leadership, remain laser-
focused on countering the scourge of sexual assault and harassment. We
are committed to investing in this work to ensure the changes we make
are enduring.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. JACOBS
Ms. Jacobs. As you know, the War Powers Resolution requires the
White House to submit a report within 48 hours of the onset of
congressionally unauthorized hostilities. A key role of this report is
to start the War Powers Resolution's 60-day clock for obtaining
congressional authorization or withdrawing U.S. forces from
hostilities. Congress has now received at least nine reports for
hostilities in Iraq, Syria, and Yemen.
When did the 60-day period, as defined by the War Powers
Resolution, begin for US military involvement in the Red Sea, Yemen,
and the Gulf of Aden against the Houthis after October 7th? Is this
period still ongoing? If it is, when does it end? Will you withdraw US
forces from these hostilities after this period, or will you request
authorization from Congress to continue?
Secretary Austin. Actions taken to date in the Red Sea region have
been necessary to defend U.S. forces from Houthi threats and attacks as
U.S. forces continue to carry out their longstanding maritime mission
in waters off the coast of Yemen. The War Powers Resolution's 60-day
termination provision does not require an end to U.S. actions like
those taken to date.
This is a question that lawyers from across the Executive Branch
have analyzed closely. The Biden Administration remains committed to
acting consistent with applicable domestic and international law,
including on the use of military force, and respects the important role
of Congress in these matters.
The U.S. Navy has long operated in the waterways around Yemen,
consistent with the U.S. Navy's authorities and mission, including the
peacetime promotion of national security interests and prosperity of
the United States. This area is critical to global commerce: nearly 15
percent of all seaborne trade passes through the Red Sea, including 8
percent of global grain trade; 12 percent of all seaborne-traded oil;
and 8 percent of the world's liquefied natural gas.
The actions that U.S. forces have taken have been necessary to
defend U.S. forces from Houthi threats and attacks as U.S. forces carry
out that longstanding mission to protect and defend U.S. commerce and
interests at sea. The strikes have targeted the specific types of
weapons and infrastructure that have been used for Houthi attacks and
that continue to threaten U.S. forces.
We would emphasize that this conclusion is based on the facts of
this particular situation, which we do not believe constitute an
introduction of forces into hostilities or imminent hostilities that
triggers the termination provision.
We will continue to evaluate the facts and circumstances as they
evolve.
Ms. Jacobs. One of the components of the CHMR-AP is mitigating
civilian harm in partner forces, and recently the The State Department
set up the Civilian Harm Incident Response Guidance (CHIRG) process to
collect and investigate reports of civilian harm using U.S.-origin
weapons.
Mr. Secretary, how does the Department interact with this process,
and does the Defense Department have its own such process to determine
whether US weapons transferred under Title 10 authorities have been
implicated in civilian harm?
Has the Defense Department investigated or contributed to
investigations into whether US weapons have been used in Israeli
forces' strikes that have hit humanitarian organizations, hospitals,
and health facilities?
Secretary Austin. Protecting civilians is not only a moral
imperative; it's a strategic priority essential to long-term success.
Innocent civilians in Gaza are not to blame for Hamas's horrific acts
of terror. They are protected under international law. As directed by
President Biden in National Security Memorandum -20, Israel provided
assurances that they are adhering to their obligations under
international law, including the law of war, in their use of covered
weapons and other defense articles provided by the United States and in
their actions related to humanitarian assistance to civilians in the
context of armed conflict. Democracies, like Israel and the United
States, engage in a variety of efforts to implement the law of war in
their military operations. The Department is working with the
Department of State on the NSM-20 required report to Congress.
In the Civilian Harm Mitigation and Response Action Plan (CHMR-AP),
I directed that civilian harm mitigation and response be established
and resourced as part of our security cooperation programs, and that
ally and partner CHMR efforts be promoted. This was reaffirmed in the
December 21, 2023, publication of Department of Defense
Instruction(DoDI) 3000.17, Civilian Harm Mitigation and Response.
Through that DoDI, I established DoD policy to encourage and support
U.S. allies and partners as they implement their own CHMR practices.
DoD will accomplish this through integration of CHMR considerations
into DoD security cooperation and security assistance activities, and
by working with other U.S. government departments and agencies on CHMR
objectives, such as by providing any necessary expertise in support of
the Department of State (DoS) Civilian Harm Incident Response Guidance
(CHIRG). In our security cooperation programs, we are working to
implement, as appropriate, tailored conditionality to promote ally and
partner efforts. For example, we conduct training to reinforce best
practices which recognize that the occurrence of civilian harm does not
necessarily indicate a violation of the law of war, but that protecting
civilians is a moral and strategic imperative essential to long-term
success.
DoD has been actively filling the new positions associated with
civilian harm mitigation and response that Congress funded, including
several that focus on objectives oriented toward DoD security
cooperation programs with allies and partners. We appreciate
congressional appropriations accompanying the DoD CHMR-AP
implementation which will allow us to hire these individuals.
DoD personnel charged with addressing civilian harm mitigation and
response (CHMR) and the DoS policy office responsible for the CHIRG
conduct regular interagency information sharing meetings on U.S.
Government efforts to promote CHMR good practices globally.
All these efforts are aimed at improving our approach to civilian
harm mitigation and enabling our strategic success.
Ms. Jacobs. Secretary Austin, I want to discuss the achievements of
SOUTHCOM's human rights office since its creation in 1995. This office
has effectively incorporated human rights into the command's
operations, a critical step considering the history of human rights
abuses by some of our partners in Latin America. Could you highlight
the specific successes of this initiative at SOUTHCOM and share any
insights or lessons that other Combatant Commands could apply?
Secretary Austin. Protecting civilians is both a moral and
strategic imperative essential to long-term success--whether that's
building enduring coalitions or upholding higher principles on the
global stage.
The USSOUTHCOM Human Rights Office provides direct support to the
commander and senior leadership by advising on human rights
developments in the USSOUTHCOM Area of Responsibility (AOR) that affect
partner nation militaries and the nations of the region. In addition,
the Human Rights Office helps oversee USSOUTHCOM's implementation of
DoD and USSOUTHCOM Combating Trafficking in Persons Policy, which
requires training for all personnel, including contractors. The Human
Rights Office focuses on developing AOR-specific guidance and education
for USSOUTHCOM personnel to better recognize indicators of trafficking
in persons, and to implement DoD and USSOUTHCOM's zero tolerance policy
toward trafficking in persons.
USSOUTHCOM's Human Rights Initiative seeks to bring together
representatives of the military, security forces, civilian government,
and civil society to develop a model human rights program for military
forces focused in four areas: doctrine, education and training,
internal control systems, and cooperation with civilian authorities.
The Human Rights Office supports the efforts of 11 countries and one
regional organization that have formally committed to implement the
initiative within their armed forces.
The Dominican Republic established the first Latin American
military school dedicated to human rights education. Colombia and Peru
have since also opened similar military schools. SOUTHCOM's Human
Rights Office contributed to these efforts.
Ms. Jacobs. The GAO released an alarming report on the condition of
unaccompanied housing across the Department of Defense. This problem
has accrued over time with the military departments taking risk in
their infrastructure portfolios and conditions degrading to a point
that impacts readiness and retention. The FY24 NDAA required the
Department of Defense to take a stronger leadership role in setting
standards for unaccompanied housing. What is your role in ensuring
service members have high quality living facilities across the
enterprise?
Secretary Austin. DoD has a moral obligation to ensure that the
places where Service members live and work are safe and secure. The
Department remains committed to ensuring our troops and their families
have high-quality housing that is safe, functional, and reliable. In
order to improve housing conditions and address recommendations
included in the Government Accountability Office's September 2023
report on military barracks, the Department stood-up a Tiger Team to
address urgent and on-going deficiencies in living spaces for Service
members, initially prioritizing junior enlisted unaccompanied housing.
The Tiger Team is comprised of housing and engineering experts from
across the Department to develop new standards for privacy,
configuration, habitability, environmental health and comfort, and
safety and security that will apply across all Services. Additionally,
the Department must accelerate investments and improvements, including
renovation and construction work, in government-owned and controlled
housing, to meet military demand. These reforms and investments will
make military housing better and safer for our Service members.
We are also exercising full oversight authority over housing
privatization projects. The Department has made significant progress in
implementing privatized housing reforms, including progress toward full
availability of rights contained in the Military Housing Privatization
Initiative Tenant Bill of Rights. The Department is approaching
universal availability of those rights, and all rights should be
available at all privatized housing locations by the end of FY 2024.
The Department appreciates congressional support for improving
military housing facilities and will continue to engage with members of
Congress to ensure that DoD has the appropriate resources and
authorities to invest in homes for our Service members and military
families.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STRICKLAND
Ms. Strickland. As you may know, many schools in the US currently
have silent panic alarms, or panic buttons, deployed throughout their
schools as a way to enhance school safety. Is the Department currently
deploying silent panic alarms at all Department of Defense Schools? If
not, is there a plan to do so?
To follow-up on the question regarding panic alarms, does the
Department have a plan to deploy mass notification systems at its
Schools as a way to alert parents of a security or safety incident?
We have seen more than 20 shootings at US military installments
over the last 30 years, such as the 2014 incident at Fort Cavazos (then
Fort Hood). As we know, when there is an active shooter, the faster we
can get information to those on the base, the more likely we are to
save lives. What is the current state of base-wide notifications to
alert individuals of a threat and to direct action such as lockdown or
seek shelter?
Secretary Austin. There is nothing the Department takes more
seriously than the health and wellbeing of our people, including
military families and children. While there is no Department of Defense
requirement for silent or panic alarms in DoD Education Activity
(DoDEA) schools, existing facilities utilize varying combinations of
silent and overt alarms. DoDEA is incorporating overt alarms in new
construction projects and renovations.
The Department of Defense requires all buildings to be capable of
mass notification through public address systems, integrated into other
building systems, or through a different method. Mass notification
capabilities and mass notification systems in schools are limited to
the building and the immediate vicinity and are not intended to alert
outside parties of the incident. Based on local conditions, host
installations employ various techniques to communicate with parents in
conjunction with a security incident.
We have seen more than 20 shootings at US military installments
over the last 30 years, such as the 2014 incident at Fort Cavazos (then
Fort Hood). As we know, when there is an active shooter, the faster we
can get information to those on the base, the more likely we are to
save lives. What is the current state of base-wide notifications to
alert individuals of a threat and to direct action such as lockdown or
seek shelter?
The Army is the DoD executive agent on an Enterprise-Wide Mass
Warning and Notification capability. The Unified Facilities Criteria
system provides planning, design, construction, sustainment,
restoration, and modernization criteria and applies to the Military
Departments, the Defense Agencies, and the DoD Field Activities. The
requirements to install wide area mass notification systems are
specific to each DoD component.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. DELUZIO
Mr. Deluzio. Mr. Secretary, you've implemented new Pentagon
procedures to provide appropriate notification, including to the White
House, when a transfer of authority to the Deputy Secretary has taken
place. If those notification procedures had existed at the time, would
the procedures have required notification of the White House during
your hospitalization in early January? Similarly, would the new
procedures have required notification of the White House when you
transferred authority during your December 22nd hospitalization?
Secretary Austin. Yes, had the new notification procedures existed
at the time, they would have required notification to the White House
Situation Room, the White House Office of Cabinet Affairs, and the
White House Chief of Staff, among others, when the Deputy Secretary
assumed the functions and duties of the office of the Secretary of
Defense pursuant to 10 U.S.C. Sec. 132(b) on December 22, 2023, and
January 2, 2024. The Department of Defense employed these new
procedures in connection with my February 2024 hospitalization at
Walter Reed when the Deputy Secretary temporarily assumed the functions
and duties of my office on February 11, 2024.

[all]
