[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 118-59]

U.S. AND ADVERSARY HYPERSONIC
CAPABILITIES

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 12, 2024

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-191                    WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California,
DON BACON, Nebraska                  RO KHANNA, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              MARC VEASEY, Texas

Whitney Verett, Professional Staff Member
Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Owen McGeary, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1
Moulton, Hon. Seth, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     2

WITNESSES

Horowitz, Dr. Michael C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Force Development and Emerging Capabilities................     4
McCormick, Jeffrey, Senior Intelligence Analyst, National Air and
Space Intelligence Center......................................    10
Rasch Jr., LTG Robert A., USA, Director of Rapid Capabilities and
Critical Technologies Office, United States Army...............     8
Weber, Dr James W., Principal Director for Hypersonics, Office of
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Critical Technologies;
and Rumford, George J., Director, Department of Defense Test
Resource Management Center.....................................     5
White, Lt Gen Dale R., USAF, Military Deputy, Office of the
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force...........................     9
Wolfe Jr., VADM Johnny, USN, Director, Strategic Systems
Programs, United States Navy...................................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Horowitz, Dr. Michael C......................................    37
McCormick, Jeffrey...........................................    78
Rasch Jr., LTG Robert A......................................    65
Weber, Dr James W.; and Rumford, George J....................    42
White, Lt Gen Dale R.........................................    71
Wolfe Jr., VADM Johnny.......................................    55

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Lamborn..................................................    85
Mr. Wilson...................................................    86
Mr. Garamendi................................................    87
Dr. DesJarlais...............................................    87
Mr. Waltz....................................................    89

U.S. AND ADVERSARY HYPERSONIC CAPABILITIES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, March 12, 2024.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:00 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
COLORADO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Lamborn. The subcommittee will come to order.
This Strategic Forces Subcommittee will have a hearing
today on U.S. and adversary hypersonic capabilities.
The purpose of this hearing is to review the policies,
programs, and priorities associated with U.S. hypersonic
capabilities and explore the capabilities and intent of
adversaries' hypersonic development efforts.
I ask, first, unanimous consent that non-subcommittee
members be allowed to participate in today's hearing after all
subcommittee members have had an opportunity to ask questions.
Is there any objection? Without objection, non-subcommittee
members will be recognized at the appropriate time for 5
minutes.
So good afternoon to our witnesses, Dr. Horowitz, Dr.
Weber, Vice Admiral Wolfe, Lieutenant General Rasch, Lieutenant
General White, and Mr. McCormick. We are also joined by Mr.
Rumford, the Director of the Test Resource Management Center,
who will not have a separate opening statement, but will be
available to answer questions.
Thank you all for being here today. Thank you for your
service. This is a very important topic. This is now the second
hearing this subcommittee has had on hypersonic capabilities--
one of the most pressing issues for our national defense.
China and Russia continue their own program developments at
a breathtaking pace. In the time since our last subcommittee
hearing on this subject the joint Army-Navy program has had
several unsuccessful test events and the Air Force has
continued to struggle with ARRW (Air-Launched Rapid Response
Weapon).
I appreciate the work your teams are doing to identify and
fix the malfunctions that caused the unsuccessful flight test
and get the programs on track to field these critical
capabilities. However, at this point we're still well behind
our adversaries, even if everything goes as planned.
I have a remainder of the opening statement but for the
sake of time I am going to submit it for the record, and I will
point out that in about two hours' time we'll have a vote
series on the floor.
I hope to be all done with our public and our classified
upstairs portion of the hearing so all the witnesses can go on
their way and we will go on to our votes and be done for the
day.
So, for that purpose we'll probably only have time for one
round of questions and then we will adjourn and quickly go into
a classified portion at that point in time.
But I want to see if the Ranking Member has any opening
statement he would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. SETH MOULTON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Moulton. Sure. Mr. Chairman, I have to start by saying
I am quite jealous that you will be done for the day at the end
of votes, not what my calendar looks like this evening.
But thank you very much. I also want to extend a warm
welcome to our distinguished panel of witnesses today and I am
thankful that we are holding this hearing on hypersonics, not
only to understand our adversaries' capabilities and intentions
when it comes to these weapons but also to gain a better
understanding of how the department envisions the employment of
our own hypersonics in a future conflict.
In the year, almost to the day, since our last hearing on
hypersonics we've seen war criminal Vladimir Putin employ
hypersonic weapons in his criminal war against Ukraine. The CCP
continues to test novel and more advanced hypersonics and North
Korea now purports to have them as well.
This all started when America pulled out of the anti-
ballistic missile treaty which had effectively limited the
development of any new strategic capabilities beyond our
existing triad since the 1970s. Our adversaries have, clearly,
determined that being able to surprise us with extremely fast,
highly maneuverable weapons that are hard to detect is critical
to defeating U.S. missile defense systems.
From a technological perspective, the Pentagon's work on
hypersonics has seen some positive developments over the past
year. The services are tapping into nontraditional industries
to solve challenges like new thermal protection system, solid
rocket motors, and software.
I am also encouraged at programs like MACH-TB [Multi-
Service Advanced Capability Hypersonic Test Best] that are
bringing in innovative ways to test components and systems more
quickly, getting closer to something we have been pushing the
department to do--not be afraid to fail and in fact to fail
faster, learn faster, and pivot quickly from mistakes.
We've also seen great strides in domain awareness. This
past year both the Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space
Center and Tranche-1 missile warning prototype satellites had
been placed into orbit, their future operational constellations
being critical for our defense and decision making.
There remain, however, significant fundamental concerns
with the program. One of the top conclusions of the bipartisan
Future of Defense Task Force that I co-chaired in 2020 is that
it's not enough for the Pentagon to pursue technology for
technology's sake. We need to develop the operational concepts
for how that technology will actually be employed.
Indeed, the operational concepts should come first and then
we should develop whatever technology is needed to best address
the need.
Over the past few years, I've asked this most basic
question of department officials--how will you use these
hypersonic weapons that are costing taxpayers hundreds of
billions of dollars to build.
Several times I have been met with blank stares--literally
blank stares. So last year we directed the Pentagon to tell us
with a simple report explaining the concept of operations and
total missiles needed for offensive hypersonic systems.
This committee was just told that, quote, ``more time is
needed to collect and integrate inputs from all relevant
stakeholders. We anticipate delivering the report by December
31st, 2024.''
This fundamental confusion is shocking. Let me be clear.
The Department of Defense cannot clearly explain to Congress
and the American people the rationale for developing these
weapons for the past four years at the cost of $15 billion and
is now asking for an additional $3 billion for the 2025 budget.
I mean, I am curious if ever before in the history of the
Pentagon we've spent billions developing a weapon we don't know
how to use. Absent any plans from the Pentagon some generals
and admirals--in your seats here--have tried to answer this
most basic question by saying that hypersonics will be a
strategic deterrent.
Yet, there's no plan to arm them with strategic warheads.
And is the hope that we never use them? That doesn't seem
consistent with what we've heard.
Others have implied they will serve as next-generation
cruise missiles, harder to counter than our ubiquitous
Tomahawks. Such an answer seems to me both simple and
believable and, yet, apparently this is not true because I
can't imagine it would take five years to provide a forward
answer.
Others have said that we need them simply because our
adversaries have them. Well, there are plenty of weapons our
adversaries are developing that we are not for good reason.
Russia's recently leaked space weapon comes to mind. I saw
carrier pigeons employed in Iraq not long ago. I assume we're
not developing them, too.
Being unable to answer this alarmingly simple question, how
will we use hypersonics, may expose an even greater concern,
that we are developing a weapon that is seriously
destabilizing, a weapon that will ultimately make us and the
world less safe and secure.
This would be notably in contrast to the rest of our
nuclear triad. Sure, I wish we didn't have to have
intercontinental ballistic missiles. But I support investing in
them because they provide strategic stability and have been a
cornerstone of that strategic stability for decades, as our
experience with Russia has proven.
But if a nation, us or them, cannot tell whether an inbound
hypersonic missile is a strategic nuclear weapon or not or
simply where it is aimed that nation could feel compelled to
launch a nuclear response and a nuclear holocaust could be the
result. Obviously, we need answers.
The bottom line is we have a lot of work to do and I hope
today's hearing will for the first time help answer some of
these fundamental questions to give us better insight into
whether developing hypersonic weapons will make us safer or
whether they will prove to be an epic multibillion-dollar
mistake that hopefully doesn't inadvertently spark a nuclear
holocaust.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I hope the Ranking Member asked the
right questions to get to the bottom of the issues that he's
having trouble with. So you will have that opportunity here
soon.
I will make an editorial comment right now and say that I
believe it's destabilizing for China and Russia to have a major
capability that we do not have and that there are problems sets
and target sets that can only be addressed through this
capability.
So that's the kind of thing we should have a good debate
and discussion during this important hearing today.
We will now turn to our witnesses. Your prepared statements
will be made part of the record. Since we have such a full
house I will ask each of you to please limit your opening
comments to 4 minutes.
We have a very distinguished panel and we'll start with Dr.
Horowitz. You are recognized first.

STATEMENT OF DR. MICHAEL HOROWITZ, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE FOR FORCE DEVELOPMENT AND EMERGING CAPABILITIES,
OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY

Dr. Horowitz. Thank you.
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton, members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today. I am honored to be here to speak about the department's
policy regarding hypersonic weapons.
The 2022 National Defense Strategy outlines four core
priorities and serves as our North Star: defending the
homeland, pace of the multi-domain threat posed by the People's
Republic of China, deterring strategic attacks against the
United States, our allies and partners, deterring aggression
while being prepared to prevail in conflict when necessary, and
building a resilient joint force and defense ecosystem.
U.S. development of hypersonic systems supports integrated
deterrence against the priority challenges identified in the
National Defense Strategy. The department continues to focus on
developing conventionally-armed systems that can contribute to
long-range strike within a designated theater area of
responsibility.
The department's offensive hypersonic weapons development
is driven by a need to provide a full range of options to
senior decision makers. Hypersonics are a key component in the
mix of capabilities that the joint force needs to deter and, if
necessary, defeat aggression.
We are continuing to invest in and accelerate the delivery
of these capabilities to the warfighter. More broadly, the
department is also making substantial investments in a range of
conventionally-armed offensive hypersonics from the air to
undersea. This is critical to enhancing deterrence.
It's also important for the department to continue
developing capabilities to defend against hypersonic threats.
The department is continuing its efforts to develop active and
passive defenses against regional hypersonic missile threats
and to pursue a persistent and resilient sensor network to
characterize and track hypersonic threats, improve attribution,
and enable engagement.
In conclusion, DOD [Department of Defense] is focusing on
fielding the right mix of capabilities to generate the effects
that we need to deter and, if necessary, prevail in any
conflict.
Hypersonics, because of their characteristics, represent a
key element in this mix of capabilities. Delivering those
capabilities in concert with a network of allies and partners
and in parallel with other advanced technologies and new
operating concepts for the force as a whole will ensure that
DOD maintains the ability to deter potential adversaries and to
defeat aggression if necessary.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Horowitz can be found in the
Appendix on page 37.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Dr. Weber.

STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES WEBER, PRINCIPAL DIRECTOR FOR
HYPERSONICS, OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR DEFENSE FOR
CRITICAL TECHNOLOGIES; AND GEORGE J. RUMFORD, DIRECTOR,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TEST RESOURCE MANAGEMENT CENTER

Dr. Weber. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting us to provide testimony before the House Armed
Services Committee Subcommittee on Strategic Forces hearing on
U.S. and adversary hypersonic programs.
I serve as the Principal Director for Hypersonics in the
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering. I am also happy to introduce my research and
engineering colleague to my left, Mr. George Rumford, the
Director of the Test Resource Management Center.
Today we are here because the United States faces
unprecedented challenges in national security. The PRC
[People's Republic of China] and Russia have deployed high-end
defensive and anti-access systems that will challenge our
ability to deter adversaries and defend U.S. forces, allies,
and partners against rapid military interventions.
To address these challenges the Department of Defense is
accelerating the development and delivery of hypersonic systems
that provide responsive, survivable, and lethal capabilities to
our warfighter.
Our strategic approach to delivering these capabilities is
focused on four priorities: first, demonstrating a transition
in hypersonic systems through rapid design, build, test and
learn cycles; second, reduce the cost of hypersonic systems and
increase industrial capability to build warfighting
inventories; third, grow and sustain our critical enablers to
accelerate the development of current and future hypersonic
systems.
These enablers are test and evaluation, science and
technology, workforce development and allied partnerships.
Fourth, identify, develop, and demonstrate next-generation
capabilities.
Thanks to the resources Congress has provided the
department is developing a range of hypersonic and counter
hypersonic capabilities for our warfighters that will hold time
critical and heavily defended targets at risk from a survivable
standoff range and defend the U.S. homeland, warfighters
abroad, allies, and partners against adversary hypersonic
threats.
Consistent with the direction in the fiscal year 2017
National Defense Authorization Act the department is taking
risks, pressing the technology envelope, and increasing tests
and experimentation to accelerate the development of hypersonic
technologies and systems.
The department is using the middle tier acquisition
authorities provided by Congress to streamline and accelerate
the development of five hypersonic strike weapon prototypes.
Three programs, including the Air Force Air-Launched Rapid
Response Weapon, the Army Long-Range Hypersonic Wapon, and the
Navy Conventional Prompt Strike system, have already reached
flight tests in less than 4 years and we are positioned for the
United States to field hypersonic weapon capabilities by the
mid-2020s.
The department is also accelerating our development of
hypersonic systems and capabilities by making significant
investments to increase our ground and flight test
infrastructure, our domestic manufacturing capabilities and
industrial supply chain, and scientists, engineering, and
technician workforce.
In closing, our nation is now at the threshold of
delivering hypersonic systems that will provide
transformational capabilities for deterring and defending
against future aggression.
However, we must maintain our national commitment to this
goal to be successful. We appreciate Congress' support to U.S.
hypersonics development and with your continued help we will
field the hypersonic and counter hypersonic capabilities the
nation needs.
Thank you for having us here today to discuss this critical
effort and we look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Weber and Mr. Rumford can be
found in the Appendix on page 42.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Vice Admiral Wolfe.

STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL JOHNNY WOLFE, JR., USN, DIRECTOR,
STRATEGIC SYSTEMS PROGRAMS, UNITED STATES NAVY

Admiral Wolfe. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to discuss the Navy's Strategic Systems
Programs, Conventional Prompt Strike hypersonic weapon known as
CPS.
The Navy and Army are partnered to execute the CPS and
long-range hypersonic weapon programs through the use of a
common hypersonic missile which consists of a two-stage missile
booster designed, developed, and produced by the Navy, as well
as a common hypersonic glide body designed and developed by the
Navy and produced by the Army.
The CPS and LRHW [Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon] programs
have pursued an aggressive schedule to develop a common
hypersonic weapon that will be the Army and Navy's first.
By leveraging joint developmental test opportunities, the
programs have marked significant testing milestones at a
consistent pace including a March 2020 flight test that
demonstrated our common hypersonic glide body technologies
mature and a 2022 flight test that provided vital data on the
performance of our newly developed missile booster.
Although CPS and LRHW successfully initiated the first
flight test of the newly developed weapon system less than 4
years after the initiation of the programs, recent tests were
not completed as expected.
In each case the Navy, Army, government national team and
our contractors has rapidly reacted to identify root causes,
complete corrective actions, and expeditiously return to the
range.
Additionally, our programs have initiated an additional
series of design reviews and have planned additional testing
opportunities to restore technical confidence, achieve critical
knowledge points, and further reduce risk on the path of
fielding.
As a complement to our plan for a weapons system flight
test the program has continued to utilize the multiservice
advanced capability hypersonics testbed known as MACH-TB. The
MACH-TB program was created in 2022 by CPS and the Naval
Warfare Center, Crane, Indiana, leveraging a generous
congressional appropriation increase.
We have now turned the effort over to OSD's [Office of the
Secretary of Defense] test Resource Management Center, allowing
CPS, LRHW, and the entire hypersonics enterprise to utilize
commercial launch platforms for subcomponent, subscale, and
full-scale test to increase the rate of testing at a reduced
cost.
Meanwhile, our hypersonic industry partners are working
diligently with the government national team to facilitate a
rapid transition to production, platform integration, and
delivery to the warfighter.
We continue to prioritize improved affordability of the
weapon system through initiatives to reduce material costs,
including leveraging, additive manufacturing, and other new
production processes.
In order to deliver this capability at the speed of
relevance the Army and Navy teams will continue to work closely
with our industry partners, OSD, and Congress to identify
supply chain issues and put mitigation plans in place.
The Navy continues to prepare for the fielding of CPS on
both the Zumwalt-class destroyers and the Block-V Virginia
payload module-equipped submarines. Testing at our in-air
launch test facility has continued to refine the cold gas
launch approach the Navy will use to launch the common
hypersonic missile from both our sea platforms.
The CPS fielding on Zumwalt-class destroyers will mark the
first use of this cold gas launch approach on the surface ship
platform.
Construction and outfitting of the underwater launch test
facility continues and that will allow the program to evaluate
how the CPS missile transits through the water using the newly
developed CPS launcher.
We have conducted a series of exercises that allow our
sailors to execute scenarios in an operationally relevant
environment and have deployed a weapon system prototype and
missile simulator on our Zumwalt-class destroyer. The ship took
that equipment to sea and we validated that we can demonstrate
employment concepts and command and control following tasking
by any combatant commander.
I would like to thank Congress for the support you have
shown our program and the important focus that you have placed
on this essential capability.
As the director, it is my honor to represent the personnel
of SSP's [Strategic Systems Programs] CPS program. One of my
top priorities is to ensure that these dedicated Americans are
poised to execute the Conventional Prompt Strike mission with
the same level of success, passion, and rigor as we had since
SSP was founded.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf of
the team that will provide our nation with a credible and
reliable intermediate range hypersonic strike capability. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Wolfe can be found in
the Appendix on page 55.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Admiral.
Lieutenant General Rasch.

STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL ROBERT A. RASCH, JR., USA,
DIRECTOR, RAPID CAPABILITIES AND CRITICAL TECHNOLOGIES OFFICE,
UNITED STATES ARMY

General Rasch. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
allowing me here today to represent the Army to discuss the
ongoing development of the long-range hypersonic weapon
alongside my colleagues and other services and in the Office of
Secretary of Defense, and on behalf of the Army's senior
leadership we thank you for your continued support of our
soldiers, our civilians, and their families.
The responsiveness and survivability of hypersonic weapons
is unmatched by traditional ballistic capabilities for
precision targeting, especially in anti-access area denial
environments.
The department made the decision to pursue these systems
because these weapons provide the United States with a suite of
options to strike at strategic targets.
My goal as a material developer is to help ensure the
United States military can successfully deter and, if
necessary, defeat and fight our nation's wars.
The Army tasked the Rapid Capabilities and Critical
Technologies Office with developing the Long-Range Hypersonic
Weapon on an aggressive timeline. The Army and Navy are closely
partnered in this endeavor.
The Navy's Conventional Prompt Strike program and the
Army's Long-Range Hypersonic Weapon program share key
components such as a common missile booster stack, the use of a
common hypersonic glide body, and have aligned developmental
efforts and resources, and these commonalities have supported
an emerging industrial base in maintaining aggressive
development and fielding schedules.
In addition to this partnership both the Army and the Navy
have benefited significantly from the work at government labs
and with the considerable support from OSD to help ensure this
capability gets delivered.
Throughout 2023, the Army and Navy conducted three
iterations of Joint Flight Campaign 2. While those tests did
not go as planned, the Army and Navy teams learned from each of
these and worked with industry to make necessary corrective
actions to return to the range for further testing.
Following the third attempt both programs worked together
to establish multiple lines of effort to conduct a series of
design reviews across the weapon system.
In close partnership with the Navy, we are pursuing a
rigorous test regimen to reduce risk before returning back to
flight test. This regimen will ensure incremental success at
the subsystem level, making necessary adjustments and
demonstrating repeated success, allowing us to return to flight
tests with unwavering confidence.
Above all, I am confident that our team will do what is
necessary with appropriate rigor to deliver this system to our
soldiers. I am so proud to be part of this team and am
immensely grateful for the significant time and energy that our
collective teams have poured into supporting this mission.
We appreciate the support we have received for these
programs from Congress and from this committee. Your support
and receptiveness to our efforts is paramount to our success
and I look forward to taking your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Rasch can be found in
the Appendix on page 65.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Lieutenant General White.

STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT GENERAL DALE R. WHITE, USAF, MILITARY
DEPUTY, OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE

General White. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
the opportunity to provide testimony on the Department of the
Air Force's hypersonic programs.
Our continued efforts to develop and field and operational
hypersonic air-launched weapon will enable us to hold high-
value time-sensitive targets at risk in contested environments
from standoff distances.
A hypersonic weapon in concert with a wider weapons force
mix is key to providing a war-winning Air Force. The Air
Force's hypersonic portfolio consists of three major thrusts:
boost glide missiles, air breathing cruise missiles, and the
foundational science and technology--S&T--hypersonics
portfolio.
Starting with ARRW, our boost glide missile is the Air-
Launched Rapid Response Weapon. We are undergoing the final
test of the All Up Round with a planned test program completion
by the end of second quarter fiscal year 2024.
This test will launch a full prototype of the operational
hypersonic missile and is focused on the ARRW's end-to-end
performance. While future ARRW decisions are pending final
analysis of all flight test data, the service is pleased to
report that the ARRW rapid prototyping program has been a
categorical success to date.
Next, HACM. Our air-breathing cruise missile is the
Hypersonic Attack Cruise Missile. It is an air-launched air-
breathing weapon that can be integrated on current and future
fighters as well as provide expanded capacity on bombers.
The Air Force awarded the HACM contract in September of
2022 and is developing the weapon using the middle tier
acquisition rapid prototyping authority.
We are working to mature HACM to critical design along with
other development activities to enable the flight test
activities in fiscal year 2025.
Science and technology--in collaboration with the wider
hypersonics community our foundational science and technology
hypersonics portfolio is executed by the Air Force Research
Laboratory.
AFRL [Air Force Research Laboratory] has made many enduring
contributions to the field of hypersonics to date. They
achieved significant successes with their recently completed
high-speed strike weapon technology maturation program.
This program transitioned over 30 technologies to various
DOD hypersonic programs ranging from advanced materials to
propulsion technologies to vehicle designs. Based on these
successes, we look forward to the launch of TechMat 2 to
further develop and transition technologies for next-generation
hypersonic capabilities.
In fiscal year 2025 the focus of the Air Force Research
Laboratory technology development efforts will shift to less
mature technologies that are needed to develop future reusable
hypersonic platforms which will provide multi-mission
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, as well as
strike capabilities.
I thank you again for the opportunity to testify and
provide additional details in the classified session later
today and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General White can be found in
the Appendix on page 71.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. McCormick.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY MCCORMICK, SENIOR INTELLIGENCE ANALYST,
NATIONAL AIR AND SPACE INTELLIGENCE CENTER

Mr. McCormick. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the invitation
to provide the Defense Intelligence Enterprise assessment of
China's and Russia's hypersonic weapon systems.
I am a senior intelligence analyst with the National Air
and Space Intelligence Center here on behalf of DIA [Defense
Intelligence Agency]. Our competitors are developing advanced
weapon capabilities aimed at holding U.S. forward-deployed
forces and the homeland at risk. Hypersonic weapons are
designed to evade U.S. sensors and defensive systems and they
provide adversary military commanders with unique capabilities.
These weapons pose an increasing and complex threat due to
the availability of both nuclear and conventional capabilities.
U.S. competitors are developing multiple configurations and
types of hypersonic missiles that can be tailored for
employment from air, ground, and sea launchers.
Both China and Russia have conducted numerous successful
tests of hypersonic weapons and fielded operational
capabilities. Russia has used these against Ukraine but China
is ahead of Russia in support infrastructure and total
inventory.
China's missile programs are comparable to top tier
producers internationally and China leads Russia with its
hypersonic arsenal. China's progress is resulting from its
efforts over the past two decades to dramatically advance its
capability in conventional and nuclear-armed hypersonic missile
technologies.
This has been done through intense and focused investment,
development, testing, and now deliveries to the PLA [People's
Liberation Army]. China has an extensive and robust research
and development infrastructure and PRC researchers have claimed
these facilities help expose critical engineering and
technology issues before missiles are tested.
China is also expanding research into reusable high-speed
vehicles. China has demonstrated a high pace of flight testing
for its hypersonic systems. This emphasis is enabling China to
deploy weapons including the DF-17 that has an estimated range
of at least 1,600 kilometers, enabling it to reach U.S.
military basing and fleet assets in Western Pacific.
Since 2014, China has conducted several tests in pursuit of
an intercontinental range hypersonic glide vehicle. China is
pursuing this capability in part due to long-term concerns
about U.S. defenses and a desire for parity with the future
worldwide missile capabilities.
China's investments will enable it to deploy large numbers
of hypersonic weapons in line with its plans for a strong and
modernized rocket force. China also is advancing advanced high-
speed engine, or scramjet, technologies that have applications
in hypersonic cruise missiles.
Russia has performed research on hypersonic weapon
technologies since at least the 1980s and currently has three
deployed hypersonic systems. The first is the air-launched
Kinzhal.
It has a claimed top speed of Mach 10 and a reach of over
2,000 kilometers and Russia has used this extensively against
Ukraine with varying degrees of success and effectiveness.
The other--another weapon is the SS-19, or Avangard
hypersonic glide vehicle. Russian officials claim this has
capability to fly over Mach 20 and a range of up to 10,500
kilometers.
The third system, the Zircon, is a ship launch hypersonic
missile that travels at speeds up to Mach 8. Ukraine reported
recovering components of the Zircon, indicating it has also
been used operationally earlier this year.
And Russia has declared its intentions to continue
developing and deploying hypersonic weapons including another
air-launched hypersonic long-range missile called Kh-95.
My goal in this hearing is to help Congress and the nation
better understand the threats that advanced hypersonic weapons
pose to our forward deployed forces and the homeland. The
defense intelligence enterprise aims to support the committee
in identifying opportunities to respond to these key
challenges.
Thank you for your continued confidence and we are grateful
for your vital support.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McCormick can be found in
the Appendix on page 78.]
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you to the very distinguished
panel of witnesses for each of your statements.
We will now have one round of questions from the panel and
then we'll go into our classified remainder of our hearing
upstairs.
For both Dr. Horowitz and Mr. McCormick, in the hands of
the Chinese are hypersonic weapons able to do something that
none other of their weapons can do?
Mr. McCormick. I can take that to start.
So, China is very invested in long-range strike and
precision strike capabilities. They have looked at missiles for
a long time to achieve their strategic goals and hypersonics is
really a continuation of that commitment to a long-range
missile force for counter-intervention and strategic nuclear
deterrence.
Dr. Horowitz. Thanks so much. I think that that's right.
The only thing I would add is that we have concern about the
hypersonics being developed by the PRC and Russia, given their
potential for dual-capable systems where there may be ambiguity
about whether a system is armed with a nuclear or conventional
weapon.
Those are the kinds of situations where the deployment of
hypersonic weapons is more likely to have destabilizing effects
during a crisis or a conflict and that is also not a concern
with the hypersonic weapons that the United States is
developing.
Mr. Lamborn. So, is it your position that hypersonics have
capabilities that no other weapons have?
Mr. McCormick. So, they combine the benefits of ballistic
missiles, which are high speed and cruise missiles, which are
maneuverable, and so they--you can get those effects with two
different types of weapons but what they really challenge our
sensing capability and our defensive capability, and they do
provide military commanders very rapid response capability that
you wouldn't have necessarily with other weapons.
Dr. Horowitz. This is why we're pursuing hypersonics in the
first place. The combination of speed, range, and
maneuverability means they have the potential to generate
effects that in combination with the other capabilities the
joint force is developing give us the ability to deter
aggression and, if necessary, prevail in conflict.
Mr. Lamborn. I think it's a straw man argument to say that
we would pursue a type of weapon class only because the other
side is doing it. I think that there is a use for hypersonics
in and of themselves no matter whether anyone else is doing it
or not and whether they're ahead of us or behind us.
Would you both, gentlemen, agree with that statement?
Dr. Horowitz. I think that the Department of Defense is
well aware of Russia and the PRC's activities in hypersonics.
The United States is not developing hypersonic weapons to
respond to Russian or Chinese development of hypersonic
systems. We are developing, you know, hypersonics, you know, as
you suggest because we think that their development and
deployment is necessary to enhance the capabilities of the
joint force and our ability to implement the National Defense
Strategy.
We think that the development of hypersonic systems will
support integrated deterrence against priority threats because
of that intersection of speed, maneuverability, and range that
they have.
It helps give senior decision makers the full range of
options especially in a contested battlefield environment where
an adversary has deployed anti-access area denial systems.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. I certainly can't speak to the U.S.
strategy. I will just say that China views these as an
extension of its desire for precision long-range strike and to
also enhance the credibility of its nuclear deterrence.
These are in line with strategies it's developed for its
ICBMs [intercontinental ballistic missiles], its IRBMs
[intermediate-range ballistic missiles], MRBMs [medium-range
ballistic missiles, and cruise missiles, and so they extend
that strategy.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you.
Now, here's a question for General Rasch, Vice Admiral
Wolfe, and Lieutenant General White. Can you talk about how
your teams are working to overcome recent testing challenges
and what problem is on your critical path?
General Rasch. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Since the three events this last year--nonflight test
activities--the team has doubled down during the time we've had
available to really take a deep dive look into some of the
system design aspects while we're refitting missiles to get
back out to the range.
So this has been a time for us, both Army and Navy, to
develop some lines of effort where we do a complete system
analysis, ensuring that we've--we uncover any additional
trouble spots other than what we found to date as well as
standing up an independent review team to actually come in and
look over our shoulder to make sure we haven't missed something
in the past, and we can go into more details on the test
activity during our closed session.
Vice Admiral Wolfe.
Admiral Wolfe. Yes, sir, that's exactly right, and as we
work with the Army, certainly, what General Rasch is doing on
his side and what we're doing on our side together to
understand, obviously, both of these programs have been very
fast paced and we've really leaned into Ranking Member
Moulton's point of understanding the risks that we were taking
to try and get this capability out there rapidly.
We've had some hiccups and we're learning from that. So we
will--to General Rasch's point we can talk about some
additional testing we believe that we need to do to get some
more confidence as we in parallel push this entire system
forward.
So, again, a lot of these have been just understanding how
we actually put this in the warfighter's hands. It's not
necessarily a technology challenge. It's a ramping up industry
to produce these things reliably so that we can give them to
our warfighter.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
General White.
General White. Yeah. I would say something similar,
Congressman. The challenge--we've had some pretty good success
with some of our tests over the recent past and so I do think
there is a part of this that is learning.
Many of these programs, as you know, are somewhat born out
of science and technology and so we continue to learn as we go
through the process. I think taking the time, as General Rasch
had pointed out--taking the time, good system engineering and
design, and making sure we're taking into consideration as we
have these programs because many of them are middle tier
acquisitions and we're moving quickly with these technologies.
So, continue to stay focused on that design and engineering
piece. And then, of course, it's absolutely critically
important that we continue to test.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And, Mr. Rumford, from your seat at
TRMC [Test Resource Management Center] what is the biggest
bottleneck right now when it comes to hypersonic testing and
how are you working to address that?
Mr. Rumford. So, the two biggest bottlenecks--and thank you
for that question. It's the most important focus that we have
is improving our flight test capacity and our ground test
capacity. We need both of those.
Testing is essential to understanding how well these
weapons work. You can't think a weapon into existence, but you
can test a weapon into existence, and so it's essential to kind
of understand how those weapons perform.
Every capability that we've ever put in air or into space
we've had ground test infrastructure that enables us to
understand how well it works.
So we have significant investments going on the ground test
side to better understand the material science and the
propulsion systems and as well as improving our high-speed test
tracks.
And then on the flight test side we have three major
initiatives that are going to change our posture in our nation.
One is the MACH-TB program that the Navy mentioned already
which is really going to be able to improve our throughput of
hypersonic tests.
Secondly is the SkyRange program which is retrofitting UAVs
[unmanned aerial vehicles] so we can test hypersonics in more
locations, and then, thirdly, a corridor initiative to be able
to have more long-range corridors. All those couplings, I
think, take on this challenge of how do we improve our ability
to test for our nation.
Mr. Lamborn. Very good. And lastly, Dr. Weber, are you all
at OSD using this delay as we work through the testing issues
to make sure that the production capabilities will be there and
that we'll be able to produce at scale when necessary?
Dr. Weber. Thank you for the question, sir.
So, certainly, we are making significant investments in our
industrial base so we're using our authorities and programs and
manufacturing technology, industrial base analysis and
sustainment and Defense Production Act title 3 to improve our
manufacturing technologies but also to improve our
manufacturing capability and capacity with industry and to
ensure that we have a resilient industry base.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Ranking Member Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I wasn't quite sure if you were going to call me Ranking
Member Mr. Straw Man but----
Mr. Lamborn. Ranking Member.
Mr. Moulton. Look, I support a lot of big weapons
investments. In fact, I've even been accused of being a defense
hawk, which is not always a compliment--rarely a compliment in
my party.
So, look, if you can answer some of these basic
foundational questions with confidence, questions I've been
asking for 3 years now, then you have every right and a very
good chance of changing my mind.
But I am asking these basic questions because I haven't
been able to get simple answers to these simple questions. Now,
look, a Congressman recently decided to leak the fact that
Russia is developing a nuclear space weapon.
Dr. Horowitz, do we have a plan to develop our own nuclear
space weapon to deter this development?
Dr. Horowitz. Here to talk--we're here to talk about
conventional hypersonics for----
Mr. Moulton. Yes. My question is do we have a plan to
develop a nuclear space weapon to deter the Russians' recently
leaked development of such a weapon?
Dr. Horowitz. Not as far as I know but I am happy to take
that for the record.
Mr. Moulton. Well, I would love to see it for the record if
the answer changes.
So, the point is that we don't plan to develop one just to
deter a weapon because our adversary has it. There are a lot of
other examples of this. For example, we developed blinding
lasers and we decided that that's probably not a great thing to
subject our infantry to.
So, years ago we, through diplomacy, achieved an agreement
that's been upheld even by our adversaries not to use blinding
lasers on the battlefield.
In fact, you could make--you could say this about just
about every other major weapon system that has been cancelled
since DOD established--was established, that even though our
adversaries have some things we don't necessarily develop them
ourselves and we know that's a long list.
Now, the Chairman said in his comments about my opening
statement that hypersonics provide the only way to get to
certain targets. So, gentlemen, does that mean that there are
targets today that we don't have the means to strike?
Admiral Wolfe.
Admiral Wolfe. Sir, that's difficult to answer in an open
forum. As we talked about, I am prepared in the closed session
to walk you through, at least from a Navy perspective, some of
the things that went into our initial capability document
requirements and also went into the other requirements that
we're developing our system specifically for.
So if I could take that question in the classified forum I
would be happy to go further into that.
Mr. Moulton. Sure. Okay. That sounds good. I will look
forward to it.
Dr. Horowitz, the foundation of nuclear deterrence is
through the concept of mutually assured destruction. We know
that if we launch a bunch of ICBMs from missile fields out West
that we can expect the exact same thing in return and that's
what's prevented either us or Russia from doing so.
Russia and China have been very clear that they are
developing hypersonic missiles as a strategic deterrent,
equipping them with nuclear weapons to evade our homeland
missile defense systems, and this is why you said that
adversary systems which are dual-capable, conventional or
nuclear, are strategically destabilizing, and I want to
emphasize the fact that you said that in your testimony.
If we detected a salvo of hypersonics coming our way--
something we can't do today, by the way, but we're hopefully
able to soon--how would we respond?
Dr. Horowitz. We have established processes and procedures
for how the department would make that decision and whether
the--how and when the United States would respond and in what
time frame would be a decision that senior military leaders or
the President would make, and happy to talk about that more in
the closed session.
Mr. Moulton. Well, let me just posit that we've been very
clear and very public about the fact that if we see a whole
bunch of nuclear-tipped ICBMs coming our way we're going to
respond with the same thing and that's what prevents Russia
from doing it.
So I think we might want to consider being pretty public in
saying if you have a whole bunch of hypersonics coming our way
and a big salvo like that we would have a similar response
because that's how we deter it from happening, and if not, we
are in a strategically destabilizing situation.
So let me ask you this. What will China do if they see a
salvo of hypersonic missiles headed their way that they think
might carry nuclear warheads?
Dr. Horowitz. So we think that that's the difference
between the hypersonic weapons that we're developing and the
hypersonic weapons that they're developing and that--because
their systems are dual capable that's why we think they
potentially increase the risk of instability.
Because we are only acquiring conventional hypersonics and
have been very clear about the way that we've messaged that we
think that it'd be--you know, it'd be a lot less likely that
any country including the PRC would view shots of U.S.
hypersonic systems as potentially carrying nuclear weapons
because we are not developing nuclear-armed hypersonics.
Mr. Moulton. Well, I agree that we think that.
Mr. McCormick, from an intelligence perspective do China or
Russia--does China or Russia have any doubt that our
hypersonics program is not developing dual-capable systems that
could be equipped with nuclear weapons?
Mr. McCormick. I think we--I would prefer to take that in
the closed session.
Mr. Moulton. Well, let me tell you, if you can't answer
that here I think we know what the answer is. So it's great
that we think our hypersonics are not strategically
destabilizing even though you have admitted that our
adversaries' hypersonics are.
But it doesn't matter what we think in this situation. It
matters what Russia or China thinks, because if we launch a
bunch of hypersonics into China to get at targets that we want
to get in China and they think or they even might think that
that salvo has nuclear weapons on it that they can't even tell
where they're going because that's the whole point of
hypersonics, right.
They could be going to purely military targets but they
won't know that because the whole point of hypersonics is they
can veer over and hit Beijing or whatever else at the last
minute. That's the whole point of this weapon system. That does
not sound very strategically stabilizing to me.
Dr. Horowitz, if we actually do receive the answer to the
simple question of how you plan to use these weapons in
December as promised can you just explain why it's taking so
long to get a simple answer to this simple question?
Dr. Horowitz. I will have to take that back. I think from
our perspective there are a couple----
Mr. Moulton. You can't explain?
Dr. Horowitz. There are a couple of ways to think about
this. One is because these weapon systems are still in--are
still in development that concepts of operation for their
potential employment are also still in development.
Mr. Moulton. Which is exactly contradicting the advice that
we gave to the Department through the Bipartisan Future Defense
Task Force report, which is not to go spend billions of dollars
of taxpayer money developing weapons that you don't know how to
use.
Okay. Continue.
Dr. Horowitz. The Department, whenever it develops new
weapon systems, develops concepts for--develops concepts of
employment for their use but the specifics regarding those
concepts of deployment I think some of the details that you're
really looking for are the kinds of details that the department
has for any weapon system when those capabilities--when those
capabilities transition.
Certainly, the Department has spent some time thinking
about possibilities in this regard that we can talk about in
the closed session.
Well, I am delighted to know that $15 billion later the
Department is thinking about possibilities for how you will use
these weapons. We certainly hope to have an answer by December.
I rest my case.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Indeed, it is
bipartisan. I want to thank the Ranking Member Seth Moulton for
his passion today and his service, and with his military
background he is a person, who in a bipartisan manner, we look
forward to working with you.
Also, I want to thank the extraordinary panel here today.
Chairman Lamborn is doing a great job. We've never had seven
witnesses simultaneously. So thank you. It's really an
achievement.
Mr. McCormick, with war criminal Putin's invasion of
Ukraine we observed the assistance of the Democratic People's
Republic of North Korea and Iran have provided. With the
alliance of dictators with rule of gun invading democracies
with rule of law it's concerning to see the cooperation among
our adversaries and the Western civilization adversaries.
Is there evidence that suggests that the axis of evil--war
criminal Putin, the regime in Tehran, and the Chinese Communist
Party--are cooperating in the development of hypersonic
missiles, exchanging technologies for collaboration within
their own industrial base?
Mr. McCormick. Yes. I would like to reference the testimony
of the Director of National Intelligence either earlier today
or earlier this week that did talk about increasing
collaboration between those actors.
I think on hypersonics it's still to be seen exactly what
collaboration may occur but we are very concerned about the
increasing ties between those adversaries.
Mr. Wilson. And, indeed, too, Dr. Weber, it's critical that
the United States cooperate as we see the axis of evil
cooperating with their foreign partners in the development of
hypersonic missiles and share the cost in developing hypersonic
programs.
Expanding hypersonic program efforts with our foreign
partners such as NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]
partners, Sweden, and South Korea would undoubtedly strengthen
our ability to deter foreign adversaries.
We know firsthand of the technological industrial
capabilities of South Korea and which is well represented here
in Washington by Ambassador Hyundong Cho. Additionally,
yesterday was historic and something that America and the world
should recognize and that is that the formal admission of
Sweden into NATO and ending 200 years of neutrality.
The Swedish industrial capabilities are crucial to
establishing peace through strength. Swedish Prime Minister Ulf
Kristersson deposited the instrument of accession March 7th to
join with NATO and, indeed, Sweden is capably represented here
in Washington by Ambassador Urban Ahlin.
And so this is a time that we should be working together
and we do have the extraordinary example of the trilateral
security partnership between Australia, the United States, and
the United Kingdom and our bilateral plan with other partners.
And so, indeed, Dr. Weber, is the United States looking to
expand cooperation with other foreign partners in the
development of our hypersonic and counter hypersonic programs?
Dr. Weber. Thank you for the question, sir. Certainly, that
is one of our highest priorities is to establish allied
partnerships to develop hypersonic and counter hypersonic
capabilities.
As you noted, we are working very hard with our U.K. and
Australia counterparts under the AUKUS [Australia-United
Kingdom-United States security cooperation agreement] framework
to identify collaboration opportunities there, again, for both
hypersonics and counter hypersonics.
We're also working very closely with Norway and we've had
introductory discussions with a number of countries as well.
Mr. Wilson. And it's just so mutually beneficial and the
best way and we--I was really pleased the--you can correct me--
the first hypersonic missile attack that I am aware of was on
Ukraine--on the civilian population of Ukraine and,
fortunately, somehow, I don't know how it was done but it was
taken down.
And so whatever capabilities and, sadly, we can see from
the invasion of Ukraine, the invasion of Israel, that we need
to be developing capabilities and we have now real world
situations that should be addressed, and over and over again
it's just inconceivable in the 21st century that we have a land
war in Europe, that we have mass slaughter in Israel, and then
we have the threats and challenge to the people of Taiwan, and
I hope every effort is made to preserve the borders of Ukraine,
of Israel, Taiwan, and America and we look forward to working
with each of you.
I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Representative Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. First, thank you very much. Extremely
important hearing. Thank you for bringing it to our attention
and for all of the witnesses here.
There's a lot of dancing around some fundamental questions
that have gone on here. I recall not too long ago we had a
long, long debate about the LSRO [Long-Range Standoff Weapon],
whether it was conventional or nuclear, and I think it's
probably currently dual capable. And now Mr. Moulton has raised
the question once again of this new system--is it nuclear or is
it conventional.
And, Mr. Horowitz, you danced around this question. I want
to put it to you very directly. Can you confirm at this public
hearing on the record that we are not developing this new
system--this hypersonic system for nuclear capability and that
it is only for conventional?
Dr. Horowitz. The only hypersonic weapons the United States
is developing are conventional weapons.
Mr. Garamendi. And not nuclear?
Dr. Horowitz. Not nuclear weapons.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. There's been a lot of discussion
about the capabilities of the hypersonic and its effectiveness
and the effect that it has on a particular target. I think this
is what Mr. Moulton wanted to get to and I guess that'll be in
the classified setting.
The witnesses here have raised questions about the use of a
ballistic missile with a maneuverable warhead.
General White, I think you did this specifically with your
testimony with regard to the HACM--a HACM with a maneuverable
warhead.
How does that differ in its effect with a hypersonic weapon
that also is maneuverable?
General White. I can certainly take that question. I don't
believe it was me that referred to it. I believe it was Mr.
McCormick in his testimony.
But the bottom line is is the point he was making in his
testimony, essentially, what a hypersonic weapon is--is
essentially a cruise missile with ballistic capabilities, and
if you want to add to that I will----
Mr. McCormick. Sure. I will just add that our adversaries
are looking at a broad variety of systems, some closer to
ballistic missiles, some closer to cruise missiles, and they--
there's a very large design space that they're exploring and
each of those bring different challenges to defending against.
And so when we say hypersonic system there's actually a lot
of diversity even in--within that field of weapons that we see
being developed.
Mr. Garamendi. I believe, Lieutenant General Dale White, in
your written testimony ``as a self-powered cruise missile HACM
provides complementary trajectories to boost glide systems such
as the ARRW,'' which I understand to be a hypersonic, imposing
additional cost on our strategic competitors by increasing the
complexity.
General White. Yes, sir. What I was referring to there is
that the hypersonic attack cruise missile is a cruise missile
that has speed, range, and maneuverability like we talked about
and so that is the focus of that particular capability.
Mr. Garamendi. And how does that differ from a hypersonic
with respect to----
General White. So it's exactly what Mr. McCormick said. The
dependence on how--and I can't go into too much detail here--
all hypersonics are technically not created equal in terms of
from a technology perspective. But I can certainly go into
greater detail and I think I plan to during the closed session.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, the GAO [Government Accountability
Office] suggests that a hypersonic is about $17 billion and a
cruise missile or a standard missile with a maneuverable
warhead is about one-third less to achieve the same effect.
Anybody disagree with that analysis?
General White. So I think that analysis has to be highly
contingent on how many you're buying, for example.
Mr. Garamendi. Doesn't everything?
General White. Yeah. So the greater quantity would be a
determination. I know there was some questioning from Dr.
LaPlante and the Honorable Shyu early on about the cost of
weapons.
And so we sent over an RFI [request for information] that
basically laid out some of the details on that and quantities
have a significant impact over the overall cost. But in
comparison there is----
Mr. Garamendi. The more you buy the cheaper they are per
unit.
General White. Yes, sir. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. And the total cost.
I am going to yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Representative DesJarlais.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Chairman.
I know the chairman has already discussed ground test
infrastructure a little bit and you addressed some of the
bottlenecks but I wanted to go just maybe a step further with
Dr. Weber and Mr. Rumford.
We know it's a painstaking process to modernize aging
ground test infrastructure but it's picked up speed over the
last decade due to bipartisan efforts in this committee as well
as the work done within your department.
Can you give the committee an assessment of our ground test
infrastructure today? Are we moving fast enough and what areas
of improvement remain?
Mr. Rumford. Thank you for that question. We are investing
heavily and thank you for the support for the investments
needed in our ground test infrastructure.
As I said earlier, it's essential to be able to understand
how well these weapon systems work. I will also say replicating
the hypersonic flight environment in a grounded facility is
extremely complicated and so there's a lot of challenges to be
able to make that happen.
So these facilities are complicated to design. I will say
that while we have a whole nation approach and we're looking at
both capabilities that are in the private sector and in
academia as well as our allied nations we are also very focused
on improvements with our own organic DOD test capabilities.
Our crown jewel in DOD ground test is at the Arnold
Engineering Development Complex in Middle Tennessee. These are
the engineers and scientists that helped us win the space race,
helped us win the Cold War, and they're helping us win in this
competition that we're facing.
Yeah, as you mentioned, taking aging instrumentation and
aging facilities and modernizing them is--does have limitations
and challenges to it. That is why we've also embarked on some
new facilities.
We have two new facilities being developed in Tennessee at
the Arnold Engineering Development Complex to get after and
better understand hypersonics both in material testing, which
is essential to understand and improve the maneuverability and
the range of the weapon is how well that ARRW shell works on
that weapon system, as well as the--for an air-breathing cruise
missile how well that propulsion system works and how we can
better characterize the uncertainties of that test regime.
And so we are making major investments and with the
continued support of Congress we'll continue to accelerate and
improve the bottlenecks that we currently have.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. For the second time, Dr. Weber or
either of you, you were kind enough to meet with me last week
in my office and you all highlighted an interest interesting
issue surrounding the flexibility that would be helpful in
expediting these modernization efforts particularly with some
of the supply chain issues and some of these construction
materials and replacement parts that have long lead times.
Can you briefly touch on how you're grappling with this
issue within the department and how this committee can be
helpful in this effort?
Dr. Weber. Thank you for the question, Congressman. So,
certainly--so we are making investments now to address those
critical items that do have long lead times.
When we've worked very closely with the program offices,
the military acquisition programs that we've been talking
about, and they start looking ahead to production, you know, we
learn from them what are the long lead items that would delay
the production or slow the production right down.
So, we're making investments in the department to address
that. So, we are bringing on new industry to expand our
industrial base to increase their capacity and also give us the
resilience that we need.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. And I have a minute and a half, Dr.
Weber.
When Secretary Shyu appeared before this committee last
month we briefly talked about the value of reusable
hypersonics.
Can you describe in a minute or less the concept of
reusable hypersonics aircraft and what it'll mean for our
ability to project force over China and how will this
capability allows us to overwhelm Chinese anti-access aerial
denial capabilities for critical ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance] and strike missions?
Dr. Weber. Certainly. Thank you for the question.
Yes, sir. So we are looking at reusable hypersonic aircraft
for responsive strike in ISR missions so we're currently
conducting studies to understand the military utility of that
and we were also doing some work at the science and technology
level to address the critical technologies that we would need
to burn down in order to move to the next phase for an activity
or program like that.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. And I will yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. Vasquez--Representative Vasquez.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all the
witnesses before the subcommittee to discuss this very
important topic.
I proudly represent New Mexico's Second Congressional
District, home to Holloman Air Force Base and White Sands
Missile Range, the birthplace of America's missile and space
program.
New Mexico's testing and manufacturing capabilities are
critical in keeping the United States at the forefront of
innovation and there's no better place to display those
capabilities than at Holloman.
Dr. Weber, the high-speed test track at Holloman Air Force
Base is one of the Department of Defense's most valuable tools
to test and evaluate hypersonic weapons in a safe, controlled,
and cost effective manner.
Unfortunately, like many pieces of critical defense
infrastructure the test track for years has been in critical
needs of significant updates.
What steps is the department taking to modernize the test
track and how important is it to maintain critical test and
evaluation infrastructure like that found in Holloman for the
future of hypersonic testing in this country?
Dr. Weber. Thank you for the question.
The Holloman high-speed test track is a critical asset to
our development of hypersonic weapons. We use it extensively
for warhead testing, lethality testing, before we actually
conduct those tests through flight tests. So it's a critical
enabler for us.
We also use it to look at weather effects as well, to look
at what are the weather effects or erosion effects on a
hypersonic weapon. So TRMC--I will pass this to my colleague
from TRC but they're looking at, you know, modifications or
upgrades to the Holloman high-speed test track so I will just
pass it to them.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you.
Mr. Rumford. Thank you for the question. Being able to
replicate hypersonic flight on high-speed test tracks is an
essential ingredient to the success of developing hypersonic
systems.
So it is essential to have this test capability. As Dr.
Weber said, we are making some modernization efforts and we are
improving some things. But simply put, as a nation we need a
new track.
When we modernize the track we have to take the track
offline for a period of time, which is the exact opposite of
what we want to be doing when we're trying to go fast and take
on more risk.
So while we've been making some modernizations and trying
to make sure that we don't impact the speed of testing, we are
studying and embarking upon a capability to build an additional
new track so that we can have a better capability for our
nation.
The track we have now it's 70-plus years old. It was
originally designed to test ejection seats in airplanes and
over the years it was modified to be able to do things like
test faster systems and missile defense capabilities and
lethality tests.
But if we're really going to move after and get after
testing hypersonics we're going to need a new track capability
in our nation.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Mr. Mumford. Thank you, Dr. Weber.
Like a lot of military infrastructure research and development
infrastructure in New Mexico, a lot of it is 70-plus years old.
But yet we continue to be the nation's testing ground.
Now, sure, we'll give you the free--the first free mile to
space for free because we're at 5,500 feet of elevation. But we
need more in terms of investments from the Department of
Defense in these critical facilities.
Now, beyond the integral role that we play in testing
hypersonic weapons we're also a leader in manufacturing key
components for hypersonic and other critical weapon systems.
Dr. Weber, what would you say are the biggest challenges to
the department that they face in recruiting and retaining a
workforce of well-trained civilians and contractors to meet the
development and production demands at places like Holloman?
Dr. Weber. Yes. So thank you for the question, and that
also is a priority for us as workforce development. As a matter
of fact, our joint hypersonic transition office they are the
lead for our workforce development for hypersonics--for our
hypersonics critical technology area.
So it's important that we work very hard to attract the
scientists, the STEM [science, technology, engineering, and
math] students, as well as the technicians. So it's not just
the scientists and engineers but also the technicians as well
and the skilled laborers who can help us with production.
So through the University Consortium for Applied
Hypersonics, for instance, we have--we're funding research with
over 300 undergraduate students to get them training in science
and technology associated with hypersonics.
We're also working to establish internship programs for
those students to come and work in government or industry labs,
and then we also have outreach with community colleges and tech
schools to try to attract the skilled laborers that--you know,
that are coming up in those educational facilities to come work
for us in hypersonics to support our production lines.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you so much, Doctor. And, again, I've
said it before, if you can test it in New Mexico you should be
able to design it and manufacture it in New Mexico. You should
be able to hire New Mexicans for this job. This is incredibly
important to me, especially with some of the best and brightest
students coming out of places like the University of New Mexico
and New Mexico State University. Thank you all for your service
to our country and for your time to discuss this important
topic.
And I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Representative Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. Thanks for being here. It's a very
important topic.
Dr. Horowitz and Dr. Weber, so China is putting nuclear
warheads on the hypersonics. Do we have any evidence of Russia
doing anything like that?
Okay. Maybe it could be someone else.
Mr. McCormick. Yes. Thank you for the question. Yes, we
have--believe that both China and Russia are looking at
conventional and nuclear-armed hypersonic weapons.
Mr. Bacon. So then I go back to the original two I was
going to ask. Are we confident that it's not right for us to do
the same?
If Russia and China are putting nuclear warheads on
hypersonic delivery systems why is it that we're not? And I
know you mentioned a little bit because it's confusing--is it
conventional warhead or nuclear warhead--but it doesn't seem to
be stopping the Russians or Chinese.
So are we confident this is the right decision?
Dr. Horowitz. I think the department is confident in the
nuclear deterrent and that's something that we could--you know,
we could talk about further in a different session--in a closed
session.
But I think the department has every confidence in the
triad and is making tremendous investments to ensure the
modernization of the triad. We view hypersonic weapons in
particular as most useful as regionally ranged conventionally
armed systems because of the way we think that they enhance the
capability of the joint force to--you know, to complete a
variety of different missions.
Mr. Bacon. So based on the expense of each delivery
vehicle--you mentioned this a little bit--what are the best
targets go after? Because they're expensive so you have to get
a value--you have to hit a valuable target. So what is the
right kind of targets?
Dr. Weber. So, sir, thank you for the question. We
obviously can't talk about the specific targets or missions
here in this session. But each of the systems that we're
developing have different attributes.
Just like other weapons in our munitions portfolio or tools
in your toolbox they have different attributes that make them
most suitable for different missions--for various missions.
And so that's why we're developing a suite of hypersonic
capabilities. The suite of hypersonic capabilities that we're
developing complement each other and they complement the rest
of our joint force.
The other thing that's important to understand is that
we're developing capabilities that can be deployed from all of
our domains--air, land, and sea--our air, land and sea domain
and that's important as well because that complicates the
adversaries' decision calculus, which increases the deterrence
effect, and it also makes it more difficult for the adversary
to defend against.
Mr. Bacon. This is my concern is that the expense of each
weapon you have to have very particular high value targets that
make sense. It's like shooting--us shooting Patriot missiles
at, you know, a 122-millimeter rocket or something. Just got to
make sure it's worth the value.
So talk about the air, land, and sea domains. Who
determines the right mix? Because if I understand right the
air-launched portion is actually fairly--it's less expensive
because it's easy to configure the hypersonic to the airplanes
already.
But with the surface ships, the subs, and the ground you
have to deliver or develop the whole launcher, which I think is
a lot--adds a lot of price tag to it. So how do we determine
the right mix?
Dr. Weber. Yes, sir. So ultimately, that is determined
through the recommendations in our program and budget review
that we conduct each year in the Department of Defense.
So in our program and budget review there are a number of
studies and analysis that inform that--studies and analysis
performed by the Joint Staff, by CAPE [Office of Cost
Assessment and Program Evaluation], by acquisition and
sustainment research and engineering and the services.
So we bring together a number of studies and analysis to
inform what are the capability gaps that we have, what are the
needs, what are the solutions that we have to address those
needs, and we address those collectively through our program
and budget review which result in recommendations that
ultimately end up in the President's budget.
Mr. Bacon. Okay. Finally, a quick question for General
White.
Secretary Kendall recently noted that the Air Force is more
committed to the hypersonic attack cruise missile instead of
the air-launched rapid response weapon, yet I think we're still
testing both.
What is the service position and which one, or is it both?
General White. So right now we are still in the final
phases of ARRW and we will be testing that. We'll be wrapping
that testing up second quarter of '24 [2024] and then, again,
when we we're in the classified session I can go into a little
bit of detail about the difference between those two
capabilities specifically and it will highlight, again, what
characteristics you need based on the mission set.
Mr. Bacon. So both weapon systems still may be in play?
General White. Currently right now we do not have the ARRW
in the '25 budget. However, we are continuing to analyze the
test data that we have from that capability.
Mr. Bacon. Okay. Thank you, gentlemen. Appreciate it. I
yield.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
seven witnesses. I think this is a record for the amount of
witnesses at one of the hearings I've attended.
Fielding our own hypersonics capability seem to be eluding
us even as our peer adversaries are finding success in this
technology.
This is a technology that might cost the taxpayers billions
without delivering the intended result. But it is a technology
we need to continue pursuing to keep pace with China and Russia
and to allow ourselves to better understand the threat.
I think research is critical to understanding and deploying
new--any new and emerging capability. Our nation is lucky to
have some of the top universities in the world leading cutting-
edge research.
Cal Poly San Luis Obispo is in my district and it's working
with the Air Force research laboratory and building a Ludwig II
wind tunnel capable of Mach 6 to conduct hypersonic research.
Dr. Weber or Dr. Horowitz, can you speak to the importance
that university research plays in supporting the development of
capabilities like hypersonics and do you think it is important
for the department to continue these types of research
partnerships?
Dr. Weber. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Our universities are one of our asymmetric edges. They're
very important to developing our hypersonic capabilities. They
bring the best and the brightest ideas and scientists and
engineers into the ecosystem that we need to develop hypersonic
systems.
As I mentioned before, with the Joint Hypersonic Transition
Office we established the university consortium. We have over
100 universities in that university consortium and that we're
funding to do applied research.
So one of the key things about this university consortium
is that we are working with them to conduct applied research in
addition to the basic research that's funded by our service
labs. So that partnership is key.
Again, it's one of our asymmetric advantages that we have
and the relationships with the universities are also important
for developing--identifying and developing those next-
generation capabilities as well.
Mr. Carbajal. Dr. Horowitz.
Dr. Horowitz. Absolutely. I agree with Dr. Weber
completely. Our universities are an enormous comparative
advantage and our investment in them and the knowledge they
produce has been critical to the military technological edge
that we've enjoyed for decades and hope to continue to enjoy
whether in hypersonics or in other areas.
Mr. Carbajal. Your answers would have been perfect if you
said the best universities are in my district.
But one potential way to drive down costs of hypersonic
systems is to make them reusable. Dr. Weber, can you describe
the concept of a reusable hypersonic aircraft and what it will
mean for our ability to project force over China? How would
this capability allow us to thwart or overwhelm Chinese anti-
access area denial capabilities for critical ISR and strike
missions?
Dr. Weber. Thank you for the question.
So a reusable hypersonic aircraft would take off and land
on a conventional runway just like any other aircraft but it
would accelerate to hypersonic speeds and cruise at hypersonic
speeds to perform missions.
The missions that we've identified would be responsive
strike and ISR so it would give us the ability to deliver
effects and to collect ISR very quickly, much quicker than our
traditional bomber forces would.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
Dr. Weber, can you describe the timetable for development
of reusable hypersonic aircraft and what are some of the key
technology development targets you're looking at?
Dr. Weber. Thank you. So we are currently addressing
critical technologies for hypersonic aircraft. With reusable
aircraft one of the key differences between that system or that
application and, say, a weapon, of course, are the reusable
structures.
So there's a lot of work that we have to do in the science
and technology world to address the materials and structures
for reusable hypersonic aircraft. Also, the propulsion systems
are different in the sense that they're a combined propulsion
system as opposed to single--a single type of propulsion
system.
So reusable materials and structures, propulsion systems.
Power generation is another key technology.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. In 2018, Congress recognized
hypersonics was one of the six key technologies in the office
of Under Secretary of Defense and Research, and the engineering
was established to drive the technological development required
to secure the homeland and warfighter deployed abroad.
Mr. Weber, how confident are you that we are on track to
lead on this technology and if we are not there yet what will
it take to get there?
Dr. Weber. So thank you, Congressman. So I am confident
that this--that we can deliver this technology and this
capability into the hands of the warfighter. It's important for
us to maintain our national will and our national commitment to
this area.
We have made good progress and we are at the threshold of
delivering capabilities to the warfighter in the next couple of
years.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. I thought I would ask you some
softball today since you were getting grilled earlier.
With that, Mr. Chair, I will yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank each of you
for being here today.
As I've said many times before Huntsville, Alabama is no
stranger to hypersonics. I am thankful for the chance to have
this discussion with all of you today and especially glad to
see one of Redstone Arsenal's own here today, Lieutenant
General Rasch. Welcome.
The standard of excellence and dedication to the mission
set by RCCTO [Rapid Capabilities and Critical Technologies
Office] should be an example for the entire department. Dr.
Weber, I also appreciate you taking the time to stop by my
office last week.
My first question is for you, General Rasch, and Admiral
Wolfe. The Navy conventional prompt strike--CPS--and Army long-
range hypersonic weapons program were structured to go into
production earlier than traditional missile development
programs once the flight test phase is complete.
Do you believe the CPS and the LRHW will complete their
flight test phase this year?
General Rasch. Thank you for the question, and it is good
to be here. Absolutely. We're doing everything we need to do
within both the Navy program and the Army program with our
industry partners to get ready to continue on with our flight
test program this year.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Can you briefly speak to how the
joint nature of these programs has contributed toward their
success thus far?
Admiral Wolfe. I will take that one to start.
I would say, sir, as we've talked about in the past this is
a program that I think is unique to some of the things we've
done in the Department of Defense.
Although we're not a joint program, as General Rasch and I
have talked many times we are so linked to a common success
which is a common all up around which we will deploy both in
an--from an Army tell from a Zumwalt or from a Virginia-class.
That makes us very unique, and although we are budgeted
separately, we run our individual portions separately,
everything we do has to be done together because it's not one
or the other being successful. It's both being successful.
And I think that's driven us, driven us to get to the point
we got although, arguably, yes, we've had some challenges. But
I don't personally believe a traditional program with one
service doing it would be where we're collectively at today.
Mr. Strong. I agree.
Last month the press reported on a meeting between the
Secretary of Defense and the defense industry asking companies,
and I quote, ``to accelerate hypersonic weapon development as
U.S. lags behind China,'' close quote.
While I agree with the sentiment and glad the department is
communicating with industry the principal way to do this is
through contracts and funding, putting your money where your
mouth is.
Admiral Wolfe and General Rasch, do you believe the common
hypersonic glide body program has the manufacturing
infrastructure and resources ready for production?
General Rasch. Congressman, with this committee's support
and Congress' support over the last several years we have made
the investments in the common hyper-glide body industrial base
to support the requirements for the Army's program in the near
term and the Navy's program as well with flexibility to scale
up in the out years as needed.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Would you say in general these
programs have gone faster and cost less than typical missile
development programs?
General Rasch. These programs, CPS and LRHW, are
significantly faster--a much more aggressive schedule than
traditional programs. We're 5 years--we're into the fifth year
of this activity from the Army's perspective. Traditional Army
missile programs any way--are anywhere 7 to 10 years. So we're
well ahead of schedule.
Cost--you know, it's expensive going fast. You pay a price.
But then again, we're seeing a lot of that up front versus on a
traditional program it would be spread out over a longer period
of time.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Mr. Rumford, our national hypersonics test infrastructure
is inadequate to meet current and future demands of current and
next-generation hypersonic programs. How is the Test Resource
Management Center balancing investments across industry and
academia to complement government facilities and accelerate
testing and fielding of hypersonic weapons?
Mr. Rumford. Thank you for that question. We definitely
need to have a whole of nation approach for our test
infrastructure. We have such a bottleneck within our own
government facilities we're not going to be able to close the
gaps our nation needs to if we only rely on government
facilities.
So we absolutely are partnering with the private sector and
there are some very innovative approaches that they're taking
that is giving us new opportunities to do testing, as well as
looking at what availability that we have in academia and
academia tunnels as well as our allies equally also have
hypersonic test capabilities, and we're looking to leverage all
of those to be able to meet the gaps that we need to take--we
need to cover. Thank you.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And last but not least we have the
representative from Indiana, Representative Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rumford, what else do you need from Congress to scale
the MACH-TB program?
Mr. Rumford. So MACH-TB--thank you for that question. MACH-
TB is actually a game changer to how we take things on. If you
look at traditional acquisition and what the three gentlemen to
my left have to do is often when they're doing their all around
tests there's a whole set of components that are all being
tested for the very first time.
What MACH-TB has really brought is this game-changing
approach that we have--hypersonic flying testbeds. Things that
we actually can't test in a ground test facility like a new
radio system, a new comms link, we can test in a very reliable,
repeatable type solution with MACH-TB. So MACH-TB is an
essential solution that we want to move forward on.
From a standpoint of support from Congress absolutely is
the approach of funding. We definitely need funding to be able
to move forward and to scale the program to the size we need.
From an authorities standpoint we believe that we mostly
have all the authorities that we have. One of the things that
we're looking at when we use private sector activities is
understanding that public-private relationship and who has the
responsibility.
So, for example, part of the MACH-TB program is looking at
leveraging commercial space ventures like Varda that is
launching into space, and then we're looking at reusing the
reentry aspects as a hypersonic profile.
When we use commercial sector like that--private sector
like that, understanding who has the insurance responsibility
and understanding how that balance is it's wonderful when
things go right but we need to be prepared when things go wrong
and having--and so we're embarking on a new era of a public-
private partnership and that's where we'll seek support from
Congress so we can really take MACH-TB to the level that we
need it to be. Thank you.
Mr. Banks. Okay. So bear with me a little bit.
If Congress increased funding what could you do with it? If
we gave you just flat funding, maybe what the President
requested, what does that mean? Either way, give us--give the
committee an idea of what more you could do with more money or
what would happen if we flatlined or decreased the funding?
Mr. Rumford. So what we could do--thank you for the
question, sir.
What we could do with more funding simply put is more
flights and that's what we need. The limited opportunity of
flight tests means that new technology developers have to wait
in some cases months, if not years, to be able to get on a
flight manifest to run.
If we start having MACH-TB flights much more frequently and
we're designing an infrastructure to be able to do 50 flights a
year suddenly you can now be in a mode where a technologist can
be developing their technology at the fastest pace they can and
ready to be able to go on a flight test as soon as it's
available.
It's like having an airport that has a lot of opportunities
to get flights or having an airport that flies an airplane once
every three months. We really need that flight volume up.
Mr. Banks. Good way to put it.
How would failing to meet the testing schedule harm other
hypersonic programs?
Mr. Rumford. It's like molasses to an engine. It slows
everything down by not having that volume of flight throughput.
So we absolutely want to be able to increase the number of
flight tests that we can do.
Mr. Banks. Okay. I really appreciate what you do. I think
it's really important. I speak on behalf of everyone in Indiana
in saying it would be great to host you in Indiana at Naval
Surface Warfare Center Crane.
If you would be able to come I would be--I would personally
like to join you and show you the important work that's being
done at Crane on behalf of all Hoosiers and everyone who is
very proud of what's going on there.
Mr. Rumford. Absolutely. My father's a proud graduate of
Purdue. My family's originally from Indiana. I would be--I
welcome an opportunity to take that visit, sir.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Chairman, we got him on the record so I am
looking forward to hosting him in Indiana.
We saw on the President's budget request yesterday that the
fielding of the Navy's conventional prompt strike missile has
been delayed a year and that the Navy does not plan to buy any
more CPS missiles in fiscal year 2025.
Vice Admiral Wolfe, can you confirm that this delay and
budget cut is the result of the conventional prompt strike
program's testing struggles and not the result of a decision by
the Navy to deprioritize the missile?
Admiral Wolfe. Yes, sir. So it's not--so we're not slowing
down getting to Zumwalt, okay. Yes, some of the issues that
we've had have slowed down us getting into the Army fielding,
which then the Navy falls behind that.
But we are still all in, moving forward to get to Zumwalt
quickly as we can. That's first and foremost. That has not
changed.
Some of the funding requests that you have seen have been a
result of trying to balance the program and some budget
instability even as we try to understand across what we might
get as an appropriation in '24 and then trying to understand
where that would put us in '25 to get the entire program
executed.
So that's around a procurement issue. That's not a lack of
wanting to get to every one of these platforms as rapidly as we
can.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Lamborn. And, Representative, you mentioned Crane,
which is in Indiana, which does great work, and Purdue
University. I've visited them as well and they have excellent--
a growing hypersonic capability on campus.
We now have--about to go to votes. They moved it up half an
hour on us. So in about three minutes they're going to call
votes.
But they should be done, roughly, at 5:15. So as much as I
wish we could do this before we head off to votes we're going
to have to take a recess for approximately 45 minutes and then
reconvene at 5:15 for a closed session in the SCIF [secure
compartmentalized information facility] upstairs.
So thank you for your cooperation on that. We will now be
in recess.
[Recess.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 12, 2024

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 12, 2024

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 12, 2024

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN

Mr. Lamborn. Dr. Weber, as we race to field first generation
hypersonic weapons, what can we do to drive down costs of these systems
in order to get to the scale we are looking for and what capabilities
will we need in next generation hypersonics?
Dr. Weber. The Department has made significant strides in the
design, manufacturing, and testing of hypersonic weapons that can
perform a range of missions from land, sea, and air domains. These
systems are a uniquely responsive and survivable component of the
broader Department of Defense portfolio of weapon systems. The Office
of the Secretary of Defense has been working closely with the Military
Services and industry to assess and identify major challenges to
industry's capability and capacity to produce hypersonic munitions at
higher rates and lower costs. Based on these assessments, the
Department is making focused investments to increase industry's
capability to manufacture hypersonic munitions at scale, reduce
component production costs, and build a resilient supply chain for
hypersonic munitions. These investments are being made in three primary
areas:

The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Acquisition and Sustainment (OUSD(A&S)) Innovation Capability and
Modernization Office is improving production timelines and capacity for
hypersonic munitions, including establishing a second source for large
solid rocket motors to strengthen the hypersonic munitions supply
chain, increase capacity, and reduce production costs.

The OUSD(A&S) Defense Production Act Investments Office
has invested in projects to increase capacity and producibility of
elements for hypersonic munitions, such as high temperature material
components and expanding production capacity of printed circuit board
assemblies, which should drive down the cost of hypersonic munitions
components.

The OSD Manufacturing Technology Program is addressing
carbon-carbon composites, advanced materials, and subsystem
manufacturing challenges by using nontraditional suppliers, advanced
manufacturing technologies, and additive manufacturing processes. The
Department and industry will apply the manufacturing experience and
lessons learned from building prototypes of hypersonic munitions to
gain further efficiencies in future production.
Furthermore, a strong demand signal, with a commitment to larger
lot buys that leverage efficiencies of scale, should result in
additional hypersonic munitions cost reductions. The Department
continues to engage with traditional and non-traditional defense
contractors to seek innovative manufacturing approaches to lower the
cost for hypersonic munitions. Key capability enhancements for next
generation hypersonic strike systems will include advanced guidance and
navigation capabilities through the integration of advanced sensors,
communications and alternate position navigation and timing systems.
This will enable enhanced effectiveness for our strike systems for
engagement of moving and relocatable time-critical targets in future
contested environments.
Next generation designs will incorporate manufacturing and
production lessons from first generation systems to improve production
efficiency and reduce cost. Next generation defensive hypersonic
capabilities are reflected in the Glide Phase Interceptor, which is
intended to provide engagement of hypersonic threats during their
glide/cruise phase to provide U.S. forces with a robust layered
defense. Next generation capabilities will also include reusable
hypersonic platforms to enable survivable, long-range airborne strike
and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance.
Mr. Lamborn. VADM Wolfe, it is our understanding that MACH-TB is
used by Missile Defense Agency, Air Force Research Lab, and others. How
is the Strategic Weapons System and Conventional Prompt Strike Programs
using MACH-TB?
Admiral Wolfe. With Congress' support, the Multi-Service Advanced
Capability Hypersonics Test Bed (MACH-TB) program was initiated by the
Conventional Prompt Strike (CPS) Program and Naval Surface Warfare
Center (NSWC), Crane, Indiana in 2022 to accelerate hypersonic
technology development by increasing the capacity for hypersonic flight
testing. The CPS Program utilizes MACH-TB as a critical test and
evaluation partner in rapidly designing, developing, and fielding a
hypersonic capability to the warfighter. In Fiscal Year 2023 (FY23),
CPS participated in four flights with MACH-TB, which included more than
20 experiments and the first full-scale test that will enable future
testing of a low cost and modular experimental glide body. In
partnership with MACH-TB, the CPS Program tested a new navigation
technology that was developed, prototyped, and integrated and flown on
a sounding rocket in just 14 months. The MACH-TB program is now managed
by the OUSD(R&E) Test Resource Management Center (TRMC), which will
ensure that the hypersonics flight test bed is a centralized hypersonic
testing capability that can be leveraged by hypersonic programs across
the Department of Defense, industry, and academia stakeholders. The CPS
program will continue to partner with the TRMC to address the current
and future needs of the CPS program's developmental sub-scale and full-
scale testing using MACH-TB. As SSP continues with development
activities for the TRIDENT II D5LE2 and W93/Mk7 programs, we
continuously engage with stakeholders across the nuclear and
conventional enterprise to identify opportunities to leverage testing
or technology maturation opportunities to support concurrent
development across the integrated deterrent mission.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. Throughout Russia's aggression against Ukraine, we've
seen their usage of hypersonic weapons against Ukrainian forces. With
each use, Russia is likely collecting valuable data that will further
help develop their hypersonic programs. Has the United States been able
to collect our own data on Russia's hypersonic capabilities and realize
our current capacity to effectively counter?
Dr. Weber. I respectfully defer to Mr. McCormick, who will provide
a classified response fully informed by the Intelligence Community.
Mr. Wilson. I am concerned with the three successive flight test
failures of the All Up Round that is common to both the Army's Long
Range Hypersonic Weapon and the Navy's Conventional Prompt Strike
programs. Can you explain how you are applying the lessons learned from
these failures and implementing them into the re-assess and re-train
phases leading up to the next scheduled flight test?
Admiral Wolfe. The Navy's Conventional Prompt Strike (CPS) and
Army's Long Range Hypersonic Weapon (LRHW) programs have pursued an
aggressive schedule to develop a common hypersonic weapon that will be
the Army and Navy's first. Although CPS and LRHW successfully initiated
the first flight test of the newly developed weapon system less than
four years after the initiation of the programs, recent tests were not
completed as expected. In each case, the Navy, Army, prime contractor,
and government national team rapidly identified root causes, completed
corrective actions, and are working to expeditiously return to the
range. This series of test events has provided the CPS and LRHW
programs valuable data and lessons learned that are being incorporated
into a rigorous test schedule replan and a series of additional design
reviews. This additional effort, planned for FY24, will achieve
additional critical knowledge points to reduce risk on the path to
return to the range. It is crucial to view these setbacks as providing
the Department an invaluable learning experience that can pave the way
for future success and foster advancements in our hypersonic
capability.
Mr. Wilson. I am concerned with the three successive flight test
failures of the All Up Round that is common to both the Army's Long
Range Hypersonic Weapon and the Navy's Conventional Prompt Strike
programs. Can you explain how you are applying the lessons learned from
these failures and implementing them into the re-assess and re-train
phases leading up to the next scheduled flight test?
General Rasch. [No answer was available at time of publication.]
Mr. Wilson. Throughout Russia's aggression against Ukraine, we've
seen their usage of hypersonic weapons against Ukrainian forces. With
each use, Russia is likely collecting valuable data that will further
help develop their hypersonic programs. Has the United States been able
to collect our own data on Russia's hypersonic capabilities and realize
our current capacity to effectively counter?
Mr. McCormick. This response contains sensitive or classified
information. The Member office may reach out to committee staff to
review.
Mr. Wilson. Our adversaries, China and Russia, are outpacing the
United States in the development of hypersonic capabilities. We have
observed Russia's ability to field and utilize this technology on the
battlefield. China has developed and is looking at ways to improve
their own hypersonic arsenal. Last year, the Pentagon stated that China
has ``the world's leading hypersonic arsenal.'' Can you characterize
Russia and China's test infrastructure and how their approach to
hypersonic weapons development differs from the United States?
Mr. McCormick. This response contains sensitive or classified
information. The Member office may reach out to committee staff to
review.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI

Mr. Garamendi. A recent CBO report stated that ``buying 300 ground-
or sea-launched, intermediate-range ballistic missiles with
maneuverable warheads and sustaining the missile system for 20 years
would cost a total of $13.4 billion (in 2023 dollars). The same number
of comparable hypersonic missiles would cost about one-third more,
$17.9 billion.'' Why is Hypersonic technology unique and worth this
investment and what strategic problem or operational capabilities gap
is it solving?
Dr. Weber. The United States faces competitors who threaten rapid
military intervention against the United States and our allies and
partners across the globe. Our potential adversaries have deployed
high-end defensive and anti-access systems that will challenge our
ability to deter and defend against these attacks in the time necessary
to prevent military, diplomatic, or political faits accomplis. As noted
in the Department of Defense's (DoD) 2023 Report to Congress on
Military and Security Developments Involving the People's Republic of
China (PRC), ``The PRC has a robust and redundant integrated air
defense system (IADS) architecture over land areas and within 300
nautical miles (556 kilometers) of its coast that relies on an
extensive early warning radar network, fighter aircraft, and a variety
of surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems.''
Due to their predictable ballistic trajectories during the
exoatmospheric portion of flight, intermediate range ballistic missiles
with maneuverable warheads are inherently more vulnerable to IADS than
hypersonic systems that can maneuver during their entire trajectory.
The United States is developing conventionally-armed, long-range, and
survivable hypersonic strike systems to counter adversary IADS
capabilities and to complement our other current and future warfighting
approaches and weapon systems. We are developing a portfolio of
hypersonic strike systems with diverse capabilities that sustain flight
at or above Mach five (five times faster than the speed of sound,
roughly one mile per second) following an initial boost by a solid
rocket motor. These systems allow a U.S. response to a contingency or a
strike on a time-critical target in minutes rather than hours.
The hypersonic systems we are developing are uniquely survivable by
design. They fly at high altitudes and speeds, and they maneuver to
evade defenses. Consequently, they can credibly threaten and, if
necessary, defeat, heavily defended targets. Their range allows us to
deter an adversary while operating from relative sanctuary, hundreds or
thousands of miles away.
Mr. Garamendi. As noted during the hearing, there are numerous
reasons to be concerned that adversaries may misinterpret these weapons
as nuclear capable, even if we have clearly stated the intent of our
weapons program is only for conventionally equipped weapons. How has
the Department engaged with the interagency (esp. Department of State)
and international communities to ensure pursuit of these programs
doesn't lead to destabilizing misunderstandings or escalatory arms
races?
Dr. Weber. Representatives from the Department of Defense and
Department of State conduct regular extended deterrence dialogues with
allies to discuss the full array of deterrence and risk reduction
issues that affect our joint security. The only hypersonic weapons the
United States is developing are conventional weapons. Planned U.S.
hypersonic systems are unlikely to trigger misunderstandings or
miscalculations based on their planned employment concepts and their
attributes, including intermediate or shorter ranges and exclusively
conventional payloads to avoid nuclear ambiguity. As our conventional
hypersonic programs progress, we will continue to engage with our
interagency colleagues and allies to proactively manage any potential
risk.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. DESJARLAIS

Dr. DesJarlais. Can you describe the concept of a reusable
hypersonic aircraft and what it will mean for our ability to project
force over China? How would this capability allow us to overwhelm
Chinese anti-access area denial capabilities for critical ISR and
strike missions?
Dr. Weber. A common definition of hypersonic systems is the ability
to operate at speeds greater than five times the speed of sound (Mach
5+). A reusable hypersonic aircraft builds upon what we have learned
from development of propulsion systems for hypersonic air breathing
weapons, scales that up and combines it with a second form of
propulsion and reusable airframes to enable subsonic to hypersonic
flight along with takeoff and landing from normal runways. This new
class of weapon system will use speed, altitude, and maneuver to
provide unique capabilities and enable new Concept of Operations
(CONOPS) for multi-mission airborne strike/intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance (ISR) against time critical and high value targets
protected by advanced defense solutions.
Dr. DesJarlais. Over the last several years, this committee has
included in the NDAA language calling for assessment and planning for
the development of reusable hypersonic aircraft. We understand that
your office may be taking additional steps to formalize these plans
into a program office. Can you describe your plans to establish an
organizational and funding structure to facilitate development? How
might this be reflected in the upcoming President's Budget request?
Dr. Weber. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Aerospace Project Office (APO) was chartered last summer to lead the
Department's Next Generation Responsive Strike (NextRS) initiative and
is coordinating efforts with the Air Force and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) to develop and demonstrate the critical
enabling technologies for a reusable hypersonic aircraft. This new
class of weapon system will use speed, altitude, and maneuver to
provide unique capabilities and enable new CONOPS for multi-mission
airborne strike/ISR against time critical and high value targets
protected by advanced defense solutions. NextRS is closing the gap
between the state of the art in reusable hypersonic air platforms and
the level of technical maturity required to initiate a Y-Plane program
later this decade. The Y-Plane will be operational by design and yield
an early operational capability when the prototype program completes. A
classified briefing was provided to Rep Luttrell's office in response
to the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) language. We welcome
the opportunity to provide a classified briefing on the NextRS
initiative at your convenience.
Dr. DesJarlais. Can you describe the timetable for development of
reusable hypersonic aircraft? What are some of the key technology
development targets you're looking at? And what is your target for
first flight?
Dr. Weber. As discussed in the answer to Question #11, the NextRS
initiative is focused on closing the gap between the state of the art
in reusable hypersonic air platforms and the level of technical
maturity required to initiate a Y-Plane program later this decade. The
Y-Plane will be operational by design and yield an early operational
capability when the prototype program completes. Specific dates and
timelines are listed in the classified briefing provided in response to
the NDAA language. Along with the High Mach Gas Turbine (HMGT) program
(discussed in Question #13) the Hypersonic Aircraft Technologies (HATs)
program is developing and demonstrating the following critical
technologies to enable future design of reusable hypersonic aircraft:

Structures and Materials--technologies for high
temperature metallic materials and structural concepts that allow
design of thermally driven, weight efficient airframes.

High Speed Weapon Separation--technologies that allow
weapons, weapon bays and ejection systems to accommodate hypersonic
separation from aircraft and flyout to the target.

Dual mode propulsion--technologies that allow continuous
powered operation of a Dual Mode Ram Jet (DMRJ) in a Turbine Based
Combined Cycle (TBCC) propulsion system over the entire flight
envelope.

Power Generation--technologies that allow power
generation sufficient to support a modern avionics and sensor suite
during all periods of flight.

Thermal Management Systems--technologies that allow
integrated solutions to managing the thermal environment of the
aircraft and propulsion system. The HATs program builds off
foundational efforts conducted by Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
and NASA and in multiple cases accelerates an existing AFRL program to
meet the NextRS timelines. The Department's proposal to shift Fiscal
Year (FY) 2024 funding from the DARPA Tactical Boost Glide (TBG) Phase
3 program to HATs was not included in the final appropriations bill, so
the start of these critical technology projects will be delayed by at
least 6 months.
Dr. DesJarlais. The FY 2024 NDAA highlighted continual funding
shortfalls for the High Mach Turbine Engine, which is a critical
enabling technology for reusable hypersonic aircraft that will inform
requirements for airframe design, materials, thermal management and
many other key subsystems. Can you describe how funding high Mach
propulsion fits into your plan for development of reusable hypersonic
aircraft? Can we expect that it will be better funded in the FY 2025
budget to ensure development does not fall behind?
Dr. Weber. The Next Generation Responsive Strike (NextRS)
Initiative, described in my response to Question #11 above, includes a
High Mach Gas Turbine (HMGT) program as one of its critical elements.
The unique objective of the HMGT program to develop and demonstrate a
high Mach gas turbine engine without water injection and reduce the
risk for its use in a Turbine Based Combined Cycle (TBCC) propulsion
system. We are not starting from scratch. Past AFRL, NASA, and industry
projects allow us to build off an existing engine core and other
foundational high Mach elements. A tightly focused, dedicated project
is now planned to properly leverage those efforts and fund new ones.
HMGT will conduct the technical analysis, design, development and
critical component and system level demonstrations to complete a
preliminary design and preserve the timeline needed for a prototype
engine development during the Y-Plane program. HMGT was not included in
the FY25 President's Budget due to significant budget constraints
imposed by the Fiscal Responsibility Act.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ

Mr. Waltz. There has been a heavy commercial interest in hypersonic
development this past year. How are you consolidating and streamlining
the commercial companies' competitive proposals and RTD&E to improve
U.S. hypersonic capability?
Dr. Weber. The strength of the U.S. commercial sector has always
been an asymmetric advantage for the United States. The U.S. commercial
sector has proven itself valuable in every conflict and in the
development and production of weapons for use in every theater.
Involving the best minds and capabilities from our U.S. industry in
hypersonic system development continues to be part of the DoD strategic
approach. Besides utilizing the commercial sector to develop and
manufacture weapon systems, the Test Resource Management Center (TRMC)
is investing in innovative approaches that leverage industry to
accelerate fielding of these systems through novel design, construction
development, and operation of ground test facilities and flight
experimentation to offset capacity bottlenecks and reduce time to field
through faster and more agile test and evaluation. This includes
providing new flight test capabilities such as the Multi Service
Advanced Capability for Hypersonic Test Beds (MACH-TB) that leverages
private investment in commercial companies to provide platforms for
affordable, rapid hypersonic flight experimentation.

[all]
