- A P P E N D I X

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-31]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2024 NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE PROGRAMS

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 26, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-742           WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California,
DON BACON, Nebraska                  RO KHANNA, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              MARC VEASEY, Texas

Whitney Verett, Professional Staff Member
Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Zachary Calderon, Research Assistant
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1
Moulton, Hon. Seth, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     3

WITNESSES

Calvelli, Hon. Frank, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for
Space Acquisitions and Integration, U.S. Air Force.............     7
Plumb, Hon. John F., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
Policy, U.S. Department of Defense.............................     5
Scolese, Christopher J., Director, National Reconnaissance Office     8
Wilkerson, Tonya P., Deputy Director, National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency............................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Calvelli, Hon. Frank.........................................    39
Plumb, Hon. John F...........................................    25
Scolese, Christopher J.......................................    48
Wilkerson, Tonya P...........................................    54

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Carbajal.................................................    63
Ms. Stefanik.................................................    63
Mr. Strong...................................................    64

.
FISCAL YEAR 2024 NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE PROGRAMS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, April 26, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:21 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
COLORADO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Lamborn. Today's hearing will come to order.
I ask unanimous consent that the Chair be authorized to
declare a recess at any time. Without objection, so ordered.
I would like to welcome the witnesses to today's hearing.
We have Dr. John Plumb, the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Space Policy, back before the subcommittee.
John, I think you win the award for the most appearances
this year. So, you should get a T-shirt for that. I testified
at all these hearings and all I got was this lousy T-shirt, or
something like that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lamborn. Next, we have Mr. Frank Calvelli, the
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space Acquisitions and
Integration, in his first appearance before this subcommittee.
We also have Dr. Christopher Scolese, the Director of the
National Reconnaissance Office; and also, Ms. Tonya Wilkerson,
the Deputy Director of the National Geospatial-Intelligence
Agency.
Welcome back to all of you. Thank you for joining us. Thank
you for your service to our Nation.
So, we are here to discuss one of the favorite topics of
this subcommittee, national security space.
I was encouraged to hear General Saltzman say just last
week at Space Symposium in my home district of Colorado Springs
that, quote, ``The old ways of doing business are too slow, too
late to need, and too behind the times to meet the challenges
we are facing today.'' Unquote. And I could not agree more.
Those of us on this subcommittee know better than most that
space is vital to how we fight and win wars. Both China and
Russia have seen the advantage we have built in space over the
last few decades to enable the joint force. In response, they
are now developing and deploying asymmetric counterspace
systems meant to neutralize our advantage.
China also sees the benefits of space for its own
deployment of forces. It continues to develop and field its own
systems to support its long-range fire and standoff
capabilities.
These threats are well-known by this point. Discussions
about the democratization of space by space-faring nations have
become more commonplace in the last 5 years. The result is more
systems and more people operating in a domain that was only
accessible by superpowers until very recently.
Today, I would like to hear what you all are doing to
address the problem that General Saltzman identified. All of us
on the subcommittee are interested in how you are changing the
way you do business--going faster and becoming more innovative.
The commercial space sector is setting the pace on putting
inventive technologies on orbit. I would like to hear from all
of you how you are leveraging these developments in government
programs, how you evaluate what is useful to buy versus build,
and how you are coordinating with each other to maximize your
efforts. Specifically, I am interested in hearing how space
acquisition organizations are working with small business
partners--small businesses as partners in these efforts.
Dr. Plumb, one area that you and I have talked about often
is how the overclassification of space contributes to
inefficiencies and slower processes. Two years ago, we asked
your office to report back after looking at highly classified
space programs to see what, if anything, could be reclassified.
We are still waiting for that report.
Meanwhile, classification of space is a pervasive problem.
I believe it is impeding the Department's progress on space;
specifically, making it more challenging to collaborate with
our allies and partners.
I am also interested to get your thoughts on the current
state of space policy within the Department of Defense. There
has not been an unclassified national security space policy
document released since 2020, despite a requirement from
Congress to produce one. I think you will agree that a lot has
changed in those 3 years and public discourse is essential to
getting our space policy right.
Mr. Calvelli, we recently received a report from you that
identified the five highest and lowest performing major
acquisition programs in the Space Force. Unfortunately, it
doesn't look like much has changed in this report. The lowest
performing programs are all ground systems led by the perennial
underperformer, the Operational Control System, or OCX.
It has been said [so] many times at this point that it is
now a cliche, but ground systems always seem to be the
afterthought when it comes to space acquisitions. Ground
systems are the nuts and bolts, the bread and butter, that make
our exquisite satellite capabilities function. We cannot have
one without the other.
Today I would like to hear your specific plan to get
programs like OCX back on track and into the hands of the
force. I would also like to hear about the policies you have
implemented to make sure that we won't continue to see these
problems on future ground acquisitions.
And I'm also interested in hearing from the whole panel how
the Department of Defense and the intelligence community are
collaborating on systems and operations to support the joint
force. As we come to terms with what it means for space to be a
warfighting domain, we are going to continue to bump up against
the line between defense and intelligence authorities. We must
make sure that good collaboration continues, while also
allowing the Space Force to mature into its role as a service.
There are many topics for us to cover today. I have gone
past my time. So, I will leave it there and turn it over to my
ranking member for any remarks that he would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. SETH MOULTON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to associate myself with your remarks,
both about the topic at hand and about Mr. Plumb. Most of us
around here believe in that constitutional stipulation that you
are supposed to be elected to spend so much time in the House
of Representatives, but we are grateful for your presence and
your service.
I will try to move quickly through my remarks because they
are going to sound very similar to the chairman's.
But thank you all very much, this entire panel of
witnesses, for being here.
Across the jurisdiction of the subcommittee, our national
security space architecture is one that, in my opinion, has
experienced the most significant transformation over the past
several years. And this transformation has been necessary to
respond to the rapid pace at which our adversaries are
developing, deploying, and demonstrating capabilities in space
and on Earth to deny, degrade, and destroy U.S. satellites.
In the just the past 2 years, the People's Republic of
China [PRC] has almost doubled their number of satellites on
orbit to 400, with plans for nearly a thousand by 2030. And
they include capabilities with inherently offensive
applications.
Both the PRC and Russia are increasingly brazen in
displaying their space warfighting capabilities, whether it be
the PRC ``grappler,'' which demonstrated the ability to drag a
satellite out of its orbit; last year's incredibly destructive
and debris-producing Russian anti-satellite test; or the
multiple occasions where DOD [Department of Defense] and
commercial satellites have been jammed during the war in
Ukraine.
Broadly, the PRC is putting in place the capability and
capacity in space, and on the ground, to hold U.S. assets at
risk. Given what we know about PRC ambitions with regards to
Taiwan, many experts believe that their first move in a
conflict would happen in space.
In response to this growing threat, I'm encouraged that
this administration has taken seriously the need to move away
from the status quo and transition to a more robust and
resilient U.S. national security space architecture. This means
shifting from several exquisite ``big juicy targets'' in
geosynchronous Earth orbit, or GEO, to many smaller, more
commercially available satellites in low Earth orbit, or LEO.
For the NRO [National Reconnaissance Office] over the next
decade, this budget request continues efforts to more than
quadruple the number of satellites currently on orbit. This is
a sharp departure from the attitude of the Department just a
few years ago. Despite repeated warnings, the Space Force was
modernizing the existing space-based missile-warning
constellation by simply replacing the large, exquisite,
unprotected satellites in the GEO orbit. Over the course of 3
years, the development price tag for next-gen OPIR [Overhead
Persistent Infrared] ballooned to $14.4 billion with
significant delays.
But, in 2021, Space Force pivoted to a proliferated
missile-warning architecture. The U.S. Space Force and the
Space Development Agency, less than 3 years after contract
award, just launched its first set of demonstration satellites
to prove out the proliferated warfighting architecture in LEO,
which will also provide data transport and missile track
capabilities. DOD will be able to expand and improve capability
every 2 years, as soon as this technology is available, rather
than waiting for the standard 10-year acquisition cycle that
has plagued the space community in the past.
In addition to these encouraging steps forward on
acquisition, the space community is making strides on the
adoption of commercial data and services. From expanding
commercial imagery required to meet National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency requirements for the combatant commanders,
or the great strides Space Systems Command has made to purchase
commercial satellite communications and space domain awareness
data, this adoption of commercial space has allowed DOD to
focus on inherently military needs and stay ahead of our
adversaries in the domain.
We have also made significant progress in the past several
years with our incredible network of allies and partners. In
addition to the work being done to share space domain awareness
and adversary space capabilities, the DOD Space Policy guidance
released last August explicitly directs that our space
cooperation with allies and partners include policy, strategy,
capabilities, information sharing, and operations.
The administration's announcement that it would not conduct
destructive, debris-producing, direct-ascent anti-satellite
testing has opened the door to 12 other nations committing to
do the same. The U.S. must continue to lead by example in
establishing norms of behavior for the responsible use and
operations within the space domain.
Now, I'm increasingly encouraged by the direction of our
space program as a whole, but there are some areas we will
continue to watch closely. In addition to the pattern of large
satellite programs being late and over budget, the ground
system architecture still frequently comes as an afterthought.
And the chairman mentioned this already.
Another area we will continue our oversight is in the
overclassification of space, another thing the chairman
mentioned, which inhibits both our ability to advocate for
increasing investment and expanding collaborations with our
allies and partners.
Space is a fascinating and infinite domain. Until recently,
we really only experienced it through the lens of science
fiction. But in reality, space has been a part of our daily
lives as Americans since the dawn of the space race, and our
adversaries are keenly aware of that.
Our warfighters everywhere--on the ground, under the sea,
and in the air--depend on space. But so do people all around
the world--from Americans driving to work or checking the
weather to Ukrainians valiantly fighting the unprovoked
invasion by the Russians.
The global dependence on space often means relying on
American satellites. We must keep them secure--not only against
the threat we see today, but what we will face in the years and
decades to come.
I look forward to today's discussion with our witnesses on
how to best maintain U.S. superiority in space, and how this
year's President's budget request does that.
Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Our first witness will be the
Honorable Dr. John Plumb, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Space Policy with the Department of Defense.
The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN F. PLUMB, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR SPACE POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Plumb. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn; thank you, Ranking
Member Moulton, members of the committee.
Thanks for inviting me to testify today on the Department's
national security space programs. I'm honored to appear with my
colleagues, Assistant Secretary Calvelli, Director Chris
Scolese, and Deputy Director Tonya Wilkerson.
Space plays a critical role in our Nation's security, in
our prosperity, in our way of life. For the Department of
Defense, space is essential to how we compete and fight in
every domain. It provides us with the missile warning and
missile tracking critical to defending our homeland. It
provides position, navigation, and timing to strike targets
with precision, and it provides communication in austere
environments to support global command and control. To put it
simply, space-based missions are essential to the U.S. way of
war.
But our competitors understand this. They are fielding and
developing increasingly complex capabilities to deny space
missions to the U.S. joint force. In just the last few years,
the quantity and quality of counterspace threats has increased
significantly.
China has already fielded ground-based counterspace
weapons, including direct-ascent ASAT [anti-satellite weapons]
missiles, and it continues to seek new methods to hold our
satellites at risk. China is building a space architecture that
enables its military to execute long-range precision strikes.
China, ultimately, seeks to challenge our ability to conduct
joint operations in the Indo-Pacific.
Russia is developing, testing, and fielding its own
counterspace systems, including ground-based and space-based
kinetic anti-satellite weapons. These are aimed at degrading
and denying U.S. space-based services.
President Biden's $33.3 billion space budget for fiscal
year 2024 invests in the capabilities necessary to meet these
challenges. This investment reflects an increase of roughly 15
percent from fiscal year 2023.
The President's budget request will accelerate our
transition to resilient-by-design architectures. It will
enhance our ability to fight through disruption. It will invest
heavily in research, development, testing, and experimentation.
And it will further integrate space-based services across the
joint force.
The budget request includes nearly $5 billion for missile
warning and missile track, including $2.3 billion for new
proliferated resilient architectures and $2.6 billion for Next
Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared.
It has $1.3 billion for position, navigation, and timing,
including development of the Next Generation Operational
Control System for GPS [Global Positioning System]. There is $3
billion for 15 launch vehicles and range upgrades, and there is
$4.7 billion for protected and jam-resistant satellite
communications, and this includes the Space Development
Agency's space data transport layer. And the budget request
also includes additional investments in ground user equipment,
science and technology research, and classified programs.
Now, my office remains laser-focused on three priorities:
space control, space cooperation, and space classification.
On space control, the Department will protect and defend
our national security interests from the growing scope and
scale of space and counterspace threats. And we will, of
course, protect and defend our service men and women in harm's
way from space-enabled threats.
For space cooperation, we are investing in relationships
with allies, with partners, and with commercial space. These
partnerships are an enduring strength and an asymmetric
advantage our competitors can never hope to match.
And for space classification, the Department is working at
the highest levels to remove barriers to sharing information
with our allies and to strengthen and streamline our ability to
communicate across the U.S. Government. And I will just note
both the chairman's and the ranking member's strong interest in
their opening statements in this issue as well.
Our competitors have watched us, they have learned from us,
they have stolen from us, and they have developed capabilities
to hold us at risk. But they are not ready for us. They are not
ready for us today, and with congressional support for the
national security space investments in the President's fiscal
year 2024 budget request, they will not be ready for us
tomorrow.
So, thank you to the committee for your tireless dedication
to the Department and U.S. national security, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Plumb can be found in the
Appendix on page 25.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
We will, next, hear from the Honorable Frank Calvelli,
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space Acquisitions and
Integration.
The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK CALVELLI, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
AIR FORCE FOR SPACE ACQUISITIONS AND INTEGRATION, U.S. AIR
FORCE

Mr. Calvelli. Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone.
We continue to face an unprecedented strategic competitor
in China, and our space environment continues to become more
congested and contested. To address these challenges, we are
fundamentally transforming our space architecture to be more
resilient, proliferated, and integrated to meet warfighter
requirements and to counter the growing threats.
Today, I would like to discuss the architecture changes
that we are making, capabilities that we are delivering, and
how we are overseeing and managing the space acquisition
enterprise.
We are moving away from those big, juicy targets--highly
capable systems, but very vulnerable in small numbers--to
smaller proliferated resilient systems across multiple mission
areas. For example, we are pivoting from the legacy missile
warnings architecture to a proliferated resilient architecture
that adds capability to actually track missile threats.
We are adding new capabilities to our space domain
awareness architecture to focus on deterring and defending
against attempts to negate our critical space capabilities.
We are fundamentally transforming our military satellite
communications and data transport architecture through
disaggregation, proliferation, capacity expansion, partnership
with allies and with commercial, which will enhance our ability
to fight in contested and degraded operational environments.
We are also collaborating with the intelligence community
to design, develop, deploy, and operate a proliferated space-
based ground moving target indication system.
Overall, these architecture changes help transform our
space architecture to be more resilient, integrated, and
provide new capabilities for our warfighters.
Over the past 15 months, we continued to deliver new
critical capabilities. The Space Systems Command delivered last
year into operations two new Geosynchronous Space Situational
Awareness Program satellites, a new Space Based Infrared
missile warning satellite which completes the SBIRS [Space
Based Infrared System] architecture, and a new GPS III
satellite which achieved operational acceptance in just 12 days
after launch.
The Space Rapid Capabilities Office delivered their first
set of missions to orbit, including two prototype enhanced
situational awareness sensors and one new cryptographic
payload.
And the Space Development Agency delivered their first 10
satellites to orbit last month, which included 2 tracking and 8
data transport satellites. This was accomplished in less than 3
years from contract award to launch.
And the Department launched nine national security space
launch missions, providing critical capability across the
Nation.
On launch, the next National Security Space Launch phase
III procurement starts in FY 2025; pursues a dual-lane, hybrid
contracting approach to maximize competition, and use of the
Nation's robust commercial launch industry, as we transition to
more proliferated architectures.
Fiscal year 2024 also marks the first time the Space Force
has specifically budgeted for Tactically Responsive Space, and
we acknowledge responsive space as an emerging need and thank
Congress for your leadership in this mission area.
As the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space
Acquisition and Integration, I am focused on adding speed to
our acquisitions and delivering our programs on cost and
schedule. I recognize that I inherited several troubled
programs that are behind schedule and overrun on cost. I am
paying close attention to those programs.
Overall, I am proactively managing the space acquisition
enterprise through weekly status reports, biweekly tag-ups with
my portfolio leads, and detailed quarterly program reviews.
These reviews enable me to ensure all our programs remain
focused on delivering capabilities to the warfighters on cost
and on schedule.
In October of 2022, I issued strategic acquisition guidance
to the workforce outlining nine space acquisition tenets. You
will be happy to see that one of those tenets is deliver ground
systems before launch. These tenets form the basis of a new
direction for space acquisition and emphasize speed and program
management discipline, while addressing the fundamental issues
that slow up space acquisition.
I am committed to using all the tools and authorities
Congress has provided to help speed up space acquisition. This
includes use of section 804 middle tier of acquisition, use of
other transactional authorities, and use of the Space
Acquisition Council to ensure collaboration and integration,
while avoiding duplication of effort across the entire national
security space enterprise.
In summary, in recognition of the evolving threats, the
Department is transforming its space architecture to be more
resilient, more integrated, and more capable. We continue to
deliver critical capabilities in its operations for our
warfighters. We are focused on adding speed to our space
acquisitions and proactively overseeing and managing space
acquisition portfolios.
Thank you to the committee for all your support, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Calvelli can be found in the
Appendix on page 39.]
Mr. Lamborn. And thank you for your testimony.
We will now hear from Dr. Christopher Scolese, Director of
the National Reconnaissance Office.
The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER J. SCOLESE, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
RECONNAISSANCE OFFICE

Dr. Scolese. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member
Moulton, and members of the committee.
It is a pleasure to appear before you today with my
colleagues John Plumb, Frank Calvelli, and Tonya Wilkerson, and
to represent the dedicated workforce of the National
Reconnaissance Office.
Thanks to the support of Congress, the NRO is creating the
most capable, diverse, and resilient overhead intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance constellation in our history.
We are building capabilities to solve the Nation's hardest
intelligence challenges. We use cutting-edge technologies, both
in space and on the ground, to deliver more information faster
than ever before.
Our capabilities provide vital intelligence that can only
be obtained from space. This includes geolocations and real-
time situational awareness for our warfighters, high-resolution
imagery that helps intelligence analysts make informed
decisions, and support that aids humanitarian responses to
natural disasters.
All of this helps make America and the world beyond
stronger and safer. We are building innovation, agility, and
resilience into everything we do. This ensures we can answer
the toughest intelligence questions of today and tomorrow.
We are designing and delivering systems that can perform
multiple types of intelligence missions and quickly pivot among
them, whether the needs are traditional analytical support;
military requirements for crises, like the events in Ukraine;
or for humanitarian efforts.
Demonstration systems are proving concepts, reducing time
for deployment of operational systems, and enabling us to fill
key intelligence gaps more quickly.
All of this requires a skilled and dedicated workforce. I'm
proud to say that our team of military, DOD, and IC
[intelligence community] civilians truly lives up to our motto:
Above and Beyond.
We continue to attract great people from the CIA [Central
Intelligence Agency] and military, and with a cadre that is now
a little more than 6 years old, we just had our best recruiting
year and continue to attract outstanding interns, many of whom
come to the NRO. This ensures we have a pipeline of talent and
skills necessary to maintain our advantage.
The qualities I just described--innovation, agility, and
resilience--are integral to our ability to stay ahead of our
competitors. Our competitors are developing weapons to destroy
or interfere with our satellites, as has been mentioned. To
stay ahead of the competition and ensure we continue to operate
in a heightened threat environment, we are modernizing our
architecture on the space and ground. With the strong support
of Congress over the last several years, we are improving
capabilities, becoming faster, more agile, and more resilient.
These investments are already paying off. I'm happy to
report that just in the last year we have fielded over five new
systems demonstrating innovative capabilities, improved
utilization of data, and upgraded our ground infrastructure--
with even more to come this year.
The NRO is building and delivering a diversified
proliferated architecture that includes large and small
satellites, both government and commercial, in multiple orbits.
In the next few years, we will grow from dozens of systems on
orbit to hundreds. This will enable us to spend more time over
a given area, minimize the time between observations, and offer
more capability and a higher degree of resilience.
We are pushing boundaries and we are thinking differently.
We are using automation and tools to speed the delivery of
data.
We know we can't solve today's most difficult challenges on
our own. We depend in our partnerships. The most critical of
those is the U.S. Space Force. Our partnership continues to
grow stronger as we expand our interactions and deliver on
capabilities.
Two examples of the numerous joint efforts between the
Space Force and NRO are the ground moving target indication, as
Mr. Calvelli mentioned, and the Silent Barker System. GMTI
[Ground Moving Target Indicator] will track ground and maritime
targets for the warfighter, day or night, in all kinds of
weather, in the very near future. Silent Barker will provide
situational awareness in space. We will be launching later this
summer.
Our partnerships with allies continue to expand and provide
increased capabilities that allow us to share information,
provide multiple launch locations, and increase the exchange of
data and technologies.
The NRO is leveraging the power of U.S. space industry,
both traditional and emerging. From commercial data and launch
to commodity spacecraft, industry is helping us create the
architectures we are building today.
NRO initiatives, like the Strategic Commercial Enhancements
Framework and the Director's Innovation Initiative, allow us to
explore new and emerging capabilities and technologies with a
wide range of industry, big and small. At the same time, we are
ensuring the quality of materials and the integrity of the
supply chain are not compromised in the name of speed.
For more than 60 years, the NRO has developed tools and
technologies to bring the farthest reaches of the planet to our
grasp. We are using the vantage point to find answers to some
of the Nation's most important national security questions. Mr.
Chairman, what was a vision a few years ago is quickly becoming
a reality.
Thank you for having me today. I look forward to the
committee's questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Scolese can be found in the
Appendix on page 48.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
And before we have our fourth and final witness, I just
want to remind everybody that, as soon as we are done with one
round of questions, we will recess and go upstairs to the SCIF
[sensitive compartmented information facility] on the third
floor and have a closed session.
Now we will hear from Tonya Wilkerson, Deputy Director of
the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency.

STATEMENT OF TONYA P. WILKERSON, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
GEOSPATIAL-INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Ms. Wilkerson. Good afternoon, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking
Member Moulton, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency [NGA] is the
leader in timely, accurate, and actionable geospatial
intelligence [GEOINT] that provides a decisive advantage to
warfighters, policymakers, and first responders.
GEOINT goes beyond telling you what, where, and when
something is happening. It also reveals how it is happening,
why it matters, and what is likely to happen next.
Our principal focus is advancing GEOINT capabilities to
fulfill our role as both a combat support agency and a member
of the intelligence community. NGA's GEOINT professionals work
across more than 120 locations at home and abroad. We have
support teams embedded with U.S. Government agencies, combatant
commands, service intelligence centers, and most service
operational centers--for targeting and to allow them to
navigate safely around the globe every day.
NGA has well-defined responsibilities for aeronautical and
maritime safety of navigation, but we are still working to
evolve the foundation GEOINT role as it applies to the space
domain.
Just as NGA's predecessor agencies mapped the moon ahead of
the Apollo missions, today we are working with NASA to develop
the lunar geodetic system that will be the coordinate framework
for accurate and safe movement on the moon.
We partner with the U.S. Space Force and U.S. Space Command
to ensure GEOINT fully supports strategic intelligence
assessments of adversary space and counterspace threats and
activities. Our presence assists with collection management and
allows us to team on future architecture requirements and
career development and training of GEOINT-capable guardians.
We have seen a dramatic increase in demand for space-
related GEOINT, and NGA is increasing our focus on cutting-edge
analysis of our adversaries' space-related equipment and
activities on Earth and in space.
This is reflected in our new motto: ``Know the World, Show
the Way . . . from Seabed to Space.'' This revision
acknowledges that our changing world requires a steadfast
effort across every domain, including evolving areas that
require both exquisite tradecraft and our dedicated attention.
In addition to producing GEOINT analysis on adversary
capabilities, NGA's foundational physical modeling of our
planet directly supports the DOD by ensuring the precision and
accuracy of GPS and maintaining the WGS-84 reference frame.
These are the backbone for the geolocation our forces require
for targeting and to allow them to navigate and operate safety
around the globe.
As the volume of GEOINT data expands with the proliferation
of collection systems and expansion into the space domain, the
transfer of Project Maven to NGA will play an essential role to
future military operations. Artificial intelligence and machine
learning are capable of quickly fusing enormous amounts of data
from across disparate data sets and provide meaningful answers.
NGA will further automate significant portions of dynamic
collection, imagery exploitation, and reporting workflows to
rapidly exploit data and anticipate activity.
NGA continues to grow and evolve its space intelligence
mission through people, partnerships, and capabilities to meet
current and future partner needs. We will continue to have a
vested interest in the space domain, as much of our overall
GEOINT mission is enabled by data from space systems.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wilkerson can be found in
the Appendix on page 54.]
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you.
We will now have questions from the members of the
subcommittee. I will go ahead and jump in first.
Dr. Plumb, your office owes us several reports. There are
four I am specifically interested in on reclassification, space
policy review, a strategy on the protection of satellites, and
a report on opportunities for collaboration between United
States and Israel on space. When can we expect to get these
reports?
Dr. Plumb. Thanks, Chairman Lamborn. I will just address a
couple at a time here.
So, first of all, aware and tracking of the reports that we
owe you, sir, and we are working on them.
1602 and 1611--1602 is the unclassified protect and defend
strategy you've requested, and 1611 is the unclassified space
policy review. Working on a comprehensive answer to both of
those. There is obviously more equities than just my office in
all of these. So, that should be out for coordination soon in
the building. So, I hope to get that to you in the next few
months.
The 1609 on the Space Force capabilities and
classification, we might better save that for the classified
session, but we are working hard on it, and I'm working with
your team on this. But, as you know, there is a SAP [Special
Access Program] reform effort, and I have been loath to get
ahead of that.
And then, on the U.S. and Israel space cooperation piece,
aware of that and I will make sure we dig into that.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Plumb. Thanks, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Calvelli, I am encouraged by many
innovative acquisition approaches I have seen the Space Force
taking, but I am concerned that Space Systems Command [SSC]
seems to be using old approaches that do not serve a fast-paced
acquisition model.
Mr. Moulton and I are planning to visit SSC on Monday in
Los Angeles, where I expect we will hear more details about
this, but what changes have you implemented to speed up the
acquisition process out of SSC?
Mr. Calvelli. I think you are going to be very impressed
when you visit SSC. They are doing an outstanding job. They
have really stepped up their game.
For example, if I look at the MEO [medium Earth orbit]
missile-warning/missile-tracking capability that they are
providing, it is an outstanding effort building SmallSats in
medium Earth orbit. They have done some really great work on
some ground systems, if you can believe that. They have done
some really outstanding work in terms of where they are heading
with GPS and how that program is progressing.
And so, they have taken to the nine tenets that I put out
back in October. They are looking at going smaller with their
systems. They are looking at going faster. They understand the
direction we want to head in.
And I'm really proud of the team out that way. So, I hope
you enjoy your trip out that way and see the great work that
they are doing.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you.
And also, Mr. Calvelli, I am concerned about the
incorporation of small businesses in space acquisitions. My
district in Colorado Springs, for instance, is home to scores
of small businesses who are pursuing many innovative space
technologies. And I know that other members of the subcommittee
also represent these types of small businesses.
Can you share with the committee initiatives you have put
in place to increase the participation of small businesses in
space acquisition programs within your purview?
Mr. Calvelli. Yes. So, I think the whole approach about
building smaller and trying to get systems in place between,
you know, less than 3 years from contract award to launch is
really going to be a key to taking advantage of small business.
Right now, today, when we build a 7-year--it takes 7 years
to build a satellite, and then we build the second block, and
it takes another 7 years to get there. You are talking 12 to 14
years for technology refresh. If we are launching new systems
and developing them in less than 3 years and launching them
every 2 years, you are talking about significant opportunity
for technology refresh and opportunity to on-ramp new and
innovative technologies. So, that is really, fundamentally, my
approach of getting at that.
Mr. Lamborn. That is exciting. That is great to hear.
And finally, for all members of the panel--and we will
start with Ms. Wilkerson and go down in this direction--as we
mature the concept of space as a warfighting domain, how are
you thinking about the difference between intelligence and
Department of Defense operational missions? Where do you draw
that line?
Ms. Wilkerson. So, thank you for the question, sir.
As a combat support agency and a member of the intelligence
community, we are very well-informed of the national
intelligence priorities, as well as the priorities of the
warfighters. And so, we try to ensure that we are addressing
the needs of both of our user sets.
Dr. Scolese. And a very similar answer. We principally
provide capability, as you know, from space. And our
requirements generally cover both the military needs and the
intelligence community needs, and oftentimes we see that they
overlap very significantly. So, we work very closely with the
Department and the IC to make sure that our requirements
satisfy their needs.
Mr. Lamborn. And if you can say so in this setting--if not,
we will hold off until we are in classified setting--but that
overlap, does that create friction at times or is there a great
collaboration instead of friction?
Dr. Scolese. We can talk more in the other session, but I
would say that there is great collaboration. I mentioned Silent
Barker just a little bit earlier. That is a very tight
collaboration that is going to launch this year that is going
to allow us to greatly improve our space domain awareness.
GMTI, as Mr. Calvelli and I mentioned, we have had that
capability, but we know we have to expand it. We need to work
together in order to make that truly what the warfighter needs.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. And quickly, Mr. Calvelli and Dr. Plumb.
Mr. Calvelli. Yes. So, I have seen absolutely no
duplication of effort. And what I have seen is just a great
partnership, and the DOD relies every day on the great stuff
that Chris and his team build. So, it is a great partnership
out there between the IC and DOD.
Mr. Lamborn. Great.
Dr. Plumb. And, sir, I would just echo that and say I don't
think it has ever been stronger, the cooperation/collaboration
between DOD and IC. And I think this is a perfect example of
how much more we can unlock with that type of relationship.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you all for what you do and for
being here today.
Representative Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I'm going to defer most of my questions to the
classified session, but just a couple of things.
Ms. Wilkerson, beginning with you, your agency has provided
great support for the war in Ukraine. And everyone wants to
know, what are the lessons that we are learning from this. If
you had to just pick one lesson that you, specifically, in your
work have taken from the war in Ukraine, what would it be?
Ms. Wilkerson. Thank you for the question, sir.
I think the one take-away would be the critical importance
of partnerships, not only partnerships across the U.S.
Government, but across our allies as well, and to be able to
continue to meet user needs with respect to ensuring that we
are doing so at speed and scale.
Mr. Moulton. Well, that is the perfect answer to segue into
my next question for Dr. Plumb.
You have talked about the overclassification of space. I
know this is something you have been working on. How do you see
this affecting our relationships with allies and partners and
our ability to collaborate on space projects?
Dr. Plumb. So, thank you, Ranking Member. I would say a
couple of things.
One, working with allies and partners is absolutely
essential in this security environment. And on space, in
particular, the inability to share some classified information
with highly capable allies is slowing us down, and we are
working on it.
But I don't want that to be misconstrued. We do share
classified information with allies. The question is, can we
share more, especially for operationally relevant speeds to be
able to do combined space operations?
Mr. Moulton. Great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Now, we will hear questions from Mr.
Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Plumb, can you talk just for a moment about what is
going on with spectrum and with international organizations?
And do we have a strategy to deny our adversaries necessary
spectrum, as it gets increasingly crowded up there? And
conversely, do we have a strategy to protect spectrum that we
may need and don't want to find ourselves, 5-10 years from now,
with the PRC, for example, sitting in a key space?
Dr. Plumb. So, sir, I can't--let me just answer the part
that I'm partially responsible for, if that is all right. So,
the----
Mr. Waltz. And I should have asked probably, does the
interagency? And you would have a key part of it, and that's my
concern----
Dr. Plumb. If I could just lay flat, the main concern of
DOD at this moment is the issue of the 3.1 to 3.45 gigahertz
portion of the spectrum, the S band. That, we have an agreement
between the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Commerce
to conduct a study as to whether this portion of the spectrum
can be shared. The Department relies heavily across all of our
forces on that spectrum to communicate and fight and to defend
the United States.
And so, the question is, can it be shared? The question is
not, can it be vacated and can we move somewhere else? I have
testified at prior hearings that that would be extraordinarily
costly and it would take decades just to get back to where we
are now.
And it is also not a question of, can we partially vacate,
by which I mean give up some portion of the spectrum. The
question is, can it be shared in a way that we can do our
mission and protect the homeland, and then, allow commercial
entities to also work in that space.
Mr. Waltz. I think I'm trying to get the Department and
some others to think more broadly, is we are increasingly--and
I think rightly--interoperable with commercial, and then, we
see our adversaries, through a number of means, taking key
spectrum in the commercial space, I think my concern is the
Department and interagency is, like, hey that is a commercial
issue. But we could find ourselves at a real disadvantage. Does
that make sense?
Dr. Plumb. It does. I do think, you know, the Department is
focused on use of spectrum. You know, the nearest one we are
focused on is, again, 3.1 to 3.45, but there are portions that
folks all across this table rely on just for the space piece
only. And I think your point is well taken that we need to be
looking further down, further in the future, to make sure we
are also protecting the next thing that might come under.
Mr. Waltz. I think our adversaries certainly are.
Separately, can you talk to--I know there are some efforts
underway--I have talked to General Thompson a good bit about
it, and I have raised this before in terms of modeling a CRAF
for space, a civil reserve [air] fleet. I understand there was
just a--can you just talk to the Department's efforts along
those lines, and when you think you would have something you
can come back to the committee with?
I think it is incredibly important, as we look at
resiliency, redundancy, and to really have these agreements in
place now, should we ever need them in a time of emergency.
Dr. Plumb. So, first of all, fully agree; we need to be
able to access our commercial space partners and their capacity
and bandwidth. Maybe something like a CRAF agreement, if not
exactly that.
I will say that the Secretary and Deputy Secretary have
charged all of us to work on that, and different components
are--you know, SSC is working on it. Director Scolese is
working on it. I'm kind of working on it from a policy, overall
arching piece.
I would say, as to when we could get back to you with a
coherent story, I mean, we could provide where we are now, but
I would say, you know, I would say in summer we could probably
provide a much more fulsome response as to where we are in each
of these pieces and how they are coming together.
It is--we are all taken with it. It is very important, and
I think this is the right time to make sure we are doing it.
Mr. Waltz. Oh, great. That is good to hear. I think we are
moving--we are moving in the right direction.
Just in the time I have remaining, our adversaries have
clearly militarized space. I mean, let's look at the PRC's new
space station and who is manning that. Do we need to rethink
kind of our own protocols? Do we need to man--do we need to
have manned applications and platforms, both on the moon and in
low Earth orbit, with a U.S. military application and
capability?
Dr. Plumb. I haven't considered the concept of actually--
you know, if you are asking me do I have to have people in
orbit to defend orbit, I don't think that is correct. I think
what we need to make sure is that we have the right ability--
and we have the Space Force working hard on this--to protect
and defend our own systems, both in space and protect and
defend our troops on the ground from space-enabled threats. And
we are working hard on both of those.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
We will now have questions from Representative Vasquez.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all the witnesses for taking the time to speak
with us today.
As you are well aware, space is an increasingly important
domain for national security. Nowhere is that more understood
than in my home district in my home State of New Mexico.
In my district, White Sands Missile Range is currently
testing and developing the Deep Space Advanced Radar
Capability, or the DARC, program. This impressive radar
technology detects objects with extreme precision, which allows
our operators to have adequate time to maneuver satellites away
from debris before potential collision and give them the
ability to identify potential civil and military satellites
that may pose threats to our national security.
This question is for Dr. Plumb. How does White Sands
Missile Range testing and development of the DARC program
support our national security efforts in space?
Dr. Plumb. Sir, the DARC program is very important, as you
just pointed out. I think the ability to have good space domain
awareness, including through radar capabilities, is essential
to be able to do safe navigation, track orbit. And that applies
not just for national security missions, but, really, for all,
all space missions.
Mr. Vasquez. Great. And, Dr. Plumb, do you think it would
be a priority of the Department of Defense to continue R&D
[research and development] of the DARC program?
Dr. Plumb. Generally, yes. I think we make sure that it
works well and we continue R&D. I don't know if Mr. Calvelli
might have something to add on that since that is----
Mr. Vasquez. Sure, Mr. Calvelli, go ahead.
Mr. Calvelli. Yes. Thanks. Thanks for the help from the
folks from your great organization, the folks out of WSMR
[White Sands Missile Range].
We proved out the concept that DARC can actually work.
Mr. Vasquez. Sure.
Mr. Calvelli. And thanks to great work by Johns Hopkins and
APL [Applied Physics Laboratory], and those folks who developed
the prototype. And because of that, we are building the
systems.
Mr. Vasquez. Great.
Mr. Calvelli. We are going to deploy them globally, and it
is going to be something we really, really critically need to
keep track of objects at GEO. So, thanks to the folks at WSMR
for helping us out with that.
Mr. Vasquez. Absolutely. And I'm so happy to hear that.
Because we want to make sure that we are continuing to fund
cutting-edge, both space exploration and national security
tools, at places like White Sands Missile Range, and in
conjunction with some of our partners at Holloman Air Force
Base and at Kirtland Air Force Base.
Not only is New Mexico an essential part of testing and
developing these types of technologies, but we play an integral
role in manufacturing key physical space infrastructure. Now,
for example, New Mexico is one of only two domestic providers
of space-qualified satellite solar cells. This industry employs
hundreds of folks in New Mexico, many in the Albuquerque area,
including in my district, who make this mission possible. Now,
these good-paying, highly skilled jobs have contributed to over
1,000 satellites that are currently in orbit.
I have always said, if we can design it in New Mexico and
test it in New Mexico, we should be able to build it in New
Mexico. And through our work on this committee, I want to
ensure that we will continue to be key contributors to
supporting satellite-based space missions for years to come.
Dr. Plumb and Secretary Calvelli, what is the state of our
current satellite production capabilities for both military and
commercial use?
Mr. Calvelli. You know, so far, it seems pretty good. I
mean, the Nation experienced an economic boom in terms of the
commercial space, and that has been something that we have been
able to leverage, especially in the standpoint of satellite
busses and being able to buy busses off production lines and
add payloads to them, and get them launched quickly, like we
just did with a Space Development Agency system. So, so far,
from what I have seen, sir, the environment is pretty good.
Mr. Vasquez. Great.
Dr. Plumb.
Dr. Plumb. I think I will just add, I fully take your point
on the solar cell manufacturing and the difference between
solar cells for space-qualified and ground, and the importance
of being able to do that at scale.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Dr. Plumb.
It is incredibly important that we have these domestic and
very robust satellite production capabilities. And in our home
State in New Mexico, and in our district, I think we are very
interested in continuing to produce those.
So, thank you for your responses today.
I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. And thank you.
Representative Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you very much, Chairman Lamborn and
Ranking Member Seth Moulton, for putting together this
bipartisan hearing.
You can see we want you to succeed. And so, with that in
mind, Secretary Plumb, the Secretary, the senior Department of
Defense officials, and Defense Intelligence Agency officials
have developed the Challenges to Security in Space 2022 report.
And it points to a rapid rise of the adversary counterspace
capabilities, especially for China and Russia.
We have seen demonstrations of these capabilities,
including China's ability to move a defunct satellite and
Russia's destruction of a satellite in November 2021. What is
the DOD's assessment of China's and Russia's ability and intent
to operationalize such capabilities, should a direct conflict
arise? And what is DOD's assessment of the current requirement
and response options, if China and Russia operationalize such
capabilities? To what extent has the conflict and the invasion
of Ukraine by war criminal Putin impacted Russian development?
Dr. Plumb. Thank you, Congressman.
Just in order, on the ability of Russia or China to
operationalize these capabilities, I think, from a military
mindset, once we see something tested, we have to assume it has
some operational capability as well. So, I think that is just a
standard, conservative form of planning, and that is what we
do. We are a contingency planning department.
On the DOD response options, I will just make clear--and
this is not a new statement--but the Department reserves the
right to respond at a time, place, and domain of our choosing,
and that is across any domain--space, cyber, air, ground, land.
And your third question on how the Ukraine conflict is
affecting Russia's ability, you know, my assessment there would
simply be that the sanctions have made it harder for Russia to
get at some type of, you know, modern chip sets and equipment,
and that has set them back some, as they try to find
workarounds.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you.
Again, every effort to match or meet or exceed opposition,
please, we are, again, in bipartisan support.
And, Dr. Scolese, our partnerships with allies continue to
expand and help to provide increased capabilities and
flexibility. During the ongoing invasion of Ukraine by war
criminal Putin, we have been working together with NRO systems
that have provided vital support to our European partners and
allies in NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization].
What has the NRO systems supporting our allies and partners
in Europe against war criminal Putin? Are we leveraging and
building relationships with our allies and partners in the
Indo-Pacific area of operations with the ongoing threats of the
Chinese Communist Party to Taiwan? And then, also, in the
Middle East, what are we doing to recognize the regime in Iran,
which still chants, ``death to Israel, death to America''?
Dr. Scolese. Yes, sir, I can best answer that question in
the next session, but at a broad level, we have very strong
partnerships. We have learned a lot from Ukraine and how to
work with our allies to both share information and share
technologies to enhance our capabilities and to enhance their
capabilities at the same time.
And I would like to turn a little bit of this over to Ms.
Wilkerson because we work directly through them, and that is
where the direct support to the allies comes from. So, our
systems provide the information and they deliver it.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. Yes.
Ms. Wilkerson. Thank you for the question.
So, as I noted earlier, one of the key critical lessons
learned through the crisis has been the importance of allies,
sharing with our partners, and specifically, the allies.
One of the other highlights that I would note is that the
nature of commercial GEOINT, in particular, makes it especially
valuable as an opportunity to be able to share and continue to
strengthen the partnerships with our allies as well.
Mr. Wilson. And an unintended consequence of war criminal
Putin is that we are all--NATO is enhanced with Sweden and
Finland. How incredible the resources of both of those
countries that we should be working so closely with.
So, I wish you well and best wishes for continued success.
I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Now, we have questions from Representative Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And for the witnesses, thank you. Very important
information and much appreciated.
My question goes to you, Ms. Wilkerson. The National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency has state-of-the-art equipment
capable of providing time-critical information to firefighters.
Needless to say, we have plenty of those throughout the entire
Nation and, indeed, the world. But the access to such
information should not be held financial hostage to other
agencies. Yet, in fiscal years 2011 to 2018, FEMA [Federal
Emergency Management Agency] paid nearly a million dollars,
reimbursing the NGA for information. Money is not just the
issue here; it is the time necessary to get the information.
We have introduced legislation called the Military Support
for Fighting Wildfires Act. It is cosponsored by Ms. Jacobs and
Mr. Carbajal. We introduced it last year. We are going to do it
again this year.
It, basically, would require that the NGA make information
readily available to our firefighters as they attempt to save
our communities and our lives. Do you have a position on this
issue, and can you explain to me how we can make this work?
Ms. Wilkerson. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question.
So, NGA is reimbursed only if another Federal Government
agency, such as FEMA, designates NGA as a mission assigned. And
it is in that instance that there would be a reimbursement.
From an NGA perspective, we do not initiate reimbursement for
mission support to any domestic crisis response.
As it relates to wildfire disasters, we do have two
programs that support, can support wildfire disasters, and we
do operate those programs 24 by 7. And that support is not
based in an event reaching a major disaster--is not based in an
event reaching a major disaster classification. Our support is
constant and it is not intended to incur any additional cost or
manpower for wildfire support.
Mr. Garamendi. I appreciate your answer. We do have an
administrative complexity here to make sure that information is
readily available on time 24/7. And I do know you do collect
it; making it available sometimes gets to be a bureaucratic
difficulty.
So, we look forward to the legislation which clears all of
that up.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Okay. We have no other members to ask questions. So, we
will take a 5-minute recess and convene in the SCIF at 2337, I
believe is the room number, one floor up.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:16 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 26, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 26, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 26, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STEFANIK

Ms. Stefanik. Dr. Scolese, the NDAA 2023 clarified the National
Reconnaissance Office and the Director of the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency, shall leverage to the extent possible domestic
commercial geospatial-intelligence services and domestic commercial
satellite imagery, and that domestic commercial services shall include
companies operating in the U.S. that have active mitigation agreements
pursuant to the National Industrial Security Program. In your upcoming
competitions for commercial services, including the upcoming commercial
radar layer imagery contract, will you confirm that the NRO will comply
with this provision of law and allow all domestic commercial service
providers as defined above to participate?
Dr. Scolese. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARBAJAL
Mr. Carbajal. I think we'd all agree that innovation has been a key
contributor to our military's success. Today there's no shortage of
innovation in our country, but it seems the department has struggled to
leverage its full potential. The term ``valley of death'' is widely
used to acknowledge the difficulty to transition cutting-edge
technologies from concepts and demonstrations to programs of record.
What do you see as key contributors to the ``valley of death'' in the
area of space and how are you working to bridge the valley across Space
Systems Command, the Space Rapid Capabilities Office, and the Space
Development Agency?
Mr. Calvelli. One of the biggest contributors to the ``valley of
death'' for space systems is the historically lengthy time from
contract award to launch. Prolonged space system development timelines
reduce the number of opportunities to bring new cutting-edge
technologies into operational systems. It has commonly taken seven
years to build and launch a satellite. That means we might have to wait
that many years to incorporate promising new technology for a given
mission, which is simply too long.
My tenet of building smaller is intended to enable our acquisition
organizations to develop and launch new systems faster. Moving faster
inherently increases the frequency of opportunities to onramp new and
innovative technologies from our research labs and industry, thereby
helping to bridge the ``valley of death.'' Achieving my target of no
more than three years from contract award to launch will substantially
increase our ability to transition demonstrated technology into
operational capabilities.
To emphasize how my space acquisition tenets enable speed, I
derived a simple formula for going fast in space acquisition, which
includes: 1) Build smaller systems + 2) Use existing technology designs
to minimize non-recurring engineering + 3) Drive contract scope to 3
years or less from start to launch + 4) Use fixed-price contracts =
Mission Capabilities Faster to Our Warfighters
1Mr. Carbajal. Continuing the focus on innovation, many around the
world watched SpaceX launch the most powerful rocket in human history .
. . it concluded in a ``rapid unscheduled disassembly'' but was hailed
as a massive success. SpaceX and others in the industry are leveraging
an approach to go fast, accept failures, apply lessons learned, and
keep going. In your testimony, you mentioned the need for rapid space
acquisitions, and I agree with the need to pick up our pace. As
industry has demonstrated, in order to move along faster, you have to
accept some risk. Can you explain your approach to risk and provide
examples where your approach has been implemented?
Mr. Calvelli. I published the 9 Tenets and the Simple Formula memos
for the Space Acquisition Workforce to emphasize what they need to do
to be more agile and responsive. This is a culture change.
By building smaller and on shorter timelines, we are able to take
smart risks and plan in the potential for some failures along the way
while also increasing the rate and capacity of capability delivery to
our warfighters.
We also need to share this risk with industry. Industry must be
onboard with rapid contract delivery, fixed priced contracts, providing
realistic bids, and bidding on contracts on which they have mission
area experience.
The U.S. Space Force's Space Development Agency approach to
satellite acquisition has spread the risk by awarding tranches of
satellites to different vendors for a proliferated constellation of
low-Earth orbit satellites. They have capitalized on harnessing
commercial development and shorter timeframes to enhance resiliency and
add capabilities as the threat evolves.
Mr. Carbajal. There's been a lot of focus on the amount we spend on
the Department of Defense. Some are saying we need to curb our
spending, while others talk about the rise of near-peer threats and a
need to invest in our outdated systems from the cold war. Last
September, the GAO published a report on the acquisition of commercial
satellite imagery across the Intelligence Community and the Department
of Defense. The report points to the possibility of the same image
being purchased multiple times, which wouldn't be the best use of
taxpayer dollars. How are you working together across the NGA andNRO to
ensure DOD requirements are being met across the combatant commanders
to minimize duplicative purchases of imagery?
Dr. Scolese. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Carbajal. I think we'd all agree that innovation has been a key
contributor to our military's success. Today there's no shortage of
innovation in our country, but it seems the department has struggled to
leverage its full potential. The term ``valley of death'' is widely
used to acknowledge the difficulty to transition cutting-edge
technologies from concepts and demonstrations to programs of record.
What do you see as key contributors to the ``valley of death'' in the
area of space and how are you working to bridge the valley across Space
Systems Command, the Space Rapid Capabilities Office, and the Space
Development Agency?
Dr. Scolese. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
Mr. Carbajal. There's been a lot of focus on the amount we spend on
the Department of Defense. Some are saying we need to curb our
spending, while others talk about the rise of near-peer threats and a
need to invest in our outdated systems from the cold war. Last
September, the GAO published a report on the acquisition of commercial
satellite imagery across the Intelligence Community and the Department
of Defense. The report points to the possibility of the same image
being purchased multiple times, which wouldn't be the best use of
taxpayer dollars. How are you working together across the NGA andNRO to
ensure DOD requirements are being met across the combatant commanders
to minimize duplicative purchases of imagery?
Ms. Wilkerson. Congressman Carbajal, thank you for your question.
NGA and NRO work closely to ensure our processes and plans for the
acquisition of commercial imagery remain aligned. NGA's most important
steps to mitigate uncoordinated purchases has been the establishment of
a commercial GEOINT Requirements Process for the user community. This
process allows the GEOINT community to submit GEOINT needs that could
be satisfied by commercial solutions, including imagery, products, or
services. These needs are prioritized to enable collaborative
procurements and licensing terms that reduce duplicative purchases and
maximize mission utility across the community. NGA also gathers
information on current and planned purchases of commercial GEOINT by
other government organizations as part of our annual user data calls.
These efforts provide the transparency and coordination necessary to
enable informed acquisition decisions across the GEOINT user community.
I'll also highlight that DOD and IC policies and instructions
direct NRO to coordinate its commercial GEOINT acquisition activities
with GNA. This partnership enables collaboration in situations where
other government agencies engage NRO for independent procurement of
commercial GEOINT.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. STRONG
Mr. Strong. It's my understanding the missions in Lane 1 of Phase 3
allow for new entrants to bid for less complicated missions while Lane
2 of Phase 3 represents the most difficult missions and are therefore
reserved for experienced launch providers. For Lane 2 missions, why it
is important that providers selected are experienced and meet all NSSL
requirements?
Mr. Calvelli. NSSL missions require assured access to space, so
Lane 2 providers are incentivized to meet all unique gov't
requirements, to include Western Range capabilities and vertical
integration.

They have more challenging mission requirements,
necessitating full mission assurance (e.g., Space Based Infrared
System, USSF classified missions, NRO missions).

To bid on Lane 2 does not require prior experience, but
requires fully-certified launch vehicles in accordance with the New
Entrant Certification Guide prior to launching an NSSL Phase 3 Lane 2
mission.
This strategy avoids the possibility of providers optimizing to
meet some, but not all requirements, resulting in potential gaps in DOD
launch capabilities
Mr. Strong. Please explain the importance of ensuring all national
security space launch providers have the capability to launch from our
Western range at Vandenberg to reach polar orbits. Do you expect the
Space Force to maintain this requirement into Phase 4?
Mr. Calvelli. Currently, the USSF expects to maintain the Western
Range requirement for all Phase 3 Lane 2 providers. Phase 3 Lane 1
(IDIQ) providers will not be required to maintain launch capability
from the Western Range. The only instance that would require a Lane 1
provider to launch from the Western Range is when a provider bids on a
Task Order for a Western Range mission.

The Western Range maintains resiliency by providing an
additional site to launch from in the event of an anomaly or other
event that denies the use of Cape Canaveral Space Force Station, FL.

Many critical missions manifested on NSSL Phase 3 require
launches from the Western Range at Vandenberg Space Force Base, CA
since its location allows for a more direct insertion into polar and
retrograde orbits.

This location also increases the payload mass that a
given launch vehicle may deliver in a single launch to these specific
orbits.
Mr. Strong. This committee was recently briefed by Space Force
officials who indicated that adding a third launch provider in Lane 2
would likely increase launch costs by more than $5 billion, which could
instead be used to buy 330 SDA satellites, and that three launch awards
would not properly incentivize industry to bid the best prices. Please
explain how the Space Force came to this conclusion.
Mr. Calvelli. Adding a third provider to NSSL Phase 3 Lane 2 will
inherently increase costs. The Space Force based its cost estimate for
adding a third provider to Lane 2 on the following parameters:

Phase 2 actuals (plus escalation) to calculate estimates
for:

8 years of launch service support (FY25-FY32) for an
additional launch service provider

Launch service support pays for NSSL-unique costs not
directly associated with any one mission (e.g., maintenance of secure
facilities, support to west coast launch capability, and vertical
integration, etc.).

8 years award fee (FY25-FY32) for an additional
launch service provider

8 years of fleet surveillance (FY25-FY32) on an
additional launch system

Assumed space vehicles need to be designed/compatible to
fly on all three launch systems for max resiliency (tri-integration);
drives additional cost on both the launch vehicle and space vehicle
sides, and demands additional resources (both government and
contractor) to manage multiple, simultaneous efforts

Assumed additional overhead for program management and
other Program Executive Office support to manage a third provider

Assumed potential increase in launch service costs if
providers are less incentivized to competitively bid given all bidders
will win something The SDA comparison was only provided as an example
to show the capability tradeoff between adding a third provider and on-
orbit assets.
