- U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS BUDGET REQUEST FOR FISCAL YEAR 2015

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS BUDGET REQUEST FOR FISCAL YEAR 2015

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MARCH 13, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-57

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
87-670 PDF                          WASHINGTON : 2015

_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              DINA TITUS, Nevada
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
DAVID JOLLY, Florida
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Nancy Dolan, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

(II)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Thursday, March 13, 2014

U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Budget Request for Fiscal
Year 2015......................................................

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Jeff Miller, Chairman.......................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    34
Hon. Michael Michaud, Ranking Minority Member....................     2
Hon. Corrine Brown
Prepared Statement...........................................    35

WITNESSES

Hon. Eric K. Shinseki............................................     4
Prepared Statement...........................................    35

Accompanied by:

Hon. Robert A. Petzel, MD, Under Secretary for Benefits,
Department of Veterans Affairs
Hon. Allison A. Hickey, Under Secretary for Benefits,
Department of Veterans Affairs
Hon. Steve L. Muro, Under Secretary for Memorial Affairs,
Department of Veterans Affairs
Ms. Helen Tierney, Executive in Charge for the Office of
Management and Acting Chief Financial Officer
Department of Veterans Affairs
and
Mr. Stephen Warren, Executive in Charge for Information
and Technology, Office of Information, Department of
Veterans Affairs

MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Paralyzed Veterans of America....................................    45
Veterans of Foreign Wars fo the United States....................    49
Disabled American Veterans.......................................    51
Statement of Diane M. Sumatto, Director of AMVETS................    58
The American Legion..............................................    61

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS BUDGET REQUEST FOR FISCAL YEAR 2015

Thursday, March 13, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Roe, Flores,
Runyan, Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Walorski, Michaud, Brown,
Takano, Brownley, Titus, Kirkpatrick, Negrete-McLeod, Kuster,
O'Rourke, and Walz.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN, JEFF MILLER

The Chairman. Good morning, everybody. I want to welcome
each and every one of you here this morning to our hearing on
the President's fiscal 2015 budget request for the Departments
of Veterans Affairs.
Mr. Secretary, we are glad to have you back with us here in
the room. I appreciate your attendance and that of your entire
leadership team.
We have only had a short time to review the details of the
budget request, so I am sure that we will likely have some
follow-up questions after the hearing. And as usual, I would
ask for you and your folks' cooperation in trying to get the
answers to those questions to us as quickly as possible.
You know, in a fiscal climate that has seen budget cuts all
the way to the bone, funding for our veterans has emerged as an
obvious priority for both the Administration and the Congress.
For that, I commend you for your leadership and fighting to
ensure that veterans of this country remain a priority.
I also want to commend VA on the operation of its veterans'
crisis line. I have heard some really positive feedback in the
most recent days. Paul Rieckhoff was testifying in the joint
hearing over in the Senate and your statement that roughly
35,000 men and women have been rescued from suicide because of
VA's intervention, it is the rough equivalent of two army
divisions. And certainly that speaks for itself and is a great
success. So with that, we say keep up the good work.
I have listened carefully in the last few weeks to
testimony from a whole myriad of veteran service organizations
who testified before our committees regarding the need to
improve timely delivery of mental healthcare, to not only
ensure that healthcare is delivered in state-of-the-art
facilities, and to sustain VA's progress in reducing the
backlog that exists out there, but also making sure that we
have timely decisions and accurate decisions on the backlog of
claims that exist out there.
When I look at this $163.9 billion budget request, I am
left wondering why we cannot do better than we are in some
areas. I think it is fair to say that Congress has supported
nearly every request that the Administration has asked for when
it comes to our veterans, yet I think we can all acknowledge
that serious problems still exist within the system.
Although it is nice to see a steady downward trend in the
backlog over the last year, what I am hearing from veteran
service organizations and veterans themselves is that VA is
sacrificing accurate decisions for fast decisions and that it
is falling behind on appeals.
With the record funding provided in this area over the last
decade both in manpower and in technology, it is frustrating, I
think, to all of us to continue to hear some of those same
complaints.
And I am also concerned about continued inspector general
and media reports regarding preventable deaths at a number of
VA facilities across the country. I know that VA is not
infallible, but serious, even deadly mistakes merit swift and
clear accountability.
I know you believe as I believe and we are ready to work
with you and your agency to give you any of the tools that you
need in order to get the job done.
I am going to follow-up on this last issue in questioning,
but I am troubled with what appears to be a common practice
with VA's budget submissions of late. And that is to identify
based on updated information excess funds that are no longer
necessary, then redirecting those funds toward initiatives that
were budgeted and appropriated in advance at a lower level.
For example, VA overestimated by about $700 million what it
needs for long-term care resources in fiscal year 2015, but now
the agency wants to redirect all of that money and more towards
its homeless initiatives, facility activations, and other
needs.
In fact, notwithstanding the overestimation of $700
million, VA now seeks a supplemental budget for fiscal year
2015 of $368 million. Needless to say, I think this practice
needs further discussion.
Mr. Secretary, these are just a couple areas I would like
to address with you this morning. In the interest of time,
however, I am going to recognize the ranking member for his
opening statement.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Jeff Miller appears in
the Appendix]

OPENING STATEMENT OF MICHAEL MICHAUD, RANKING MINORITY MEMBER

Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, and the panel for being here
this morning as well.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to begin by noting that in your
written statement, you applaud, and I quote, ``Congress's
foresight,'' end of quote, in providing for advanced
appropriation for the Department of Veterans Affairs'
healthcare budget.
This committee is again trying to show that foresight in
looking down the road and providing advanced appropriation
authority for the remaining 14 percent of the Department of
Veterans Affairs' discretionary budget.
As you know, H.R. 813, Putting Veterans' Funding First Act
of 2013, would give the Department of Veterans Affairs a
certain and stable budget. It would also implement some vital
planning and programming provisions.
You have seen firsthand how valuable these can be. Help us
help you and the veterans you serve by coming out today in
support of H.R. 813.
This morning, we are discussing the budget for fiscal year
2015 and 2016. Mr. Secretary, two of the VA's top three goals
have due dates in 2015, eliminating veterans' homelessness and
eliminating the disability claims backlog.
My question to you and a perspective is, I believe that we
should take in regard to this hearing is, does this proposed
budget provide the Department of Veterans Affairs with all the
resources needed to meet both of these goals in 2015? If not,
now is the time to let us know what you need to meet both those
goals.
I have been a champion, as you know, of improving access,
especially for rural veterans, since I first came to Congress
in 2003. As such, your third goal of improving veterans' access
to benefits and services is of special interest to me.
Today I hope to receive some assurance that the Department
of Veterans Affairs is pursuing new technologies,
infrastructure, and construction management process that will
increase access to all veterans.
And, finally, in December, the Department of Veterans
Affairs issued a final rule granting a presumption for certain
illnesses relating to traumatic brain injury. In the past, the
Department of Veterans Affairs has pointed to past presumptions
for leading up to the disability claims backlog. And today I
look forward to hearing what advanced planning you are doing to
ensure that this does not happen again when you look at
presumption as it relates to TBI.
And, Secretary Shinseki, this will be the sixth time that
you have come before this committee to discuss the Department
of Veterans Affairs' budget, more times than any other previous
secretary, so I applaud you for your willingness to serve as
the secretary for that many years. And I want to thank you for
your continued service to our veterans and to the Department of
Veterans Affairs and to the Nation, and I look forward to your
testimony today.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Members, at this time, I want to recognize our first and
only panel that will be with us this morning. We are going to
hear testimony from the Honorable Eric K. Shinseki, secretary
of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Accompanying the secretary this morning is the Honorable
Robert A. Petzel, under secretary for Health; the Honorable
Allison A. Hickey, under secretary for Benefits; the Honorable
Steve L. Muro, under secretary for Memorial Affairs; Ms. Helen
Tierney, executive in charge for the Office of Management and
acting chief financial officer; and Mr. Stephen Warren, the
executive in charge for Information and Technology within the
Office of Information and Technology at the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
Secretary Shinseki, you are now recognized for your
testimony, sir.

STATEMENT OF ERIC K. SHINSEKI, SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS, ACCOMPANIED BY ROBERT A. PETZEL, UNDER
SECRETARY FOR HEALTH, DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; ALLISON
A. HICKEY, UNDER SECRETARY FOR BENEFITS, DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS; STEVE L. MURO, UNDER SECRETARY FOR MEMORIAL AFFAIRS,
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; HELEN TIERNEY, EXECUTIVE IN
CHARGE FOR THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND ACTING CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; STEPHEN WARREN,
EXECUTIVE IN CHARGE FOR INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY, OFFICE OF
INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY, DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

Secretary Shinseki. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, distinguished
Members of the committee, thanks for this opportunity to
present to you the President's fiscal year 2015 budget and
fiscal year 2016 advance appropriations requests for the
Department of Veterans Affairs.
As the Ranking Member noted, I am working my sixth budget
cycle with you and together we have made a lot of progress. I
express our thanks from all of us at VA. We deeply appreciate
your unwavering support for our veterans and our past five
years of work, I think, reflects a good bit of that commitment.
Let me also acknowledge the representatives of our Veteran
Service Organizations who are here today. Their insights and
support make us better at caring for veterans, their families,
and our survivors.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for introducing the members of my
panel here, and I have a written statement which I ask to be
submitted for the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Secretary Shinseki. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Fiscal Year 2015 budget and 2016 advance appropriations
requests demonstrate once again President Obama's steadfast
commitment to our Nation's veterans. His leadership and the
support of the Congress and especially Members of this
committee has allowed us for five years now to answer one of
our abiding guides and that is President Lincoln's charge from
149 years ago to the American people to care for those who
shall have borne the battle, their families, and our survivors.
I thank the Members for your commitment to veterans and
seek once again your support for these budget requests.
The President's vision reflected in these budget requests
is about empowering veterans to help lead the rebuilding of the
middle class in this country much as they did following World
War II through access to quality healthcare, benefits,
training, education, and employment that enabled achieving the
American dream.
VA's 2015 budget request seeks $163.9 billion, $68.4
billion of that in discretionary funding, including medical
care collections, and that is an increase of three percent
above our 2014 enacted funding level.
And the other piece of that budget request is $95.6 billion
in mandatory funding. This budget also requests $58.7 billion
for the fiscal year 2016 advance appropriations for medical
care, an increase of $2.7 billion or 4.7 percent above the 2015
budget request that we are submitting today.
This is another strong budget and your support of it is
critical to providing veterans the care and benefits they have
earned through their service and sacrifice. It enables VA to
further the three significant top priorities that we have
discussed budget after budget cycle here, and laid out for you
our plans and our progress.
The first is expanding veterans' access to benefits and
services; the second, eliminating the disability claims backlog
in 2015; and, thirdly, ending Veterans' homeless in 2015 as
well.
Since 2009, we focused the resources you have provided to
address these three key priorities, among other requirements.
These three have been the driving force behind our efforts to
serve veterans better.
And where it comes to access, I would report that more than
two million additional veterans have enrolled in VA healthcare.
We opened our 151st hospital, our first in 17 years, and we
have increased our community-based outpatient clinics by a net
of 55, bringing our total CBOCs today in this country to 820.
More than a million veteran and family member students have
received VA educational assistance and vocational training.
Nearly 90 percent of all veterans now have a burial option
within 75 miles of their home, and our plans are to increase
that to 96 percent by 2017, so just a way ahead beyond these
budget requests.
In terms of disability claims, the backlog has declined 40
percent in the past 12 months. We are transitioning from paper
to digital processing and we are on track to end the backlog in
2015.
In terms of veterans' homelessness, the estimated number of
homeless veterans fell by 24 percent between 2010 and 2013 and
we expect another reduction when this year's point in time
count, which was taken in January, is tallied.
These are some of our key accomplishments. The momentum is
up. I think we are making good progress across the board and we
will continue to leverage every resource in these budget
requests to do what is right for veterans.
In closing, I would say as we have for five years now, I
assure the committee that we will use these resources that the
Congress provides effectively, efficiently, and with
accountability to best care for veterans.
So, again, Mr. Chairman, Members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear here today and for your
continued support of veterans. We look forward to your
questions.

[The prepared statement of Eric K. Shinseki appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary, for your
testimony. I am sure we all have a significant amount of
questions that we would like to ask.
If I can, I would like to talk about Senator Sanders'
legislation that he had proposed, Senate 1982, on the floor a
couple of weeks ago, which incorporated a number of House bills
that have passed this committee and the full House. And we have
actually sent it over, and we await the Senate's response.
But like many committee Members here, I support a great
number of the pieces of legislation that Senator Sanders had,
but I would like to get your take, if you would, on some of
those pieces that he included.
I think it was in Section 301 of the bill that mandates the
enrollment of certain Priority 8 veterans by December 31st of
2014. And I noted that the Administration embarked on a limited
expansion of Priority 8 veterans being able to use VA about
five years ago.
So my question is, does the Administration support an
expansion beyond what you have already allowed and, if so, what
resources would be required before such an expansion could be
accommodated without negatively impacting existing healthcare
being provided to users within the system?
Secretary Shinseki. Mr. Chairman, when we focused on
Priority Group 8 veterans five years ago, we had a number in
mind that established a goal, what we thought we would see join
us. In many ways, the specific focus on Priority Group 8
veterans became somewhat less focused because many ended up in
other higher categories and, therefore, were able to join us.
And we exceeded the number of veterans we thought would be
in this Priority Group 8 category. I think it was about 500,000
that was a rough target that we thought would respond
incrementally over time.
I would say that over the last five years, we have had over
two million veterans join VA's rolls for healthcare. And so
while we have exceeded the number, a little bit of the priority
group focus was addressed when veterans qualified for other
categories.
The Chairman. But going back to category----
Secretary Shinseki. We met the initial milestones we set.
The Chairman. Correct. And I am just saying now if you
expand it beyond what you had already opened up, what would the
agency need in order to expand for all Category 8s?
Secretary Shinseki. I do not know that we have made a
financial assessment to respond to that question.
The Chairman. Would the Administration support opening up
for----
Secretary Shinseki. I would be happy to provide an estimate
of what the cost might be, but I have not done that personally.
The Chairman. And in Section 303 of the bill, it expands
the caregiver program to all eras of veterans. And I note from
a report from last July, I think it was, that VA says they
cannot responsibly advise the Congress on expansion without
realistic consideration of the resources necessary to carry out
the expansion.
In the same report, it stated that VA believes that
expansion poses the risk of compromising resources needed for
its core veteran healthcare mission.
So my question is, does the Administration now support this
provision?
Secretary Shinseki. Here again, Mr. Chairman, I think when
we put the program together, we expected about a 3,000
population of caregivers that would meet the requirements of
the law. Today we are over 13,000. And I just share that with
you to understand how popular and how helpful this program has
been.
To the degree we can, we are interested in helping all of
our caregivers who have responsibilities for veterans who have
served this country, and I have an appreciation of what
caregivers have to go through. This is a good program and I am
happy to work with you in answering that question.
The Chairman. And one other real quick question is, part of
Senator Sanders' bill provided dental care as well. And my
question is, does the Administration support that provision?
Secretary Shinseki. Mr. Chairman, dental healthcare is part
of our healthcare program, so we provide dental care to
veterans today. It is based on service connection for dental
work, and so I would try to understand what the qualifying
conditions would be.
The Chairman. And the pilot in the legislation it is a
comprehensive approach for all veterans to get all dental care
provided, so it expands way beyond those that may have received
some type of injury in their service.
Secretary Shinseki. Sure. And I would say there is a way to
work with you and also the other body to get language that
makes sense for providing the best quality healthcare, which
includes dental healthcare for our veterans.
The Chairman. Mr. Michaud.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you again, Mr. Secretary.
The VA state home construction grant program priority one
list for fiscal year 2014 lists a total of $489 million, you
know, waiting for VA funding, projects that are waiting for
funding. You have requested $80 million for this program for
fiscal year 2015, $5 million below the 2014 levels.
In light of the backlog of nearly $500 million in projects
for fiscal year 2014, what do you anticipate to be the total of
unfunded priority one projects for fiscal year 2015 if you
indeed receive $80 million?
Secretary Shinseki. Well, Mr. Michaud, we have a
prioritization process here and this is a program that we work
in collaboration with the states. And there may be a long list
of projects that we see on the list. Some of them are on hold
until states can generate their portion of the funding, which
we then intend--you know, it is our responsibility to try to
meet.
If you have a specific state home in mind, I will try to
address that.
Mr. Michaud. Well, actually, the priority one list shows
that in 2014, a backlog of $489 million. Priority one
applications are those that have, already have state matching
funds in place. So the state matching funds are there. You have
that huge backlog currently.
And my only concern is you are only asking for $80 million,
which is $5 million less than what--it is a $5 million cut from
the previous year. So there already is a huge backlog with
state funds available.
And the issue here is GAO just came out with a report that
shows state homes provide cost-effective, long-term care for
our veterans. So I have a concern with this huge backlog
already out there with state funding available, that you are
asking for less money than----
Secretary Shinseki. Yes.
Mr. Michaud [continuing]. What you received in the previous
year.
Secretary Shinseki. Let me give you a better answer for the
record. As I say, we work these off in priority. A good bit of
work goes into this. I would say every now and then, we have
projects that fall off the list because something happens and
we move projects up.
But no question there is a long list of things we would
like to do. We pay for 65 percent of these projects which is a
significant investment by the Federal Government.
Mr. Michaud. Okay. Yeah, if you can get it for the record,
I appreciate that.
Secretary Shinseki. Right.
Mr. Michaud. I also understand that non-VA care
coordination is designed to ensure a more effective procedure
to third-party billing and also oversight of the continuity of
care for our veterans. VHA has been rolling this program out
over the last year.
Can you give a status update on non-VA care coordination
initiatives?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me call on Dr. Petzel to do this.
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, Congressman Michaud.
VA spends approximately $6.8 billion a year on non-VA care
in a variety of different programs. The thing that I think you
are talking about directly is the approximately $5 billion that
we spend on non-VA medical care across the country.
And in order to provide better access for America's
veterans that live in rural parts of this country so that they
can have care that is very similar to the care that you can
receive in a less rural, more urban area, we have developed a
program called patient-centered community care or PC3.
PC3 provides for a standardized way of a physician asking
for community care or a patient asking for community care, a
structured referral with a very clear template for what needs
to be in the request, and then we go to the network that has
been developed by the two contractors that we have, Health Net
and TriWest, to identify the providers within their network
that can meet the need in whatever part of the country it might
be.
It is going to provide better access for veterans that live
in rural America, better choices about where they go, and much
more timely service. We have in the contract a number of
requirements regarding timeliness, reporting, et cetera.
To date, about 5,500 individuals have been involved with
PC3, contracted PC3 care. It started in January with the
beginning of the rollout. TriWest's network and now Health
Net's network is out as well.
We expect that this is going to be an important part of
reaching particularly specialty care into rural America for
veterans that live in those communities.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much.
I yield. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here and for your service to
our veterans.
Last night, I had a telephone town hall meeting and one of
the questions that came up is the impending construction of a
new national veteran cemetery in southern Colorado, in El Paso
County.
I want to commend and thank Under Secretary Steve Muro for
his hard work on this project, and veterans and active-duty
folks are very excited that that is coming along. So I commend
you for your contribution to southern Colorado and veterans
living anywhere near there.
That will help reach that 96 percent goal that you
mentioned, Mr. Secretary, of people living within 75 miles of a
national veteran cemetery.
Changing subject, I was a little concerned to hear that
there are continuing, not little, I am very concerned that
there are some continuing issues with quality control over
claims processing.
And an example recently in my office back in Colorado
Springs is a veteran who waited a year for the claim to be
processed and then was told that he did not produce enough
documentation about his service in Vietnam. And he had served
in Korea and that was what his claim was based on. Now, maybe
that was a typo or maybe it was actually a sign of inadequate
claims processing.
I know that you have a tremendous need and desire to work
through this big backlog that we have, but I want to make sure
that we are not sacrificing, and the chairman brought this up a
minute ago, quantity over quality.
How would you respond to that, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me begin and then I will turn to
Under Secretary Hickey.
Congressman, I will tell you that no veteran should have to
wait for benefits and services we provide that they earned a
long time ago. And so we are committed to making that available
as quickly as possible.
The other aspect of that is not going so fast that you lose
control over the precision of getting it right. And for us, the
goal is getting it right the first time through. Not only is
that better for veterans, but it also improves our efficiency.
Any time you have to handle the same claim more than once, it
is an increase in workload.
We in VA are, about one-third of us, about 100,000 of us,
are veterans. And so looking after veterans' claims issues is
something we spend a good bit of time on. Fifty percent of VBA
is veterans. And what you are describing is a lack of precision
on a point. I would like to get some more details on that.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. We can provide those to you.
Secretary Shinseki. And I will ask Secretary Hickey to talk
about the overall accuracy picture.
Ms. Hickey. Thank you, Congressman.
As the secretary said, our VBA employees are 52 percent
veteran and many more are a direct family member of a veteran
or a family member of a serving military member and all of them
care deeply about delivering both a timely and an accurate
claim decision for their brothers and sisters whom they have
served alongside.
Let me just tell you very quickly that our approach and
method for determining our quality, it has both been audited
and validated by an external agency outside of VA and has been
found to be statistically sound, highly reliable not only for
the defined governance process but also for the accuracy of the
results. And it does cover the complete body of claims that we
do across the board.
Your budget help over the last couple of years has allowed
us to take additional steps to improve that quality. The
budgets associated with training have allowed us to stand up
challenge training for all of our new employees. That lets us
improve the skills and abilities of our folks.
We have made an investment in quality review teams at the
individual regional offices that have caught errors before they
become final which is a great way to make sure that does not
end up in a problem for our veterans.
Also, we have begun a new process in this last year called
consistency studies where we send out a scenario and we ask
everybody to do the exact same scenario, and then we look at
the consistency of the answers and apply direct training all
the way down to the employee level, if necessary, to improve on
the consistency of the responses.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. I see we have run out of time and I was
hoping I would be able to yield some additional time to my
colleague from Colorado, but I cannot do that.
So, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am not sure who to direct my question to, but I presume
it is Ms. Hickey. Is the VA working on fully completing the
long-term solution for the Post-9/11 GI Bill claims so that
automation will include original claims and supplemental
claims?
Ms. Hickey. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
Long-term solution is VA's paperless IT system that has
been put in place to help our student veterans and their family
members go to school in a timely way and with a high-quality
accuracy decision.
I can tell you that we have put new capability into the
long-term solution that allows now more than 80 percent of our
claims to go through with the benefit of automation that allows
us to get those student veterans going to school with very
quick answers and highly accurate answers.
Right now we have actually exceeded for more than a year
now the agency priority goals for both timeliness and accuracy
for those student veterans. And so our long-term solution is
proving its value for both original claims and for supplemental
claims.
Mr. Takano. Well, how far along are you towards completion
of the solution and if you still have further to go, how much
longer will it take and how much more money will it take to
complete?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me ask our IT expert to address
that.
Mr. Warren. Thank you, sir.
Right now the system is, we have it in sustainment or in
operations mode. As Secretary Hickey walked through, we build
to what the performance goal needs are. So today it is
exceeding what is needed.
So as a result of our internal prioritization of resources,
we move the IT dollars to hit what is not meeting our goals or
targets we have set. So today we are sustaining the system. We
are making updates to it as needed.
But with respect to new capability, that is something that
is probably projected for the out years because today it is
doing the job. It is moving those claims through and, as
Secretary Hickey talked about, tremendous amount of automation
such that as soon as it comes in, it moves through and we are
able to get the dollars out to those veterans so they can take
advantage of that great benefit.
Mr. Takano. So are you telling me that it is complete for
the moment?
Mr. Warren. It is complete for the moment. It meets what
our mission needs are. And if the mission needs change or if
legislation comes in that requires more, then we would go back
and re-look at where we placed our investments to meet those
needs, sir.
Mr. Takano. So you do not need additional funding at this
time?
Mr. Warren. At this time for the goals that we set, it
meets those goals, so we have funding needs, and appreciate
your support for that, to continue running that system in terms
of paying for the underlying. But with respect to new
investments right now, there are none planned, sir.
Mr. Takano. Well, I congratulate you if you have achieved
your goals and I am pleased to hear that.
Do you think that this budget and everything that the VA,
the Department of Defense, and Department of Labor are doing to
improve the transition process is enough, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me start and then I will call on
Secretary Hickey to provide some detail.
This program began, we have just started this program about
a year ago. And the program is designed to take care of the
transition of every servicemember leaving the military.
The transition assistance program, which is a DoD program,
has VA representatives as well as Department of Labor
representatives inserted into the training that goes on for
every servicemember.
Every departing servicemember gets a departure physical,
something that was not done before. And so we have a pretty
good idea of what the needs are going to be and then the
transfer of this information to VA is much better than it has
ever been.
Your question is it all that we need it to be: is what we
designed, understanding what we thought the needs are. And we
will learn as we execute the program, what needs to be
adjusted. So we are still gathering data.
DoD has just announced that they will be looking at a
downsizing requirement which will then allow us to understand
what our requirements are going to be for throughput and we are
working with them right now to understand what that plan is.
Mr. Takano. If I may, and I am going to run out of time, my
suggestion is that maybe servicemembers should be encouraged to
start thinking and preparing for the transition much earlier
than they are.
Secretary Shinseki. I agree. I agree. And those are
discussions that both VA and DoD have and understand those
encouragements occur while they are still in uniform. And I
know that is a priority at DoD.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my time is----
The Chairman. Dr. Benishek.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was looking at, you know, the overall numbers here and,
you know, I am a little concerned about the care of our
veterans and, you know, the medical aspect.
What percentage of the new employees that you are planning
on hiring will be actual medical care providers and what
percentages are the, you know, administrative staff?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me ask Dr. Petzel to discuss that.
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, Congressman Benishek.
I would have to go back and look at what the plan is for
these hires that we probably will make over the next year. I do
not have in my mind the figure.
But let me just relate the fact that when we underwent the
mental health hiring initiative starting in March of 2012 in
order to provide better access for veterans to mental
healthcare, we hired what eventually turned out to be 2,400
clinical professionals in the six different clinical categories
and about 600 administrative people to help support those.
Now, whether that plays out in our entire hiring, I would
have to go back and look.
Dr. Benishek. I would appreciate to be able to see what
those kind of numbers look like because, as you know, I am
interested in making sure that, you know, the people--you are
running an efficient program and there is more healthcare
providers than there are, you know, clipboard carrying
bureaucrats.
Another question I have to tell you the truth is a little
bit more about the PC3 program. You know, I have asked--I
cannot remember who it was I asked about the implementation of
the program and the amount of people that are actually going to
participate.
And I am a little concerned over the what is it going to
cost the VA to have this intermediary. I mean, there are two
contractors, right? Was it TriWest and Health Net are the two?
They are the only two providers in the entire country then?
I mean, can you tell me why that is and kind of what is the
percentages that they are going to be taking of the VA's money
to just organize this network?
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, Congressman Benishek.
There are two networks. There are literally thousands of
providers around the country. We negotiated with those two
organizations to basically have very close to Medicare rates
for reimbursement. You cannot get anything better than that.
They then go out and negotiate with individual providers to
join their network. So we are expecting, quite frankly, that we
are going to save money over what we have spent in the past in
non-VA medical care in those areas where we do use the
contractors.
Dr. Benishek. Well, that is my concern, you know, that they
are going to be paying providers less than Medicare. Are you
going to get providers to actually sign up?
Dr. Petzel. To date----
Dr. Benishek. Like my district, as you know, is very rural.
Dr. Petzel. Right.
Dr. Benishek. And, you know, many of my veterans want to
have access to, you know, multiple facilities like X-ray in
Sault Ste. Marie rather than to drive to Iron Mountain.
So are you going to be able to get, you know, the Sault
Hospital to provide an X-ray when it is going to be paying them
less than Medicare, maybe close to Medicaid rates? Are they
going to want to join a network like that?
Dr. Petzel. We believe that this is going to do a better
job of providing access across the country for veterans. So
far, the networks have been very successfully set up according
to the two network providers. And we have been able to--we have
had about 5,500 people actually use this and we have been able
to----
Dr. Benishek. Five thousand five hundred providers or
5,000----
Dr. Petzel. No, 5,500 patients since we--we have just
gotten started. And we have been able to meet the needs that
were identified for those patients within the network. So I am
expecting that again----
Dr. Benishek. That sounds like a very small number of
patients, though, Dr. Petzel.
Dr. Petzel. Oh, it is just starting, sir, just starting.
Dr. Benishek. Well, I am very concerned about this process
and I am concerned that there is going to be a difficulty in
getting enough outside providers.
I understand the difficulty with the VA individually trying
to contract providers on your own because I have been a part of
that, you know, as a physician working for the VA and it is not
easy to get the payment system arranged in a logical fashion.
So I understand maybe the need for that intermediary, but I am
just concerned about people participating in it, frankly,
because of low reimbursement.
Secretary Shinseki. Congressman, Dr. Petzel is our expert
here on these things, but I would say if you look at our
discussion of delivery of healthcare, this is one of the
options where we try to get as much access to veterans in as
many places as we can using the experience of these two
networks.
We also still have fee basis that we provide for those
areas that do not quite fit.
Dr. Benishek. Well, I guess what I would like is I would
like to have an update to me as to how much you are actually
paying.
If you are paying these guys Medicare rates, are they
taking 20 percent of the money to provide the network to you?
You understand me? And how much are we paying this intermediary
to provide the care to our veterans?
And, you know, those are tax dollars that these guys are
making money on and they are not actually providing the care.
They are just signing everybody up. I just want to know how
much of the take they are getting.
Secretary Shinseki. As Dr. Petzel says, we are just getting
started. We are happy to have that discussion with you.
Dr. Benishek. Appreciate that. Sorry. My time is up.
The Chairman. Ms. Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your testimony this
morning.
I remain concerned with the mental healthcare needs of our
Nation's heroes. And I know we have touched upon it this
morning.
Three weeks ago, thanks to Dr. Benishek, we had a hearing
in Ventura County, which is the district that I represent, and
discovered that the response time in Ventura County is 44 days
for mental health needs as opposed to, I think the goal was a
minimum of 14 days.
So I am wondering, and we talked a little bit about the
mental health initiative in terms of trying to hire more mental
health professionals, so I am just wondering, you know, the
VA's plan is to use the budget to make sure that we are meeting
the mental health needs of our veterans and sort of what
metrics we are using to gauge that.
Clearly we discovered an area within California where the
response and I think the number of FTEs are below what is
needed to meet the demand there and what is going to be done
about that.
Secretary Shinseki. Congresswoman, let me just say that, we
all know that we have been at war for a decade, over a decade
now, and the great young people we send off have done fantastic
jobs carrying the mission load that we have given them.
So after ten years, we ought to be very sensitive to this
area that you talk about. And I would assure you that inside
this leadership team and throughout VA, this is something that
we work quite closely. It is trying to understand. First of
all, it is a difficult area and, secondly, exactly what will
work.
And one of the metrics would be what you are talking about,
the full-time equivalent employees. But we have done other
things. We have in those areas where we have difficulty hiring
providers, just because they are not available, we are
challenged and we have set up a network where a virtual mental
health connection can be made between an individual in that
kind of a situation and the rest of the system where we have
mental health providers, sort of a virtual mental health
clinic.
We in our work are a little bit reactive, and this is not
an excuse, a little bit reactive because we look at who walked
in for treatment this year and we try to adjust it for next
year. We do not have a good metric for anticipating what next
year's load is going to be.
We put an estimate in there, but it is less precise than we
would like. And so we are constantly having to look at
ourselves, looking at those access metrics you describe.
I am going to ask Dr. Petzel to provide a little more
detail here, but it is something we adjust over time and we are
looking at how we sit today.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, sir.
Secretary Shinseki. Dr. Petzel.
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, sir.
It is very important to us that we are able to provide good
access to high-quality mental health services for these people
who are returning from conflict. As the secretary mentioned,
multiple deployments and the stress involved in their
particular circumstance there make them very vulnerable.
Our fiscal year 2015 budget requests $7.1 billion to treat
approximately 1.7 million patients with specialized mental
health services. With the addition of the 2,400 people that I
spoke about earlier, we have improved access across the
country. We are not where we want to be yet.
And there are places such as the Oxnard Clinic, which you
and Dr. Benishek visited, where for new patients, we are not
meeting our goals of providing timely access. And there are
places where we are doing an excellent job of meeting the goals
of timely access.
We are in the process of assessing those places where we
are having difficulty to look at what the recruitment problems
are and what the issues might be associated with not providing
timely care.
I know specifically in Oxnard, as we have discussed, their
plans to hire two additional psychotherapists which should be
able to then manage the individual psychotherapy needs for both
PTSD and depression in that clinic and provide for timely
access. So we acknowledge the difficulties with Oxnard and also
the fact that we are, I think, working hard to try and correct
that situation.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, sir.
My time has run out. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Coffman, you are recognized.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Shinseki, as you know, there is current
litigation between the prime contractor and the VA with regards
to the cost of construction of the Aurora VA Medical Center.
The prime contractor is arguing the cost is $1.1 billion and
the VA argues the cost is $600 million.
Does the VA have a contingency plan if the prime contractor
walks off the job or VA realizes a shortfall of between $400
and $500 million?
Secretary Shinseki. Congressman, this is in litigation, so
I cannot go into too much detail except to tell you that for
the design of the Denver medical center, a contractor was
brought in early to help with the design and it happened to be
this contractor. And this contractor then was allowed to
compete for the project and did and signed the contract at $604
million. And that is the contract we are pursuing.
We understand that because of mutual agreement about
requirements to improve on the contract that the figure has now
been increased, I think, to $612 million. And this negotiation
continues. We work with this contractor. It is our intent to do
that.
I have not heard from the contractor any indication that he
is thinking about walking off the project. We certainly, you
know, hope that is not the case. We are committed to funding
this project.
And I would point out, as I mentioned to you in the past,
this project did not exist before 2009. And today there are
pilings in the ground and it is going vertical in about five
years. I think this contract has done well. We just need to
work out what is usually construction negotiation between a
contractor and the government.
Mr. Coffman. If the appeals court does determine that the
cost is closer to the billion dollar figure than the $600
million that you have just referenced, would the VA have to ask
Congress for additional appropriations to complete the project?
Secretary Shinseki. I will have to see, wait and see what
the figure that comes out of the appeals process nails.
Mr. Coffman. That is not the question. The question is, if
it is closer to a billion dollars, would you have to come
before Congress for an appropriation?
Secretary Shinseki. You are asking a hypothetical here,
Congressman. I do not know. I will have to take a look. I have
not heard the billion dollar figure before.
Mr. Coffman. That is in the litigation.
Secretary Shinseki. Well, we have not accepted all of what
the contractor said is part of that, so----
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
But I think the question is, if the court's rule is that
the agency owes an additional $400 million, would that require
VA to come to Congress for additional funds?
Secretary Shinseki. It may, but I am not going to speculate
here today.
The Chairman. That is not a hypothetical. That is if the
court rules and says you owe it, I need to know, we need to
know from an authorization----
Secretary Shinseki. We may re-prioritize other projects,
Mr. Chairman----
The Chairman. I am sorry. I missed that.
Secretary Shinseki [continuing]. Before I come back. Yes.
The Chairman. Yeah. I missed----
Secretary Shinseki. We may look at re-prioritization and
come to you for reprogramming.
The Chairman. Reprogramming?
Secretary Shinseki. Yes.
The Chairman. But you would have to come to Congress for
reprogramming or reauthorization----
Secretary Shinseki. We always do, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman [continuing]. Of funds? Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Shinseki, I would like to start out by thanking
you and commending you for your responsiveness to me and to our
office in the many requests that we have put before you,
commend your team collectively and individually for their
responsiveness to us.
We do not always agree with the conclusions that members of
your leadership team reach. For example, Mr. Muro and I have
talked about re-grassing the Fort Bliss Cemetery which right
now is xeriscaped and covered in essentially gravel and dirt.
We would love that to be re-grassed. But we are working
constructively with Mr. Muro to try to beautify what is there
already and I think that holds true for everyone almost without
exception.
I would like to go through a few of our priorities in El
Paso and I think they pertain to national issues and to the
fiscal year 2015 budget.
The first is expanding capacity and quality of care,
primary care at the El Paso VHA Clinic and ultimately we need a
full-service veterans' hospital in El Paso. Currently when
veterans need that kind of care, they are traveling on a 9 to
10-hour round trip to Albuquerque, New Mexico which is the
closest full-service VA hospital.
We looked at the 14-day access numbers in El Paso for the
last year. In October, only 18 percent of the veterans who are
trying to see a primary healthcare provider were able to get an
appointment within 14 days.
It has improved since then thanks to Mr. John Mendoza and
his wonderful team of doctors, nurses, and front-line staff in
El Paso, but it is in desperate need of improvement.
Second is we need to improve claims' turnaround times out
of the Waco regional office. It did go from a peak of 470 days
that the average El Paso veteran was waiting to hear back on
their claim last year to the current number which is 288. So it
is an improvement. It is not at 125, but we are moving in the
right direction. And we thank Under Secretary Hickey and her
team for helping us out with that.
Third is the backlog on the IDES claims processing in
Washington State that our wounded warriors who at the WTU at
Fort Bliss are languishing for hundreds of days beyond when
they should be so that they can transition out and get on with
their lives. We would love your help with that and look forward
to working with you there.
And the fourth one, and this is where I want to ask my
question finally, is on access to mental healthcare and to pick
up on something that Congresswoman Brownley brought up. That is
perhaps the most critical issue in El Paso and I would guess in
other VHA centers around the country.
When I was running for office, I was approached by a young
man who just returned from Afghanistan, had PTSD, was using his
Post-9/11 GI money to go to the El Paso Community College, at
night was flipping burgers at Carl's Jr., and said I cannot get
in to see a mental healthcare specialist. I am supposed to be
in every single week. I am lucky if I get in every 6 to 8
weeks. When I get in, it is a different counselor each time. I
have no continuity of care. If I could pay for this myself, I
would, but I cannot afford it. Will you help me out?
That anecdote and others that I have heard have since been
borne out by the statistics that we have seen. The recent SAO
report puts El Paso at 118 of 128 VHAs around the country for
access to mental healthcare.
We surveyed our own veterans' population and found that a
quarter of them could not make a mental healthcare appointment
within 1 calendar year.
So we have been able to work with Dr. Petzel on this. He
has made a commitment to me and to my team that by May of this
year, we will get to that 14-day number for 90 to 95 percent of
the population.
But my question for you, Secretary Shinseki, and for Dr.
Petzel is, ours in El Paso, as I heard from Ms. Brownley, is
not a unique story. What are you going to do in addition to the
additional $309 million that we are requesting in the fiscal
year 2015 budget for mental healthcare to surge providers'
access, care, and resources to these desperately under-served
areas where we are failing to care for those who have borne the
battle?
Secretary Shinseki. Dr. Petzel.
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Congressman O'Rourke, we, as you have heard me say
previously, are committed to providing access to these veterans
who have suffered these invisible wounds of war and are now
living often for our purposes in terms of not meeting needs in
relatively remote areas.
And we have talked about what we are doing in El Paso.
Specifically I would point out, and I think you know this, that
the access has improved rather substantially since that survey
that you did with your constituents.
What we have done there is, number one, hired up to the
ceiling that they have, 80 mental health professionals. And
number two is that we provided for a network of tele-home
health. Psychiatrist recruitment in El Paso has been difficult
and they are needed for medication management.
We have now two tele-health providers, one in Salt Lake
City, the other in San Diego, who are doing medication
management and individual psychotherapy via tele-mental health
very successfully. The patients like it. The service has
improved dramatically and the access now to those particular
services.
But I am empathetic with what your constituents have said.
We need to be able to assure every veteran that they can get
ready access to mental health services in El Paso as well as
every other providing community in the country.
Mr. O'Rourke. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Runyan, you are recognized.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to have one question. It is probably more
directed to Under Secretary Hickey dealing with VBA, and we
talk about the processes and initiatives are outlined in the
budget and they are centered around concepts and
centralization, national work queue and centralized mail
operations.
The biggest question here is--get that--I think most people
will ask what are we doing to fix the systematic at--I have had
the conversation with Ms. Titus--at the Reno office? How are we
addressing the underperforming things because from a big-
picture view, it looks like we are shifting workload away from
them to just get the job done. What are we doing to address the
actual problem in these underperforming offices?
The Chairman. Secretary Hickey?
Ms. Hickey. Thank you, Congressman Runyan, for your
question.
And I will tell you we are--the entire transformation
effort--people, the most important piece of it, 52 percent of
those people doing this job every day are veterans and a large
portion of them are a direct family member of a veteran or a
family member of a military--serving veteran, so everybody
wants to come to work and tries to come to work every single
day to do the right thing by these men and women they served
alongside.
So what I will tell you we have done--and we have talked to
you about this before and we are seeing great merit from it--
challenge training, which this committee has supported in
budget; not a cheap venture, but a critically important piece
of training our entire workforce, no matter where they sit, to
do a great job every single day from the moment they join us in
the workforce. We continue those efforts. You see it
represented in our budget today for fiscal year 2015 continuing
to grow that way.
We have taken and done, and thanks to this committee as
well and its support, station enhancement training where we
have gone into a complete office and we have stood down and now
we are doing a non-stand down form of that for other offices
that are challenged and retrained everybody, top to bottom,
including leadership, in all of their responsibilities in order
to get a way ahead and a better result and a better outcome
every single day.
The other things that this committee has supported,
frankly--and I need your support continued--is our IT budget.
We have built rules into the IT systems that now make it easier
to deliver on the right and accurate answer every single time.
That is critically important in this 2015 budget because
everything now in VBMS forward is about automation and building
those rules into the system so it eases the burden of
remembering a book, bigger than the one sitting in front of me
full of rules, that are the complexity of this kind of
business. So our IT budget is critical to that aim. We have
also--and, yes, we are helping across the Nation, all veterans.
From no matter where we sit, we care about all veterans and
every bit of those family members that are supported by that
veteran, no matter the geography of where they sit.
But first and foremost, the filter for national work, too,
is, can the regional office where that veteran lives near do
that work? And if they have a surge because they have had a
recent redeployment from the theater--some of our states have
been impacted by a large National Guard redeployment at that
time and it puts a sudden surge in their system--yes, we are
helping others from across the Nation. And we can now because
we are electronic and because this committee has blessed us
with the IT resources to build a virtual electronic system that
allows anybody, anywhere to help on that claim for that
veteran, so it goes better and faster all at the same time.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you.
I yield back, Chairman.
The Chairman. Ms. Kuster.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just have
a couple of questions. I, first, just want to thank you for
your attention and I am delighted--I just yesterday spoke with
the new director at the VA in Manchester, New Hampshire, who
has now finally been installed and look forward to working with
her as well.
So, three quick questions: The first has to do with
acquisition of medical devices. We have a company in Salem, New
Hampshire called ``Gamma Medica'' and what they make is a
medical device that produces bone density imaging to help with
early detection of breast cancer, and the challenge has been
two, year-long delays at the National Acquisition Center and so
that veterans are not getting the opportunity to get access to
early detection of breast cancer. And I am just wondering if
there is anything in the budget that is going to help to speed
up the processes at the National Acquisition Center?
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, Congresswoman Kuster.
The need for timely purchase of medical equipment in order
to, again, be able to meet the needs of veterans who are coming
to our clinics and our medical centers is very important. And I
am familiar with--we have gotten some information about--some
letters from you about Gamma Medica and looking at what we call
the NAC, the National Acquisition Center, to try and reduce
this time frame. Currently, two years is what it is taking us
to acquire more costly medical equipment. We have two pilot
projects with the NAC; they have a streamlined approval
process.
And the second thing we are doing is looking at unbundling.
One of the things that takes time is that purchases are bundled
in order to get a better price, and we are trying to find,
perhaps, a compromise between getting those things done quickly
and getting a good price. So I am very familiar with that
circumstance and we are exploring ways to cut down on that
acquisition time.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you.
The second issue is a focus that I have had with
Representative Walorski and others in the congress about
military sexual trauma and sexual assault. This committee had a
hearing with both men and women victims, and my question is: As
more survivors and whistleblowers come forward, how does the VA
plan to meet the growing need for mental health and other
services for veterans that are victims of sexual trauma and
does this budget provide you with the resources that you will
need to address these needs?
Secretary Shinseki. Congresswoman, thanks for that
question.
We have all learned a considerable amount in dealing with
the issue of military sexual trauma: serious, sensitive,
greatly under-reported: and so those of us that are in the
validation of a connection of something, we don't have much
data to go on. And what I would say is that we have been very
open about understanding this is a circumstance that doesn't
lend to connecting, so we have committed to providing access
for care, both to physical medicine, as well as the mental
health aspects of this. And we have been--we provide this free
of charge even if the eligibility to other, VA services are not
being provided. Every medical center provides treatment and
they have a military sexual trauma coordinator. The same is
true at each VISN network location.
I am going to call on Secretary Hickey to talk about the
efforts she went through in reviewing benefits decisions to
ensure that claims for PTSD resulting from MST and PTSD from
other primarily combat reasons, there was some comparative
discussion here, and I think terrific work done on her part.
Ms. Hickey. Congresswoman, when I arrived here in June of
2011, one of the very first things I did was call for a full
review of all of our PTSD due to military sexual trauma
decisions and ask for a complete statistically valid review of
them and what I found was a problem we had. We had granted
these conditions lower than PTSD claims for combat terrorism,
results of terrorism, things of that nature.
Working with my counterpart in VHA, we took very aggressive
action to completely revamp that whole program. We designated
only specific people that can make those decisions on both
sides. We brought them all together at the same time with both
of us there at the training event to completely retrain that
workforce from top to bottom. I put those claims in our special
operations lanes where we have our most senior, most highly
qualified individuals to be able to work with those claims, and
together, working with our VHA counterparts, in very quick
timing, we closed the gap on that grant denial rate and we have
sustained that closed gap on that grant denial rate since. And
so we are very focused on that. I routinely ask about every six
months to review, to make sure that we are holding that effort
closed.
Those folks we had made decisions on previously, we invited
by letter and we asked the VSOs to help get the word out to
come back to us if they felt they were denied in error. We had
some come back and we have redone those and in those cases,
there have been grants at a higher level commensurate with how
we are now granting and denying those claims.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much.
And my time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Shinseki. Mr. Chairman, may I just add one last
point?
The Chairman. Yes, sir.
Secretary Shinseki. Fiscal year 2014, we had a number of
veterans coming to us to report an MST prior history for most
of whom we had no documentation. So more than 77,000 women and
more than 57,000 men came to see us in fiscal year 2013. Our
outpatient visit was significant, 16 percent increase over
whatever had happened before. So that has been put in the
calculation for the 2015 budget and I expect that we will have
most of our requirements covered here.
The other issue is: We are going to watch this as we begin
to see the downsizing of the military and we will expect to see
more of these cases, but we are sensitive to it.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary, and thank
you, Under Secretary Hickey. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Yes, ma'am.
Dr. Roe.
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to start by thanking you all for what you do for
veterans each day in my district. We have a, as you know, a
large VA Medical Center and numerous CBOCs and I know a lot of
times you hear negative things, but when I go home I hear many
more positive things than I do negative things and I think you
don't hear that enough. I mean you hear a lot of the complaints
that go on, but I certainly hear a lot of very positive
comments about the care that our veterans get in our area.
Imperfect, yes--individuals with problems, but overall it has
been a very positive experience. I wanted you to hear that
publicly.
I think we mentioned a few things earlier about the
Caregiver Program, a tremendous program, that the VA has
initiated to help veterans.
The homeless issue is one that I will continue to work on
with you, Secretary, as long as I am here, and I know as long
as you are here, that is a passion you have. One of the saddest
things I think I can think of is a homeless veteran, a person
who served this country honorably that now doesn't have a place
to live. That is a very good--VASH program is a tremendous
program.
And also, the Post-9/11 GI Bill that Mr. O'Rourke brought
up, I can't say more good things about that. That is an
incredible educational opportunity. I know maybe others in this
room have used the GI Bill. I remember I had $300 a month--I
will never forgot the number--and it helped me tremendously
when I got that, and it is a wonderful benefit.
I think a couple things I do want to talk about, what
percent of veterans do we serve in this nation--does the VA
serve? There are 22 million veterans----
Secretary Shinseki. Twenty-two million veterans, Enrolled
for healthcare, probably 8.9 million.
Dr. Roe. So about a third, okay.
Secretary Shinseki. And then over in our benefits, we have
about 11--12 million who are enrolled for benefits, and some of
these numbers are----
Dr. Roe. Are overlapped?
Secretary Shinseki. Yes.
Dr. Roe. Okay. I appreciate that.
Just a comment that Mr. Michaud made a minute ago, I wanted
to emphasize of the size of the state VA homes. I have seen
that--where I grew up in Clarksville, Tennessee, they are
beginning to build one there and I want to encourage the VA to
continue to invest in those.
As our veterans age--that is a huge demographic of people
out there--and it is just the population in general, as we get
older and we live longer, as a society, we are going to have to
figure out how to take care of these people in a dignified way,
and I think the VA is a very good way to help with veterans.
And I would encourage you to re-look that number and see if
more couldn't be invested, along with state homes. Since the
states makes a--I know 65 percent is a lot of money, but the
states make a huge investment.
Just to comment there--I mean nothing to do now, but when
we look at future budgets, I would strongly encourage you to
increase that significantly.
Secretary Shinseki. We will look at that.
Dr. Roe. Thank you.
I think one other--two other issues I want to talk about
just briefly, and I guess this is probably Mr. Warren that will
take this question, but is, again, the interoperability--and we
talked about this in your office--between DoD and VA and would
just briefly tell us where that is because we spent a billion
dollars--we were here last year and we don't know where the
billion went and we still can't interact.
I know when the bill--the budget was passed, we put--
Chairman Rogers put 300 million more dollars, technical
dollars, in to make this happen. Where is that, for the record?
Secretary Shinseki. I am going to call on Mr. Warren to
talk about the dollars that are being allocated. I would just
say--a quick look back here--when Secretary Gates and I
launched this, we envisioned a single, joint, common,
integrated health record and pretty much we have worked on this
project with that in mind.
When Secretary Hagel arrived, he took a look at how he was
structured to deliver his half of that commitment and he didn't
feel he was properly organized, so he asked for the opportunity
to re-look at his structure. And his decision coming out of
that--I respect his decision--was to pursue an acquisition
strategy.
We have had VistA, our electronic healthcare record system
since 1997. Technology turns over every 18 months. Some say
that the technology turn is moving closer to nine months, but
it says something about our electronic health record, that
since 1997, it has been the one that we have been able to
evolve into more and more capability. And so we are comfortable
with it and we are going to pursue raising VistA from a level
two electronic healthcare record to a level four, which would
put it at the top of the, competitors.
Dr. Roe. We have talked about this and this is a critical
decision because we have now been years trying to get this to
happen to make veterans' healthcare better and I think this is
one of the biggest decisions, from the VA standpoint,
technologically, that will be made in my tenure in congress.
Because I don't want to be here at ten years, if my voters will
let me come back for a few terms, to be having the same
conversation that we can't talk that we have had for 15 years.
Secretary Shinseki. Well, I would just say, Congressman,
that these conversations don't just occur here. They occur
between Secretary Hagel and myself, and what I will tell you is
that he is pursuing an acquisition strategy. I am evolving my
VistA, which is--at what was at one time head and shoulders
above everybody else. The gaps closed, we are still a great
health record.
As he pursues his requirements for his acquisition, we are
monitoring and having discussions and if there is a capability
there that he is looking for that we don't have, we are going
to go after that and make sure that we include that. When we
get to the point where he is ready to make a decision on the
DoD electronic health record, we want to be in the competition
and I have talked to Secretary Hagel about that. He has assured
me we are going to be in the competition, and so my work for
the next two years is to get us as competitive as anybody else.
We have taken our code, the MUMPS code that drives our
VistA program. We put it in the commercial space, workspace.
Other contractors have picked up on it and have begun to
incorporate that into their solutions. I think that makes it
healthy.
When we get down to the end, even if we don't get the nod,
the differences between what we have and what is available in
the commercial workspace I think is going to be pretty close
just because of what is going on now. Our code is government-
owned, government-operated and we are comfortable with it. We
think we are going to be competitive, but however it comes out,
we are going to be very, very close at the end, even if it is
not a single, joint, common electronic health record.
Interoperability is going to be much greater than it is today.
And I think you know, Congressman, we designed a joint
viewer that takes our two databases now and it sits so that a
care provider can pull data from both and see, on one screen,
all the critical data and make decisions that are required and
then that data goes back and resides in the proper database. We
know that isn't good enough and we are going to be much closer
here down the road.
Dr. Roe. The Chairman has been very generous with his time.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I have always been especially
appreciative of your accessibility, as well as your team, so
thank you for being here.
A lot of good points have been made today and I would like
to go back and just focus on a couple of them, maybe from the
perspective of Nevada and the West. First, I have to take a
little exception to your cemetery policy that says a veteran
will be within 75 miles of a national cemetery. There is a big
difference between a rural burial initiative and a national
cemetery, and there will still be 11 states without a national
cemetery, including six in the West, and if you look at the
map, that covers an awful lot of territory.
Second, I want to talk to the doctor, perhaps offline,
because I want to get to national issues about our hospital in
Las Vegas where there are some serious problems, especially
with the emergency room coming on. So if we could meet about
that, I would appreciate it.
Third, I would like to thank Chairman Runyan for bringing
up the point about the Reno office and the backlog. Our
committee has been working very hard to assist you and do what
we can to support your efforts to reduce that backlog, which
you have done a good job of and that we appreciate that.
And that is true Reno, too, which was one of the worst
places in the country. I support the brokering initiative, but
I don't want this to just be a policy where we ship a lot of
cases somewhere elsewhere they are doing a good job and we
don't fix the problem at Reno. So I was glad to hear the report
of some of the initiatives that are taking place there.
And when you look at state nursing homes, again, a problem
we are having, and I think you will see it nationally, is that
many of the veterans nursing homes are mostly contracted to the
State and to Medicare, and they are the ones who do the
accountability and there is not very much of it. So if you look
at that budget or look at going into that business more, I hope
that you will build in some accountability by the VA and not
just leave that to somebody else to check.
And then finally, I would ask you this: I have a bill that
is called Pay As You Rate; it has been moving forward out of
this House, but where you can pay a veteran some of his
benefits as you assess different parts of the claim, instead of
waiting until it is all finished to then give him some
compensation. That way, you get a little bit as you go along.
And we talked to some veterans and found out that in Nevada
only 8 percent receive any kind of payment as you go along,
even though the VA can apparently already do this. I understand
that it is something about the way that claims personnel are
paid or their claims are counted towards pay. I can't quite
understand why that is, but would you address it and let us
know if there is some way that we can fix it so that this could
be a policy going forward?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me try to hit all of the issues,
and let me start with the claim-as-you-go payment that you
brought up last, Congresswoman.
Ms. Hickey. Congresswoman Titus, when we get fully into an
electronic process--we are still sort of standing a foot in
paper and a foot in the electronic process--and we are able to
start really seeing, as we can now when we work a claim in
VBMS, medical issue level capability where it could keep that
claim--that medical issue could move forward without human
intervention, into and through a paid process, that is a long-
term objective for us. Today, when we do it in paper, it means
the person has to stop what they are doing to rate all the rest
of the issues, take it to the next step manually. A person has
to come off of doing a full authorization and award and
manually paying the thing, and it becomes actually a process in
a manual environment that could extend out the experience for
the veteran and many more veterans.
But in an electronic environment where you can move it
faster into an electronic payment environment, that is exactly
where we are trying to go, but we are not quite there yet. Next
year, 2015, with a strong IT budget, we get closer.
Secretary Shinseki. May I just address some of your other
questions here. I would say your sensitivity about rural
cemeteries is one that Mr. Muro has brought up in the last five
years. We looked at the way we have our population-based
national cemeteries. So in a population close to 80,000, we try
to locate a cemetery within 75 miles of everyone in that
cluster. We discovered what you just described; there are whole
states that don't have 80,000 veterans residing within a
contiguous border.
Maybe as many as eight states?
Mr. Muro. Yes, sir.
Secretary Shinseki. So, as many as eight states, and so we
began a commitment to put a VA cemetery in at least each state
so that veterans can say they have a VA resting place that
honors them. It is probably a poor choice in words to call it
burial ground because it seems like it is something less than a
cemetery. If it is less, it is only by size because of the
population that will use that capability. We establish it in
the same way we establish other national cemeteries and we set
a standard that is expected to be maintained by all of our
national cemeteries and whether that arrangement is out in a
rural area on tribal land, we have the same standard.
So we are sensitive to your point and we will continue to
work that, and I am happy to work with you on that as well.
Elko, Nevada is one of those sites in which we have programmed
to a ``burial ground.''
On the emergency room in Las Vegas, before I arrived, I
believe that that facility, that entire hospital, was designed
to be linked to the Air Force hospital medical program at
Nellis Air Force Base. Someplace along the way there was a
change in priorities, and so we were required to build a
freestanding facility of our own. That facility would have
linked in with the Air Force hospital, and therefore, the
requirement for a large emergency room wasn't necessary now
that we were required to build a hospital in north Las Vegas.
We put it up because the overall plan was good. We knew when we
did that, that we were going to have to go back and make the
emergency room a little larger.
I don't like doing that, but in this case, it was better to
get the hospital up, take care of veterans, and then make the
adjustment.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Flores.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for joining us today, and I thank
all of your team for your commitment to our nation's veterans.
I do have one question that is a non-budget related
question related to the VA nursing handbook. We will send that
to you supplementally, and ask that you respond to that.
Also, my next question is to--well, before I do this, let
me echo what Mr. O'Rourke said. I want to thank you for your
commitment to the Waco regional office and to commend them for
the improvements they have made in disability claims processing
and look forward to the day when we all meet our goal of having
zero backlog and meeting our performance objective.
The first question I have, and you probably need to answer
this supplementally, is based on headlines that came out of my
district last week, and that is because of the President's
Executive Order to force contractors to pay a wage rate higher
than minimum wage, a veteran in my district was displaced from
the nursing home in which he had resided for five years and
forced to move to another one. And so I would ask you to go
back and give us an analysis of the impact on the VA's budget
of the increase of the minimum wage, and also, more
importantly, what the impact will be on the potential
displacement of veterans from the nursing homes that they
currenty reside in. I think that was one of the unintended
adverse consequences that is coming out from this unilateral
increase of the minimum wage, so that would be helpful to have
that information.
With respect to the IT budget, as Chairman of the Economic
Opportunity Subcommittee, I am keenly interested in two IT
systems that affect the economic opportunity for our veterans:
the Long Term Solutions system which Mr. Takano asked about a
few minutes ago, and then also the CWINRS system that deals
with voc rehab cases.
On the LTS system, and, Mr. Warren, this question may be
for you, as I understand it, you are investing only in
sustainability and not into additional capabilities; is that
correct?
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir. Today it meets the mission needs and
so we are making sure we keep it up and running, but there is
nothing scheduled this year or next year to bring more
capability online, sir.
Mr. Flores. Okay. I would ask the VA to go back and
reassess two things. One is the performance objectives. I still
have veterans in my district that are having to go through the
original claims process, which is lengthy, and that is just
when they are getting into the door of starting their GI
benefits and that is when the most frustration occurs, not only
with the educational institutions, but with the veterans. So I
would ask you to, you as the organization, to relook at that. I
think for a modest amount of money, redirected from probably
VBMS since that is where the biggest pot of money is, to look
at just a little incremental improvement so that original
claims processing follows the rules-based system that you are
doing in the VA that General Hickey has done so well.
The second area is on CWINRS. Can you tell me what the
amount of investment versus sustainment spending is going to be
in the budget?
Mr. Warren. Sir, I do not have that in hand, but I can get
that for you on the record, sir.
Mr. Flores. Okay. That would be great if you would. I think
those would be interesting for this committee to know, and,
again, I would urge you to go back and re-look at the
objectives for the LTS processing, particularly with respect to
original claims.
Secretary Shinseki. Congressman----
Mr. Flores. Yes, sir.
Secretary Shinseki [continuing]. We are happy to do that.
Again, a little bit of history here, you know, we started out
doing this by hand.
Mr. Flores. I know.
Secretary Shinseki. And it was tough just getting 173,000
youngsters in the fall term of 2009 and so we began building
this without a clear understanding of what we needed and we
have built as we went. And as Mr. Warren says, what we have
today seems to be meeting our needs.
What we wanted was a TurboTax arrangement where you could
fill the bins and push a button, and the calculations would be
made and payments would follow. I don't think we are there yet,
so we will continue to look at this.
Mr. Flores. Right. And first of all, don't--this is not--I
am not being critical. I think you have come a long way with
LTS. I am just saying I think for a modest amount of money, we
could go considerably farther than where we have gone today.
So, I agree, I mean from where you started, you had an
immense task and I think that you have made progress, but I
would like to have an analysis of what we could get,
particularly with respect to original claims, what improvement
we could get and for a modest amount of investment, that
probably wouldn't hurt the continued investment, VBMS.
The next area has to do with VistA. I think you are
spending $269 million for fiscal year 2015, proposing to spend
that. What does that compare to for this current fiscal year?
Secretary Shinseki. Mr. Warren.
Mr. Warren. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Flores.
The request in 2015, as you stated, is approximately $270
million and that is tied to VistA Evolution so that we can
continue to evolve that world class system. In the 2014 budget,
there is $290 million, but the majority of those resources are
presently withheld while we bring our plan up to yourselves to
play out what is the future for VistA Evolution and what that
Long Term Solution looks like in the plan. So when that plan
clears, and I believe it goes to GAO, per the NDA requirements,
then the dollars will be released into us.
So, in the budget, but not released, so those resources are
actually not being applied today, sir. And we appreciate the
support when the plan comes up to get the resources out so we
can continue to evolve this world class system.
Mr. Flores. Okay. So when we suspended Evolution, we
basically said $290 million is just going to be on hold while
we figure out the direction that we are going to go? Again, I
am not making a judgment, I am just asking the question.
Mr. Warren. It has 75 percent of that, sir, so we have some
work underway to make sure we are continuing to meet critical
healthcare needs. Under Secretary Petzel lays those out. We
work on those. But the focus is continue that sharing of
information in a clinical engagement.
If you haven't seen that demo, I would suggest we can do
that for you. The Janus Viewer is doing great work. Continuing
to evolve that, as well as maintain systems.
Mr. Flores. Thank you. My time has expired. Again, I
appreciate your service to our veterans.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for your forbearance.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Flores.
Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.
Before I begin the VA, I want to take off my VA hat and put
on my transportation hat. Let me just read this: As a Vietnam
veteran and in support of our Nation's efforts to ensure our
veterans get good important jobs after their service, we have
set a hiring goal of 25 percent for veterans. Please accept
this photo.
And this is from the CEO, Joseph Boardman, President of
Amtrak, and I have the painting here and I would like the
entire statement about Amtrak and their hiring policy
pertaining to veterans, and I would like the members to see the
painting. And this was done at Beachwood Station, and I was
very instrumental in keeping that station open, so I want to
pass this around and I would like to take a picture at the end
with this painting that Mr. Boardman sent to you, Mr.
Secretary.
Secretary Shinseki. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. Let me just thank you again for the VA hospital
in--well, clinic, in Jacksonville, the cemetery in
Jacksonville. I mean I am very happy with everything that are
going on in Jacksonville, and I am almost happy with some of
the things that is going on in Orlando. I am just very
impressed with the clinic that has opened up. We have about 123
patients there. It is one of the best facilities that I have
seen, and I spent about four hours at the facility.
I just want to know when can we get that hospital open? You
know, we have been working on it for 25 years and I would like
for us to get it complete. I spent a couple of hours with the
VA, a couple hours with the contractors and it is just not
there.
Secretary Shinseki. Fair enough.
The construction in Orlando is about 87 percent complete.
What you listed were the 120-bed community living center and a
60-bed domiciliary, all of that delivered and in good shape.
Ms. Brown. Beautiful.
Secretary Shinseki. We just have the main building left to
do and we are well along.
Next to you, and maybe the Chairman, I am most disappointed
that this project didn't come in on schedule and we continue to
work with the contractor to get the work done that needs to be
done. Right now we are looking probably at summer 2015, which
is what the contractor is asking for. We have not agreed to
that; we are still working with him and will continue to do
that.
What has been completed is great. We just need to get this
project across the line and we are working very hard at this.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, and let me just say, I am very
supportive of the Chairman and the ranking member's effort to
get your budget completely forward budgeted. I know that we
have done part of it, but I am very interested in getting the
entire budget and it is waiting for the leadership to take it
up at the House. I know once they take it up, we will probably
have zero votes against it.
You want to say anything about it, because in some areas, I
mean, you know, you don't need to go with the whims of the
House when we can't come together on a budget, but at least it
is always comforting to know that the veterans budget is not
included.
Secretary Shinseki. Well, I would begin by thanking the
members of this committee. We have advance appropriations for
veterans healthcare. You have provided that to us since 2012.
We have learned a lot in the advance appropriations arena, and
we do that piece quite well, and it has been a good fit for the
Veterans Health Administration.
As I testified to in October in this very room, what I have
learned since is that in the area, of--and by the way, veterans
healthcare is about 80 percent of the budget, maybe even 85
percent. So for the remainder of the budget, and one specific
area, processing of claims, I can't do it internal to VA. We
have done a lot of work in the last 5 years to create a
relationship with DoD and it is has been a very good one. We
now get service treatment records electronically. Prior to this
it was a paper exchange, and so we have made a tremendous
adjustment here.
We still have to go to the Social Security Administration
to validate other disability payments. We have to go to IRS to
validate threshold income levels. We still work with Department
of Education on 9/11 GI Bill and, as I said, DoD. And so I
would, as I did with great deference during the October
testimony, say that, what would be most helpful to VA is for
the Federal Government to get a budget every year because my
ties to these other departments, even if I have advance
appropriations for this department, doesn't quite get done the
specific work that needs to be done in the benefits arena.
And for example, our concerns--I mean this committee's
concerns and our concerns and testimony--were that Treasury,
for example, wasn't funded. The checks that we would have--the
tapes that we would have passed that would have resulted in
checks being cut would not have happened so, this is a bigger
discussion than just the VA budget, but I appreciate the
question.
Ms. Brown. Thank you very much and thank you for your
service.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Brown.
Dr. Huelskamp.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary, thank you for being here today and I
appreciate your latest comments in reference to actually having
a budget. It is important to note, as well, the President was a
month late on his budget this year and--which is that much
later, but I have been concerned--both houses, leadership and
both chambers have not brought many parts of the budget to the
floor for debate and a lot of it is left in the committee or in
subcommittee, but I do have one particular budget question.
Do you have a rough count, a general idea, of how many
public affairs employees are funded in your budget?
Secretary Shinseki. I don't here today, but I am happy to
provide that for the record.
Dr. Huelskamp. All right. Does he have any guesstimates on
that at all? We will have to wait for any range on that?
Secretary Shinseki. Yes, I regret I don't have that.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. I appreciate it, Mr. Secretary, and
the reason I ask is that I have a list here of nearly 70
different instances in the last year, year and a half in which
your agency has failed to respond to requests for information
and these, generally, are from media requests and some very
specific questions and the answers are always, ``No comment,''
``No answer,'' ``No response.'' What level of transparency do
you expect and what are the roles of these public affairs
officers, other than to say, ``We can't answer that question
now.''
Mr. Secretary, I am very concerned about transparency. We
have had numerous hearings on things in which the agency was
not very responsive even before the committee, so if you could
share your thoughts on that.
Secretary Shinseki. Well, as I stated in the beginning, and
this was probably prior to your arrival, Mr. Huelskamp,
transparency is an important aspect of our being able to
establish and retain trust in this department. It is a high
item on my list of things we commit to and I regret that you
probably have some data here that I need to get into. I am
happy to do that.
Dr. Huelskamp. Excellent. And I appreciate that. Will you
commit to directing you employees to do a better job responding
to these inquiries, whether it has come from Congress or
members of the media or of the public?
Secretary Shinseki. I will do that.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. Well, thank you.
And I do also have a report specifically in which I have
not seen comments from your agency, but a January CNN story
that had identified at least 19 preventable veteran deaths due
to delays in simple medical screenings, are you familiar with
this report and what is your reaction?
Secretary Shinseki. I am familiar with what was reported in
the press and I would begin by saying that any time we lose a
veteran under circumstances that we can't explain, even though
our veterans are amongst the oldest and sickest patients, any
time we have a death it is an issue of concern to me and I look
for factors that may have contributed to that.
I would say that every one of these incidents has been
reviewed and investigated, what I think we need to recognize is
that many of those reports originate from inside VA and we--I
am pleased that we have employees who are honest and courageous
enough to call themselves on something they either saw or might
have committed, and it is because of that kind of transparency
on the part of the workforce that we are able to pursue some of
these issues.
It doesn't mean that we are without having made errors, but
if the reporting continues we can do something about that and
that is what I think is important to be retained here. That is
part of our discussion as well.
Dr. Huelskamp. And I appreciate that. That is a great
comment on that, but, you know, the employees that reported
that, but have any employees been held accountable for these
preventable deaths?
Secretary Shinseki. I can certainly turn to Dr. Petzel for
the specific 19. We do hold employees accountable. I would say,
Congressman, that in 2012, we involuntarily removed over 3,000
employees. In 2013, we involuntarily removed another 3,000
employees, and then over the past two years, six members of the
senior executive service have been dismissed as well.
Dr. Huelskamp. And I will look forward to the response of
the--for the committee. I don't want to take up any more time.
But if I might ask Mr. Warren an IT question, Mr. Chairman,
could I----
The Chairman. We are really running out of time.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. Well, I will hold that until the next
round, so thank you.
The Chairman. We are not even going to have a second round.
I mean the Secretary has been very gracious with his time.
If you could, we will put a package of questions together
for the record and we will do it that way. Thank you, sir.
Mrs. Negrete McLeod.
Mrs. Negrete McLeod. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, homelessness among veterans is a serious
problem in California and in my district. An issue not
mentioned about the per diem program is that these funds cannot
be used to help children who are under the care of a homeless
veteran. It is for this reason that I introduced H.R. 4140, the
Homeless Veterans with Children Act of 2014. This bill doesn't
cost any money, it just gives the VA more flexibility on how to
use per diem funds to help homeless--victim homeless veterans.
Mr. Chairman, I hope that H.R. 4140 will be included in our
sub health committee legislation hearing this spring. Helping
homeless veterans with dependents is an issue that has been
identified by the VSOs and needs to be fixed now.
My question is: How is the VA working with per diem
recipients to ensure that they have the protection of privacy
for homeless veterans?
Secretary Shinseki. I am going to ask Dr. Petzel to address
the per diem question, but Congresswoman, this--in discussing
the homeless program, this is one piece of that. I think you
are familiar with the HUD-VASH program, the HUD-VASH voucher.
This would be another example, Mr. Chairman, of where our
working relationship with another federal department allows for
us to get our work done. The HUD-VASH voucher is key to this
and it is the most versatile of our options that we can provide
to the homeless and, in fact, it does care for families and for
children. And in the case of California, I think we have about
9500 HUD-VASH vouchers already in place, in addition to the per
diem grants that we provide.
Dr. Petzel.
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, Congresswoman McLeod.
Two programs, the Grant and Per Diem Program and the
Supportive Services for Veterans and Families are really the
important parts of our providing transitional housing for these
veterans who are on the streets and for the families of those
unfortunate people who have been unable to maintain themselves
in their home. We contract across the country. We spent
approximately $230 million in the Grant and Per Diem Program,
and approximately $300 million last year in the Supportive
Services. We are trying to increase that to $500 million in the
fiscal year 2015.
In those contracts, there are provisions for maintaining
the privacy and the security of the people who use those
services. Tangentially to your question, I would point out that
there is a growing need in this country for Grant and Per Diem
housing for women and for families. There are plenty of
families for men, and the VA, I am proud to say, has been a
leader in facilitating the development of Grant and Per Diem
housing and Supportive Services for women in a number of places
around the country. I think we would be viewed as one of the
national leaders in recognizing the need for women and the need
for special, secure, private arrangements in these
circumstances for women.
Mrs. Negrete McLeod. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
The last question for the day comes from Ms. Walorski.
Ms. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Shinseki, good to see you. Just a quick question:
IT security is 6 percent of your budget and your 2015 budget
seeks $33 million over the 2014 budget for a total of
approximately $189 million for IT security. Will that amount
finally assist the VA in addressing the numerous IT
deficiencies that we have brought to the attention of the VA?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me ask Mr. Warren to address that.
Mr. Warren. Thank you, Congresswoman Walorski.
Yes, we take information protection very seriously and the
resources that we have asked for will allow us to keep up with
the evolving threats that all of us face.
Ms. Walorski. Thank you.
And, Mr. Secretary, the NDAA, as somebody alluded to
earlier, explains that neither the VA nor the DoD can spend
more than 25 percent until the Secretary has briefed the
appropriate congressional committees on their plan. And I know
that the VA and the DoD did provide a brief to the committees
on January 27th, but there were key elements that were missing
that had to be included in that report.
I understand the plan that includes the missing details is
awaiting clearance at OMB. Do you know when we might receive
that information?
Secretary Shinseki. Let me call on Mr. Warren.
Mr. Warren. We believe that that plan will clear in the
next 30 days. We want to make sure that it is responsive to the
questions in the NDAA, but not only responsive, but answers to
questions in a way that are understandable. So we are making
sure when it comes over that it meets the need so that we can
get the dollars released and start working on VistA Evolution
and appreciate your support for that, ma'am.
Mrs. Walorski. And will the committee receive the
Interagency Program Office Interoperability Report sometime in
that same time frame?
Mr. Warren. I believe we have already done one quarterly
report. The next quarterly report is going through review, and
so that should be coming out, I believe, in the next three to
four weeks and it has a joint report of the two departments,
and again, we want to make sure that we are responsive to your
requests.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you.
And then finally, I would be remiss if I didn't ask about
the CBOC in Indiana's Second District. That is a familiar
conversation here. When I was in your office just a couple of
weeks ago, we had received an update that they at least would
be awarded winter of 2013/2014, and is that still the latest
update, because we just received report last week outside the
VA that there is potentially a delay now until summer of 2014.
Secretary Shinseki. Let me ask Dr. Petzel.
Dr. Petzel. Thank you, Congresswoman.
The project is proceeding. There was a NEPA study that
needed to be done, an environmental study. This study revealed
some issues with potential artifacts. That has been taken care
of and the evaluation is proceeding.
Mrs. Walorski. And so is it still on track for winter/
spring, if winter ever ends up there?
Dr. Petzel. Yes.
Mrs. Walorski. Okay. So there has not been--we were made
aware last week that there is a possibility that the VA has
asked the bidders to refresh or update their proposals; is that
true that they have 30 days to do that?
Dr. Petzel. I will have to go back and check for the
record, Congresswoman. I am not familiar with that detail.
Mrs. Walorski. Okay.
Secretary Shinseki. I would not be surprised if there are
any lengthy delays, we want to be sure the bidders have the
best information in the competition before the decision is
made. So this is something that occurs from time to time.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you.
Thank you. I yield, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Walorski.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being so generous with your
time.
Thank you to the under secretaries for being here with us.
Of course there will be some follow-up questions for the
record. I would ask unanimous consent that all members would
have five legislative days with which to revise and extend
their remarks.
Without objection and with that, this hearing is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:54 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of Chairman Jeff Miller

Good morning everyone. Welcome to our hearing on the President's
Fiscal Year 2015 budget request for the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. I appreciate your attendance today and that
of your leadership team. We've only had a short time to review the
details of the budget request, so we will likely have numerous follow-
up questions. I'd ask for your cooperation in getting those back to us
in a timely manner.
Once again, in a fiscal climate that has regrettably seen the
military budget cut to the bone, funding for veterans has emerged as an
obvious priority, both for the Administration and the Congress. For
that, I commend you for your leadership in fighting to ensure veterans
remain a priority.
I also want to commend VA on the operation of its Veterans' Crisis
Line. I heard some really positive feedback yesterday from Paul
Rieckhoff at yesterday's hearing. Your statement that roughly 35,000
men and women have been rescued from a suicide because of VA's
intervention--the rough equivalent of two Army divisions--speaks for
itself. Keep up the good work.
Mr. Secretary, I listened carefully the last few weeks to the
military and veterans' organizations who testified before the Veterans'
Committees regarding the need to improve timely delivery of mental
healthcare, ensure that healthcare is delivered in state-of-the-art
facilities, and sustain VA's progress in producing timely and accurate
disability claims decisions.
When I look at this $163.9 billion budget request, I'm left
wondering why we can't do better than we are in some of those areas. I
think it's fair to say that Congress has supported nearly every request
the Administration has asked when it comes to veterans, yet significant
problems remain.
For example, although it's nice to see a steady downward trend in
the backlog over the last year, what I hear from service organizations
and veterans themselves is that VA is sacrificing accurate decisions
for fast ones, and that it is falling behind on appeals. With the
record funding provided in this area over the last decade, both in
manpower and technology, it's frustrating to hear those complaints.
I am also concerned about continued Inspector General and media
reports regarding preventable deaths at a number of VA facilities
across the country. I know that VA is not infallible, but serious, even
deadly, mistakes merit swift and clear accountability. I know you
believe that as well, and we're ready to work with you to give you any
tools you may need.
I will follow up on this last issue in questioning, but I'm
troubled with what appears to be a common practice with VA's budget
submissions of late. And that is to identify, based on updated
information, excess funds that are no longer necessary, then
redirecting those funds toward ``initiatives'' that were budgeted and
appropriated in advance at a lower level.
For example, VA overestimated by about $700 million its need for
long-term care resources in FY 2015, but now wants to redirect all of
that money and more toward its homeless initiatives, facility
activations, and other needs. In fact, notwithstanding the
overestimation of $700 million, VA now seeks a supplemental budget for
FY 2015 of $368 million. Needless to say, I think this practice needs
further discussion.
These are just a couple of areas I'd like to address with you, Mr.
Secretary. In the interest of time, however, I'll recognize the Ranking
Member for his opening statement.

Prepared Statement of Corrine Brown, Ranking Member

Mr. Secretary:
I want to put on my Transportation hat at this time. Amtrak, our
nation's passenger rail carrier, is committed to American veterans and
their families.
Amtrak has a long history of providing career opportunities to
veterans as well as active military members and values the leadership,
reliability and high-tech skills they bring to the company.
Amtrak currently employs more than 1,500 military veterans and is a
member of the Employer Partnership of the Armed Forces program,
recruiting at numerous military job fairs across the country. Since
January 2012, more than 14 percent of new hires have been veterans. and
across the rail industry, about 25% of the employees are veterans.
The Obama Administration, along with the Joint Forces Initiative,
the Department of Transportation and the Department of Veterans Affairs
has started the Veterans Transportation Careers Center.
Mr. Secretary, Joseph Boardman, President and CEO of Amtrak wanted
me to present to you this print of the Veterans' Locomotive. It
features a red, white and blue paint scheme, 50 stars and specially
designed logo with military service ribbons.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Eric K. Shinseki

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Distinguished Members
of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs:
Thank you for the opportunity to present the President's 2015
Budget and 2016 advance appropriations requests for the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA). This budget continues the President's historic
initiatives and strong budgetary support for Veterans, their families,
and survivors. We value the sustained support that Congress has
demonstrated in providing the resources and legislative authorities
needed to honor our Nation's promises to these unique and special
citizens. Let me acknowledge our partners here today--the Veterans
Service Organizations-- whose insight and support make us better at
fulfilling our mission.
After more than a decade of war, many Servicemembers are returning
home and making the transition to Veteran status. As the war in
Afghanistan enters its final chapter, our work is more urgent than
ever. The current generation of Veterans will help to grow our middle
class and provide a significant return on the Nation's investments in
them. The President fully supports Veterans and their families, and by
providing them the care and benefits they have earned, we pay tribute
to the sacrifices that Veterans have made for this Nation.
The 2015 Budget for VA requests $163.9 billion--$68.4 billion in
discretionary funds, including medical care collections, and $95.6
billion in mandatory funds for Veterans benefits programs. The
discretionary request reflects an increase of $2.0 billion (3.0
percent) above the 2014 Budget level. The Budget also requests a 2016
advance appropriation for Medical Care of $58.7 billion, an increase of
$2.7 billion (4.7 percent) above the 2015 Budget. The President's 2015
Budget will allow VA to operate the largest integrated healthcare
system in the country, including nearly 1,750 VA points of healthcare
and approximately 9.3 million Veterans enrolled to receive healthcare;
the ninth largest life insurance provider, covering both active duty
Servicemembers and enrolled Veterans; an education assistance program
serving nearly 1.1 million students; a home mortgage program with a
portfolio of over 2 million active loans, guaranteed by the agency; and
the largest national cemetery system that leads the Nation as a high-
performing organization, with projections to inter 128,100 Veterans and
family members in 2015.

Growing Demand for VA Services and Benefits

Long after conflicts end, VA requirements continue to grow, due to
the substantial needs of Veterans. VA's budgetary requirements arise
from our Nation's national security engagements, which are not within
our control. As the President said on Veterans Day last November,
``when we talk about fulfilling our promises to our Veterans, we don't
just mean for a few years; we mean now, tomorrow, and forever.'' Over
the next decade, the Department of Defense (DoD) predicts that military
separations will approach three million. This growing population is
demanding more services from VA than ever before. Currently, 11 million
of the approximately 22 million Veterans in this country are
registered, enrolled, or use at least one VA benefit or service, and
this number will undoubtedly continue to grow.

Meeting VA's Top Three Goals

In 2015, our challenges are clear and significant. VA must deliver
on the ambitious goals we established 5 years ago, which are to:

Increase Veterans' access to VA benefits and services;

Eliminate the disability claims backlog in 2015; and

End Veterans' homelessness in 2015.

The 2015 Budget is critical to VA meeting these goals. Without the
proper level of funding to meet the growing demand for benefits and
services, investing in our physical and Information Technology (IT)
infrastructure to assure reliable access, eliminating the disability
claims backlog, and completing the rescue phase of ending Veterans'
homelessness become even more difficult. VA remains committed to
meeting these challenges and appreciates the continued support of the
Congress.

Stewardship of Resources

At VA, we are committed to responsible stewardship, using resources
effectively and efficiently and aggressively identifying budget
savings. Over the past three years, we have averaged $1.6 billion
annually in efficiencies and budget savings, and in 2015, that
commitment to budget efficiencies and savings is more than $2 billion.
We are attentive to areas in which we need to improve our operations,
and are committed to taking swift corrective action to eliminate any
practices that do not deliver value for Veterans. For 15 consecutive
years, VA delivered clean financial audits, during which time material
weaknesses were reduced from four to one, and in 2013, for the first
time, we had no significant deficiencies, having eliminated 16 prior
significant financial deficiencies. This is an area of major
accomplishment in our internal controls and fiscal integrity.

Information Technology

To serve Veterans as well as they have served us, we are working to
deliver a 21st century VA that provides medical care, benefits, and
services through a secure digital infrastructure. IT affects every
aspect of what we do at VA. It has a direct impact on the quality of
healthcare we provide Veterans; our ability to process claims
efficiently; and our ability to provide Veterans' benefits and
services. In 2013, VA IT systems supported nearly 1,750 VA points of
healthcare: 151 medical centers, 135 community living centers, 103
domiciliary rehabilitation treatment programs, 820 community-based
outpatient clinics, 300 Vet Centers, and 70 mobile Vet Centers. The
corresponding increase we have seen in the medical care spending for
these facilities directly translates to new and increased services
provided to Veterans. To provide Veterans access and benefits, we must
make the necessary investments in IT innovations and deployments.
Our 2015 Budget requests $3.9 billion for IT, consisting of $531
million for development; $2.3 billion for sustainment; and $1 billion
for more than 7,400 staff, most of whom serve in VA hospitals and
regional offices. The request will sustain our infrastructure while
making necessary investments in critical business processes, such as
modernizing healthcare scheduling, streamlining benefits processing,
enhancing and modernizing VA's electronic health record, enhancing data
security, and achieving health data interoperability with DoD.
Information security is a top priority at VA. The 2015 Budget
requests $156 million for information protection and cyber security, an
increase of $33 million (27 percent) over 2014. VA is constantly
strengthening information security and improving technology and
processes to ensure Veteran data and VA's network are secure. Like any
organization, public or private, we must continue to adapt. Our
security posture is based on a ``defense-in-depth'' approach, which
includes our partners at the Department of Homeland Security who
maintain an over watch on our exterior perimeter. Working inward from
our firewalls, VA has additional layers and protections that are
constantly monitoring potential threats.
Technology is also a critical component for achieving our goal to
eliminate the disability claims backlog in 2015. The 2015 Budget
requests $137 million in IT funding for the Veterans Benefits
Management System (VBMS), including $44.5 million for development and
$92.5 million for sustainment. The 2015 development funds will allow VA
to electronically process disability compensation claims in VBMS, from
establishment to award. Planned enhancements and increased automation
will allow end-users to focus on more difficult disability compensation
claims by reducing the time required to process less complex claims.
Sustainment funds will support the infrastructure behind VBMS as well
as the deployment of additional new functionality features.
The 2015 Budget continues our progress toward evolving VA's VistA
electronic health record (EHR) and achieving seamless integration of
health data with the DoD by 2017. The budget requests $269 million to
help achieve our shared goal of providing the best possible support for
Servicemembers and Veterans. In the near term, we are working to create
seamless integration of DoD, VA, and private provider health data. In
the mid-term, we are working to modernize the software supporting DoD
and VA clinicians. Together, these two goals will help to create an
environment in which clinicians and patients from both Departments are
able to share current and future healthcare information for continuity
of care and improved treatment. As we strive to build on our successful
history of health data sharing and collaboration, we understand our EHR
modernization efforts are complicated, dynamic, and multi-faceted.

Improving and Expanding Access to Benefits and Services

The number of Veterans receiving VA benefits and services has grown
steadily and will continue to rise as overseas conflicts end and more
Servicemembers transition to Veteran status. In 2015, the number of
patients treated within VA's healthcare system is projected to reach
6.7 million, an increase of nearly one million patients (17.4 percent)
since 2009. Within VBA, the number of Veterans and survivors receiving
Compensation and Pension benefits will approach 5 million in 2015,
while the number of Education and Vocational Rehabilitation
beneficiaries will exceed 1.1 million.
We continue to improve access to VA services by opening new, and
improving current, facilities closer to where Veterans live. Since
January 2009, we have added approximately 55 community-based outpatient
clinics (CBOCs), for a total of 820 CBOCs, and the number of mobile
outpatient clinics and Mobile Vet Centers, serving rural Veterans, has
increased by 21, to the current level of 78. In addition, while opening
new and improved facilities is essential for VA to provide world-class
healthcare to Veterans, so too is enhancing the use of ground breaking
new technologies to reach countless other Veterans. We continue to
invest in ``taking the facility to the Veteran''--through expanded
access to telehealth, sending Mobile Vet Centers to reach Veterans in
rural areas where certain services are limited or difficult to reach,
and by deploying social media to connect with Veterans to share
information on the VA benefits they have earned.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) expands access to coverage, provides
new ways to bring down healthcare costs, improves the Nation's
healthcare delivery system, and has important implications for VA. VA
is ensuring a coordinated and collaborative approach to ACA
implementation. We estimate that there are approximately 1.3 million
uninsured Veterans, of which 1 million may be eligible for, but not
enrolled in VA healthcare. We will continue our education and outreach
efforts so Veterans know the healthcare law does not affect their VA
health benefits or out-of-pocket costs, and that Veterans enrolled in
VA healthcare do not need to take additional steps to meet ACA's new
coverage standards. We will also encourage Veterans' family members not
enrolled in a VA healthcare program to obtain coverage through the
Health Insurance Marketplaces.
A large part of our Veteran population hails from the small towns
of rural America. Some 3.1 million Veterans enrolled in VA's healthcare
system live in rural or highly rural areas, about 36 percent of all
enrolled Veterans. In total, more than $17.36 billion were obligated in
2013 for the healthcare needs of rural Veterans. As technology advances
and broadband access expands across rural America, we have been able to
extend the availability of VA healthcare through telemedicine, web-
based networking tools, and the use of mobile devices--all of which
help improve access to care and support economic development for people
in rural areas. Telehealth is a transformative breakthrough in
healthcare delivery in 21st century medicine, allowing care to reach
Veterans who otherwise may not have access, especially those who live
in rural and extremely remote areas. The 2015 Budget requests $72
million for Rural Health telehealth.
Changing demographics are driving transformation at VA. Women now
comprise nearly 15 and 18 percent of today's active duty military
forces and Reserve component, respectively. Women are the fastest
growing segment of our Veteran population. Since 2009, the number of
women Veterans enrolled in VA healthcare increased by almost 29
percent, to 629,683. The 2015 Budget includes $403 million for gender-
specific healthcare services for women Veterans. Today, nearly 49
percent of our facilities have comprehensive women's clinics, and every
VA healthcare system has designated women's health primary care
providers and a women Veterans' program manager on staff.
The Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services Act (Caregivers
Act) marked a major step forward in America's commitment to those who
provide daily care for wounded warriors, who have borne the battle for
us all. The sustainment phase of the Caregivers program began in 2013,
and includes application processing; stipends; travel and healthcare
coverage; education, training, and competency; and IT support. The 2015
Budget includes $306 million for the Caregivers program, including $235
million for caregiver stipends.
Since VA began implementation of the Honoring America's Veterans
and Caring for Camp Lejeune Families Act in August 2012, more than
10,100 Veterans have contacted VA concerning Camp Lejeune-related
treatment, as of February 27, 2014. Of these, roughly 8,300 were
already enrolled in VA healthcare. Veterans who are eligible for care
under the Camp Lejeune authority, regardless of current enrollment
status with VA, will not be charged a co-payment for healthcare related
to the 15 illnesses or conditions recognized, nor will a third-party
insurance company be billed for these services. VA continues a robust
outreach campaign to these Veterans and family members while we press
forward with implementing this law. The 2015 Budget includes $51
million to provide healthcare for Veterans and family members who were
potentially exposed to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune.
The 2015 Budget requests $99.6 million in IT funding for the
Veterans Relationship Management (VRM) initiative, which is
transforming Veterans' access to VA benefits and services by empowering
Veterans with new self-service tools. In addition, VRM is essential to
achieving our access goals. We are transforming VA's national call
centers into service centers by delivering enhanced, integrated,
system-wide telephone capabilities. VBA is also implementing the Client
Relationship Management Unified Desktop that provides Veterans or
beneficiary contact history and a consolidated view of benefit programs
for our employees to enhance the customer's experience and provide
responsive and complete information.
As part of this experience, VBA aggressively promoted eBenefits and
improved Veterans ability to enroll in and access VA benefits and
services. The joint VA-DoD eBenefits Web portal is a personalized
central location for Veterans, Servicemembers, and their families to
research, access, and manage their benefits and personal information.
More than 3.2 million Servicemembers and Veterans are enrolled in
eBenefits, and our goal is to expand enrollment to 5 million users in
2015. Over 50 self-service features, including online filing of claims,
online uploading of evidence, and claim status tracking are now
available in eBenefits; VA and DoD continue to expand functionality
with each quarterly release.
VA also continues to increase access to burial services for
Veterans and their families through the largest expansion of its
national cemetery system since the Civil War. At present, approximately
90 percent of the Veteran population--about 20 million Veterans--has
access to a burial option in a national, state, or tribal Veterans
cemetery within 75 miles of their homes. In 2004, only 75 percent of
Veterans had such access. This dramatic increase is the result of a
comprehensive strategic planning process that efficiently uses
resources to serve the greatest number of Veterans.

Improving Access to Mental Health Services

We have been a Nation at war for more than a decade, and the state
of Servicemembers' and Veterans' mental health is a National priority.
At VA, meeting the individual mental health needs of Veterans is more
than a system of comprehensive treatments and services; it is a
philosophy of ensuring that Veterans receive the best mental healthcare
possible, while focusing on the overall mental well-being of each
Veteran. VA remains committed to doing all we can to meet this
challenge.
Through the strong leadership of the President and the support of
Congress, Veterans' access to mental healthcare has significantly
improved. Some of the stigma associated with seeking help has
diminished. We proactively screen all Veterans for PTSD, depression,
TBI, problem drinking, substance abuse, and military sexual trauma
(MST) to identify issues early and provide treatments and intervention
opportunities. We know that when we diagnose and treat people, they get
better. Rates of suicide among those who use VHA services have not
shown increases similar to those observed in all Veterans and the
general U.S. population. Since 2006, the number of Veterans receiving
specialized mental health treatment has risen each year from 927,000 to
more than 1.3 million in 2013. In addition, Outpatient visits and
encounters will increase to 12.8 million in 2015, from 12.1 million in
2013. Vet Centers are another avenue for mental healthcare access,
providing services to 195,913 Veterans and their families in 2013.
While we made significant progress in serving the growing number of
Veterans seeking mental healthcare, our work is not done. The 2015
Budget includes $7.2 billion for mental healthcare, an increase of $309
million (4.5 percent). VA efforts are crucial to dispel the lingering
stigma surrounding treatment, and help Veterans regain their dignity
and the ability to hold meaningful employment and maintain a home,
which helps, in turn, strengthen our Nation's economy.
In response to the growing demand for mental health services, VA
enhanced capacity and improved the system of care so that services are
more readily accessible. In 2012, VA completed a comprehensive
assessment of the mental health program at every VA medical center and
is using the results of that assessment to improve programs and share
best practices across VISNs and facilities. VA also held mental health
summits at each of our 151 medical centers, broadening the community
dialogue between clinicians and stakeholders.
We are developing new measures to gauge mental healthcare
performance, including timeliness, patient satisfaction, capacity, and
availability of evidence-based therapies. Evidence-based staffing
guidelines are being written for specialty and general mental health.
In addition, VA is working with the National Academy of Sciences to
develop and implement measures and corresponding guidelines to improve
the quality of mental healthcare. To help VA clinicians better manage
Veteran patients' mental health needs, VA is developing innovative
electronic tools. For example, Clinical Reminders give clinicians
timely information about patient health maintenance schedules, and the
High-Risk Mental Health National Reminder and Flag system allows VA
clinicians to flag patients who are at-risk for suicide. When an at-
risk patient does not keep an appointment, Clinical Reminders prompt
the clinician to follow up with the Veteran.
Since its inception in 2007, the VA's Veterans' Crisis Line in
Canandaigua, New York, answered nearly 1,000,000 and responded to more
than 143,000 texts and chat sessions from Veterans in need. The
Veterans' Crisis line provides 24/7 crisis intervention services and
personalized contact between VA staff, peers, and at-risk Veterans,
which may be the difference between life and death. In the most serious
calls, approximately 35,000 men and women have been rescued from a
suicide in progress because of our intervention--the rough equivalent
of two Army divisions.

Eliminating the Claims Backlog

VA has no greater responsibility than ensuring Veterans and their
survivors receive timely, accurate decisions on their disability
compensation and pension claims. Too many Veterans have waited too long
to receive their benefits--and this has never been acceptable to VA,
including the employees of VBA, over half of whom are Veterans. To
attack this longstanding problem, we launched a historic plan to
transform our people, processes, and technology. Our strategy advances
VBA's tools, streamlines claims processes, trains its workforce,
improves workload management, and meaningfully enhances interaction
with Veterans and stakeholders to deliver more timely and accurate
benefit decisions and services to Veterans and their families. Despite
an escalating workload brought about by the correct decisions for
Veterans on Agent Orange, Gulf War, and combat PTSD presumptions--and
successful outreach to Veterans informing them of their benefits--we
are making steady progress toward our goal of eliminating the
disability claims backlog in 2015.
The 2015 Budget requests $2.5 billion for VBA, an increase of $28.8
million from 2014. VBA projects a beneficiary caseload of 5.1 million
in 2015, with more than $78.7 billion in disability compensation and
pension benefits obligations. We expect to process 1.5 million
compensation and pension claims in 2015, up from 1.25 million claims in
2014, an increase of nearly 17 percent over 2014.
Through our claims transformation initiatives, the use of mandatory
overtime, and other innovative strategies, we are making real progress
in reducing the disability claims backlog. As of March 8, 2014, the
backlog stood at 368,829 claims, down 242,244 (40 percent) from its
highest point on March 25th, 2013. Additionally, under its Oldest
Claims Initiative that began in April 2013, VA provided decisions to
over 500,000 Veterans whose claims had been pending the longest. VA
continues to work closely with DoD, the Internal Revenue Service, the
Social Security Administration, and our other Federal partners to
identify electronic data-sharing opportunities and process reforms to
streamline workflows and limit paper claims filing.
VBMS is key to VBA's transformation and success in meeting our 2015
goal. In June 2013, VBA completed national deployment of VBMS--six
months ahead of schedule--providing access to over 25,000 end-users.
Approximately 80 percent of VA's pending disability claims are in a
digital format for electronic processing in VBMS. Moving to a digital
environment is critical. VA anticipates there will be approximately
250,000 new Servicemembers transitioning to Veteran status each of the
next 4 years, for a total of one million new Veterans added during the
next four years. As a result of our increased efforts to enable more
Veterans to access the benefits they have earned and deserved, many of
these Veterans are likely to file a claim with VBA within the first
year of separation.
The 2015 Budget includes $138.7 million for continued investment in
the Veterans Claims Intake Program (VCIP), which converts paper claims
into an electronic format and enables electronic transfer of medical
and personnel records. This electronic transfer is critical to creating
the necessary digital environment for populating the eFolders and
supporting end-to-end electronic claims processing for each stage of
the claims lifecycle. Although VA continues to accept paper claims from
Veterans who are not familiar with or cannot access computer
technology, VBA is working with stakeholders to increase the number of
claims submitted electronically. VBA now converts paper claims to
electronic format as we receive them, saving time and effort and
improving accuracy. As of December 2013, over 25,000 VBMS users could
access 424 million electronic images converted from paper.
The 2015 Budget includes $94.3 million for the Board of Veterans'
Appeals (the Board), which we are requesting as a new appropriation
separate from the General Administration appropriation. The Board
provides direct service to Veterans and their families by conducting
hearings and issuing final appeals decisions. VA is actively pursuing
initiatives to improve the appeals process and reduce wait times for
Veterans, including a Board-led initiative that pre-screens appeals to
ensure that the record is fully developed and ready for adjudication.
The Board is also streamlining decision writing to increase output and
efficiency. Expanded use of VBMS and the eventual incorporation of
appeals functionality in VBMS will save resources currently spent
handling, accessing, storing, and transporting paper claims files
between the Board and VBA Regional Offices. The Board completed major
technological upgrades to its video teleconference (VTC) equipment and
the Board now conducts slightly over half of their hearings by video
teleconference, a significant increase from 29 percent in 2009. We
project appeals will increase to 72,786 cases in 2015, an increase of
12 percent from 2014's 64,941 cases.

Ending Veteran Homelessness

Every Veteran who has served America ought to have a home in
America. We made great progress toward achieving our goal to end
Veteran homelessness in 2015. VA will use knowledge gained over the
past four years to ensure robust prevention programs are in place for
future years. The 2015 Budget request is essential for VA to
successfully achieve an end-to-the-rescue phase, and prevent future
homelessness among Veterans at-risk in the years to come.
Since 2009, VA, together with our Federal, state, and local
partners, has reduced the estimated number of homeless Veterans by 24
percent. We have conducted over six million clinical visits with over
600,000 Veterans who were homeless, at-risk of homelessness (including
formerly homeless). In 2013 alone, VA served more than 240,000 Veterans
who were homeless or at-risk of becoming homeless--21 percent more than
the year before. Over the past four years, the Point-in-Time (PIT)
count of homeless Veterans declined steadily, despite challenging
economic times. The PIT count estimate of the number of homeless
Veterans dropped from 75,609 in January 2009, to 57,849 in January
2013, a 24 percent decrease.
VA's programs constitute the largest integrated network of programs
with components of homeless assistance in the Nation. They provide
homeless Veterans with nearly 80,000 beds or units, including permanent
supportive housing through the Department of Housing and Urban
Development-VA Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) program; link Veterans
with needed mental health and other medical care; and provide
supportive services and opportunities to reintegrate Veterans back into
the community and workforce. VA's cost-effective, evidence-based
homeless programs produce large savings and cost avoidance in
budgetary, social, and economic terms. Using a Housing First strategy,
VA relies on research that shows that placing homeless Veterans into
Housing First reduces emergency room visits, other forms of intensive
hospitalization, and substance overdose. Medical care costs are roughly
three times as expensive for homeless compared to Veterans who are not
homeless.
Despite significant progress and important accomplishments, much
work remains. We estimate that between 2013 and 2015, approximately
200,000 Veterans will experience homelessness at some point in time. To
reach our goal of ending Veteran homelessness in 2015, the Budget
requests $1.6 billion for VA homeless-related programs, including case
management support for the HUD-VASH voucher program, the Grant and Per
Diem Program, the Supportive Services for Veteran Families (SSVF)
program, and VA justice programs. This represents an increase of $248
million (17.8 percent) over the 2014 Budget level. This budget supports
VA's long-range plan to end Veteran homelessness by emphasizing rescue
for those who are homeless today, and prevention for those at risk of
homelessness.
HUD--VASH provides permanent supportive housing to the most
vulnerable of our homeless Veterans. The 2015 Budget requests $374
million for HUD-VASH, an increase of $47 million (14 percent) over the
2014 Budget level. This funding will support nearly 3,500 case managers
to provide intensive wraparound services to nearly 80,000 Veterans.
These case managers provide an average number of 12 clinical visits per
year to these Veterans to ensure that they remain in housing and do not
become homelessness again. Veterans in HUD-VASH are vulnerable; the
majority meets criteria for chronic homelessness, and suffers from
serious mental illness, substance use disorders, and chronic medical
conditions. This partnership remains the most responsive housing option
available to VA and is a critical component of our strategy to move
homeless Veterans from the streets to a safe and stable home.
The Grant and Per Diem Program helps fund community agencies
providing services to homeless Veterans with the goal of helping them
achieve residential stability, increase their skill levels and/or
income, obtain greater self-determination, independent living, and
employment as soon as possible. The 2015 Budget requests $253 million
for the Grant and Per Diem Program, an increase of $3 million (1.1
percent) over the 2014 Budget level. In 2015, the program will provide
over 15,500 transitional housing beds to Veterans through partnerships
with more than 650 projects.
VA's SSVF is a critical aspect of our strategy to prevent and end
Veteran homelessness. This program provides both prevention and rapid
rehousing services to Veterans and family members. In 2013, SSVF
successfully prevented over 60,000 at-risk Veterans and family members
from falling into homelessness, and successfully placed over 84 percent
of homeless Veterans and family members into permanent housing. In the
last three years, VA awarded grants totaling $459.6 million to 324
community agencies in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto
Rico, and the Virgin Islands. SSVF grants to private non-profit
organizations and consumer cooperatives provide a range of supportive
services to include outreach, case management, assistance in obtaining
VA benefits, and assistance in obtaining and coordinating other public
benefits. In 2015, VA will deploy SSVF grants strategically to target
resources to communities with concentrations of homeless Veterans.
In addition, VA's Justice Programs, which facilitate access to
needed VA treatment for Veterans in criminal justice settings such as
Veterans Treatment Courts, are an important prevention effort for
homeless and at-risk Veterans. The goal of these Courts is to divert
those with mental health issues and homelessness risk from the
traditional justice system and give them treatment and tools for
rehabilitation and readjustment. The first Veterans court was
established in 2008 in Buffalo, N.Y. By the end of 2013, there were 257
courts nationwide, positively affecting the lives of 7,724 Veterans; VA
serves Veterans in each of these courts. Many of the participating
Veterans have avoided incarceration and the cycle of homelessness, that
often follows incarceration. The 2015 Budget requests $35 million for
Veterans Justice Programs, an increase of $1.5 million (4 percent) over
the 2014 Budget level.
To increase homeless Veterans' access to benefits, care, and
services, VA established the National Call Center for Homeless Veterans
(NCCHV). The NCCHV provides homeless Veterans and Veterans at-risk for
homelessness free, 24/7 access to trained counselors. The call center
is intended to assist homeless Veterans and their families; VA medical
centers; Federal, state, and local partners; community agencies;
service providers; and others in the community. In 2013, the National
Call Center for Homeless Veterans received 111,096 calls (38 percent
increase over 2012) and made 78,622 referrals to VA Medical Centers (55
percent increase over 2012). The 2015 Budget requests $5.6 million for
NCCHV, an increase of $1.7 million (45 percent) over the 2014 Budget
level. VA has established 28 Community Resource and Referral Centers
(CRRC) to provide rapid assistance to homeless Veterans.

Multi-Year Budget for Medical Care

Due to Congress's foresight, under the Veterans healthcare Budget
Reform and Transparency Act of 2009, VA includes a request for an
advance appropriation for its medical care budget. The legislation
requires VA to plan its medical care budget using a multi-year
approach, which ensures that VA requirements are reviewed and updated
based on the most recent data available and actual program experience.
The 2015 medical care budget of $59.1 billion, including collections,
will fund treatment to over 6.7 million unique patients, an increase of
4 percent over the 2013 estimate. Of those unique patients, 4.7 million
Veterans are in Priority Groups 1-6, an increase of more than 204,836
(4.5 percent). Additionally, VA anticipates treating over 757,600
Veterans from the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, an increase of
over 141,100 patients (23 percent) over the 2013 level. VA also
provides medical care to non-Veterans through programs such as the
Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans
Affairs (CHAMPVA) and the Spina Bifida healthcare Program; we expect
this population to increase by over 42,600 patients (6.3 percent),
during the same period.
Based on updated 2015 estimates largely derived from the Enrollee
healthcare Projection Model, the 2015 Budget will allow VA to increase
funding for programs to end Veteran homelessness; continue
implementation of the Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health Services
Act; fulfill multiple responsibilities under the ACA; provide for
activation requirements for new or replacement medical facilities; and
invest in strategic initiatives to improve the quality and
accessibility of VA healthcare programs. The 2015 appropriations
request includes an additional $368 million above the enacted 2015
advance appropriations level. Our multi-year budget plan assumes that
VHA will carry over a small percentage of unobligated balances from
2014 into 2015 to ensure that funds are available at the beginning of
the fiscal year to cover any unforeseen costs.
The 2016 medical care budget of $61.9 billion, including
collections, provides for healthcare services to treat over 6.8 million
unique patients, an increase of 1.5 percent over the 2015 estimate. The
2016 request for medical care advance appropriations is an increase of
$2.9 billion, or 4.9 percent, over the 2015 budget request. Medical
care funding levels for 2016, including funding for activations, non-
recurring maintenance, and initiatives, will be revisited during the
2016 budget process, and could be revised to reflect updated
information on known funding requirements and unobligated balances.

Medical and Prosthetic Research

VA supports the President's national action plan to guide mental
health research across government, industry and academia, and develop
more effective ways to prevent, diagnose, and treat mental health
conditions like TBI and PTSD. VA's medical research programs
demonstrate the creativity and ingenuity of our Nation's greatest minds
to help save Veterans' lives, limit their incapacitation, and build a
better world for their families. Projects funded in 2015 will focus on
identifying or developing new treatments for Gulf War Veterans,
improving social reintegration following traumatic brain injury,
reducing suicide, evaluating the effectiveness of complementary and
alternative medicine, developing blood tests to assist in the diagnosis
of PTSD and mild traumatic brain injury, and advancing genomic
medicine.
In 2015, Medical Research will be supported through a $589 million
direct appropriation, and an additional $1.3 billion from VA's medical
care program, Federal grants, and non-Federal grants. Including Medical
Care support, other Federal resources, and private resources, total
funding for Medical and Prosthetic Research will be nearly $1.9 billion
in 2015. VA's research program benefits Veterans, their families, and
the Nation.

Increasing Employment Opportunities for Veterans

Under the President's leadership, VA, the Department of Labor, DoD,
and the entire Federal government made Veterans' employment one of
their highest priorities. At VA, we led by example. We made great
strides during the last five years and remain committed to meeting our
goal of 40 percent of VA employees being Veterans, compared to 32.4
percent currently. During 2013, 33.8 percent of all new hires at VA
were Veterans, including an impressive 78.5 percent of all new
employees in our National Cemetery Administration (NCA).
We continue to work to ensure that all of America's Veterans have
the support they need and deserve when they leave the military, look
for a job, and enter the civilian workforce. The interagency Employment
Initiative Task Force, co-led by VA and DOD, developed a new training
and services delivery model to help strengthen the transition of our
Veteran Servicemembers from military to civilian life. Accordingly, the
2015 Budget includes $106 million to meet VA's responsibilities under
the President's Veterans Employment Initiative and the VOW to Hire
Heroes Act. In addition, the 2015 Budget includes $1 billion in
mandatory funding over 5 years to develop a Veterans Job Corps
conservation program that will put up to 20,000 Veterans back to work
over the next 5 years protecting and rebuilding America. Jobs will
include park maintenance projects, patrolling public lands,
rehabilitating natural and recreational areas, and law enforcement-
related activities. Additionally, Veterans will help make a significant
dent in the deferred maintenance of our Federal, state, local, and
tribal lands, including jobs that will repair and rehabilitate trails,
roads, levees, recreation facilities, and other assets. The program
will serve all Veterans, but have a particular focus on post-9/11
Veterans.
Since 2009, VA provided over $31.8 billion in Post-9/11 GI Bill
benefits in the form of tuition and other education-related payments to
cover the education and training of more than 1 million Servicemembers,
Veterans, family members, and survivors. As part of this effort VBA
launched an online GI Bill Comparison Tool to make it easier for
Veterans, Servicemembers, and dependents to calculate their Post-9/11
GI Bill benefits and learn more about VA's approved colleges,
universities, and other education and training programs across the
country. The GI Bill Comparison Tool provides key information about
college affordability and brings together information from more than 17
online sources and 3 Federal agencies, including the number of students
receiving VA education benefits at each school.
VA is also now working with Student Veterans of America to track
graduation and training completion rates, and we expect a draft report
by the end of 2014 to quantify program outcomes. The Post-9/11 GI Bill
continues to be a focus of VBA transformation, as it implements the
automated Long-Term Solution (LTS), VA's end-to-end claims processing
solution that utilizes rules-based, industry-standard technologies for
the delivery of education benefits. At the end of January 2014, we had
68,215 education claims pending, 21 percent lower than the total claims
pending the same time last year. The average days to process Post-9/11
GI Bill supplemental claims decreased by 9.1 days, from 16.1 days in
September 2012 to 7 days in January 2014. The average time to process
initial Post-9/11 GI Bill original education benefit decreased by 15.3
days in the same period, from 32.5 days to 17.2 days.

Capital Infrastructure

The 2015 Budget requests $1.06 billion for VA's major and minor
construction programs, the same as the 2014 Budget level. The capital
asset budget demonstrates VA's commitment to address critical major
construction projects that directly impact patient safety and seismic
issues and reflects VA's ongoing promise to provide safe, secure,
sustainable, and accessible facilities for Veterans. The request also
reflects the current fiscal climate and the great challenges VA faces
in order to close the gaps identified in our Strategic Capital
Investment Planning (SCIP) process.

Major Construction

The major construction request in 2015 is $561.8 million. The
request provides funding for four on-going major medical facility
projects. They include: (1) seismic corrections to renovate building
205 for homeless programs at the West Los Angeles, CA VA Medical
Center; (2) seismic corrections and construction of a new mental health
facility and parking structure at the Long Beach Healthcare System; (3)
construction of a new community living center (CLC), domiciliary and
outpatient facility in Canandaigua, NY; and (4) construction of a new
spinal cord injury/CLC facility, hospice nursing unit, and upgrades to
a high-risk seismic building in San Diego, CA. These projects represent
VA's most critical major construction projects and correct critical
safety and seismic deficiencies that are currently putting Veterans, VA
staff, and the public at risk. Once the projects are completed,
Veterans seeking care will be served in more modern and safer
facilities.
The 2015 Budget also includes $2.5 million for NCA for advance
planning activities and $7.5 million for land acquisition to support
the establishment of 5 additional national cemeteries in Cape Canaveral
and Tallahassee Florida; Omaha, Nebraska; southern Colorado; and
western New York to meet the burial access policies included in the
2011 budget.

Minor Construction

The 2015 Budget includes a minor construction request of $495.2
million. The requested amount would provide funding for ongoing and
newly identified projects that renovate, expand, and improve VA
facilities. This year's focus is a balance between continuing to fund
minor construction projects that we can implement quickly to maintain
and repair our aging infrastructure, while using major construction
funding to address life-threatening safety and seismic issues that
currently exist at multiple VA medical facilities.

Opportunity, Growth and Security Initiative

The Budget also includes a separate $56 billion Opportunity,
Growth, and Security Initiative to spur economic progress, promote
opportunity, and strengthen national security. This Initiative would
increase employment, while achieving important economic outcomes in
areas from education to research to manufacturing and public health and
safety. Moreover, the Opportunity, Growth, and Security Initiative is
fully paid for with a balanced package of spending cuts and tax
loophole closers.
At the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Opportunity,
Growth, and Security Initiative will support capital investments
essential to expanding and protecting Veterans' access to quality care
and benefits. By providing an additional $400 million for the VA
capital program, enactment of the Initiative will allow additional
progress in addressing the Department's highest priority capital needs,
including a major construction project to replace a seismically
deficient research facility in San Francisco, California.

National Cemetery Administration

The NCA has the solemn duty to honor Veterans and their families
with final resting places in national shrines and with lasting tributes
that commemorate their service and sacrifice to our Nation. We honor
those individuals' service through our 133 national cemeteries, which
includes two national cemeteries scheduled to open in 2015, 33
Soldiers' lots and monuments, the Presidential Memorial Certificate
program, and through the markers and medallions that we place on the
graves of Veterans around the world. The 2015 Budget includes $256.8
million for operations and maintenance to uphold NCA's responsibility
for this mission, including funds to open two new national cemeteries
and to begin preparations for opening two National Veterans Burial
Grounds.
NCA projects its workload will continue to increase. For 2015, we
anticipate conducting approximately 128,100 interments of Veterans or
their family members, and maintaining and providing perpetual care for
approximately 3.5 million gravesites. NCA will also maintain 8,882
developed acres and process approximately 362,900 headstone and marker
applications.
NCA maintains a strong commitment to hiring Veterans. Currently,
Veterans comprise over 74 percent of its workforce. Since 2009, NCA
hired over 450 returning Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans. In addition,
NCA awarded 66.5 percent of contract awards in 2013 to Veteran-owned
and service-disabled, Veteran-owned small businesses. NCA's committed,
Veteran-centric workforce is the main reason it is able to provide a
world-class level of customer service. NCA participated for the 5th
time in the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI), sponsored by
the Federal Consulting Group and Claes Fornell International (CFI)
Group. In the 2013 review, NCA received a score of 96 out of a possible
100, the highest score to date for any organization in the public or
private sector.
NCA continues to leverage its partnerships to increase service for
Veterans and their families. As a complement to the national cemetery
system, NCA administers the Veterans Cemetery Grant Service (VCGS),
which provides grants to establish, expand, or improve state and tribal
Veterans' cemeteries. There are currently 90 operational state and
tribal cemeteries in 45 states, Guam, and Saipan, with five more under
construction. Since 1980, VCGS awarded grants totaling more than $566
million to establish, expand, or improve these Veterans' cemeteries. In
2013, these cemeteries conducted over 32,000 burials for Veterans and
family members.

Legislation

In addition to presenting VA's resource requirements, the 2015
President's Budget also proposes legislative action that will benefit
Veterans. These proposals build on VA's legislative agenda transmitted
in the First Session of the 113th Congress, as part of the 2014
President's Budget. Let me highlight a few provisions: VA proposes a
measure that will allow better coordination of care when a Veteran also
receives other care at a non-VA hospital, by streamlining the exchange
of patient information. Additionally, we propose allowing the CHAMPVA
to cover children up to age 26, to make that program consistent with
benefits conferred under the ACA. We also are submitting a proposal
that would modernize our domiciliary care program by removing income-
based eligibility restrictions.
To continue our priority to end Veteran homelessness, VA proposes
increased flexibility in the Grant and Per Diem program to focus on the
transition to permanent housing. Also among our proposals is a measure
that would allow VA to speed payment of Dependency and Indemnity
Compensation and other benefits to surviving spouses by eliminating the
need for a formal claim when there already is sufficient evidence for
VA to act. We greatly appreciate consideration of these and other
legislative proposals included in the 2015 Budget and look forward to
working with Congress to enact them.

Summary

Since the founding of our great Nation, Veterans helped our country
meet all challenges; this remains true today as Veterans help rebuild
the American middle class. At VA, we continue to implement the
President's vision and transform VA into a 21st century leader of
efficiency, effectiveness, and innovation within the Federal
government. Our 2015 Budget supports Presidential priorities to always
add value to the Nation, boost economic growth, strengthen the middle
class, and work side-by-side with Federal partners to eliminate
unnecessary overlaps or redundancies.
Given today's challenging fiscal environment, this Budget focuses
VA resources, policies, and strategies on the most urgent issues facing
Veterans and provides the resources critical to expand access,
eliminate the disability claims backlog in 2015, and end Veteran
homelessness in 2015. There is no greater mission than serving
Veterans. Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today and for your unwavering support of Veterans.

Paralyzed Veterans Of America

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Members of the
Committee, as one of the four co-authors of The Independent Budget
(IB), Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) is pleased to present the
views of The Independent Budget regarding the funding requirements for
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for FY 2015.
As Congress and the Administration continue to face immense
pressure to reduce federal spending, we cannot emphasize enough the
importance of ensuring that sufficient, timely and predictable funding
is provided to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The co-authors
of The Independent Budget--AMVETS, Disabled American Veterans,
Paralyzed Veterans of America, and Veterans of Foreign Wars--recognize
the pressure that the Administration and Congress face; however, we
believe that the ever-growing demand for healthcareservices certainly
validates the continued need for sufficient funding. We also understand
that the VA has fared better than most federal agencies with regards to
budget proposals and appropriations. However, we are concerned that
discretionary funding for the VA is no longer keeping pace with medical
care inflation or healthcaredemand.
That being said, we certainly appreciate the increases offered by
the Administration's budget for FY 2015 and the FY 2016 advance
appropriations, particularly with regards to healthcare and benefits
services. Unfortunately, we have real concerns that the serious lack of
commitment to infrastructure funding to support the system will
undermine the VA's ability to deliver those services. Similarly, we
remain concerned that the funding levels provided by the House and
Senate Committees on Appropriations in the recently passed omnibus
appropriations bill will be insufficient to address the continuously
growing demand for VA healthcareservices.
Moreover, The Independent Budget co-authors oppose the steps VA has
taken in recent years in order to generate resources to meet ever-
growing demand on the VA healthcare system. The Administration
continues to rely upon ``management improvements,'' a popular gimmick
that was used by previous Administrations to generate savings and
offset the growing costs to deliver care. Unfortunately, these savings
are often never realized leaving VA short of necessary funding to
address ever-growing demand on the healthcare system.
Of even greater concern is the fact that the VA continues to over
project and underperform with its medical care collections estimates.
Overestimating collections estimates affords Congress the opportunity
to appropriate fewer discretionary dollars for the healthcaresystem.
However, when the VA fails to achieve those collections estimates, it
is left with insufficient funding to meet the projected demand. As long
as this scenario continues, the VA will find itself falling farther and
farther behind in its ability to care for those men and women who have
served and sacrificed for this nation. In fact, we believe that is
exactly what is happening now. For example, the VA originally projected
collections of approximately $3.3 billion in FY 2013 and FY 2014 and
approximately $3.2 billion in FY 2015. Congress based its
appropriations for the VA for those fiscal years on those projected
collections. However, the VA subsequently revised its estimates
anticipating collections of $2.8 billion in both FY 2013, $2.9 billion
in FY 2014, and less than $3.1 billion for FY 2015. The flawed
projections estimates and the dollars appropriated by Congress in each
of those fiscal years suggest that the VA may have received $1.0
billion too little in resources during that period. And yet, this
shortfall has never been addressed through supplemental appropriations.
Too often in meetings with congressional offices, staff members
have proclaimed the belief that VA has received too much money. We
would ask the Committee how that logic passes when we have clearly
identified a shortfall simply based on faulty collections estimates.
Similarly, we would ask that the Committee proceed with caution in FY
2016 as the VA has once again projected a collections estimate of $3.3
billion despite the fact that its recent performance suggests that it
will not achieve that level. The fact that the VA continues to
experience problems with its medical care collections reflects an even
greater need for Congress to properly analyze, and if necessary, revise
the advance appropriations from previous years to ensure that the VA
healthcare system is getting the resources it actually needs.

Funding for FY 2015

For FY 2015, The Independent Budget recommends approximately $61.1
billion for total medical care, an increase of approximately $3.4
billion over the FY 2014 operating budget. Meanwhile, the
Administration recommended in its FY 2015 Budget Request a revised
advance appropriation estimate for FY 2015 of approximately $56.0
billion in discretionary funding for VA medical care. This revised
estimate reflected a projected increase in discretionary funding of
approximately $368 million over the recently approved advance
appropriations level. When combined with the approximately $3.1 billion
revised projection for medical care collections (decreased from $3.2
billion in last year's estimate), the total available operating budget
recommended for FY 2015 is approximately $59.1 billion. This reflects
an increase of $1.7 billion over the previously approved FY 2014
operating budget, an amount that we believe is inadequate to fully meet
the healthcare demand.
The medical care appropriation includes three separate accounts--
Medical Services, Medical Support and Compliance, and Medical
Facilities--that comprise the total VA health-care funding level. For
FY 2015, The Independent Budget recommends approximately $49.3 billion
for Medical Services. Our Medical Services recommendation includes the
following recommendations:

Current Services Estimate............................... $47,616,189,000
Increase in Patient Workload............................   1,171,260,000
Additional Medical Care Program Costs...................     500,000,000
Total FY 2014 Medical Services.......................... $49,287,449,000

Our growth in patient workload is based on a projected increase of
approximately 87,000 new unique patients--priority groups 1-8 veterans
and covered nonveterans. We estimate the cost of these new unique
patients to be approximately $853 million. The increase in patient
workload also includes a projected increase of 83,350 new Operation
Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF), as well as
Operation New Dawn (OND) veterans at a cost of approximately $318
million. The increase in utilization among OEF/OIF/OND veterans is
supported by the average annual increase in new users from FY 2002
through the 3rd quarter of FY 2013.
The Independent Budget also believes that there are additional
projected funding needs for VA. Specifically, we believe there is real
funding needed to address the array of long-term care issues facing the
VA, including the shortfall in institutional capacity, and to provide
additional centralized prosthetics funding (based on actual
expenditures and projections from the VA's prosthetics service). The
Independent Budget recommends $375 million directed towards VA long-
term care programs. In order to support the rebalancing of VA long-term
care in FY 2015, $125 million should be provided. Additionally, $95
million should be targeted at the VA's Veteran Directed-Home and
Community Based Services (VD-HCBS) program. The remainder of the $375
million ($155 million) should be dedicated to increasing the VA's long-
term care average daily census (ADC) to the level mandated by Public
Law 106-117, the ``Veterans Millennium healthcare and Benefits Act.''
In order to meet the increase in demand for prosthetics, the IB
recommends an additional $125 million. This increase in prosthetics
funding reflects an increase in expenditures from FY 2013 to FY 2014
and the expected continued growth in expenditures for FY 2015.
For Medical Support and Compliance, The Independent Budget
recommends approximately $6.1 billion. Finally, for Medical Facilities,
The Independent Budget recommends approximately $5.7 billion. Our
Medical Facilities recommendation includes the addition of $650 million
to the baseline for Non-Recurring Maintenance (NRM). The
Administration's request over the last two cycles represents a wholly
inadequate request for NRM funding, particularly in light of the actual
expenditures that are outlined in the budget justification. In fact,
the VA's FY 2015 and FY 2016 advance appropriations request for
infrastructure is wholly insufficient (a topic that will be addressed
by the VFW in its statement to the Committee), particularly with
regards to Major and Minor Construction and Non-Recurring Maintenance
(NRM). The VA continues to slash funding for NRM as evidenced by the
rapidly decreasing estimates for Medical Facilities. And yet, the VA
admits in its own documents that it spends between $1.3 billion and
$1.4 billion per year on NRM. Similarly, we are extremely disappointed
that the VA has requested such a laughable funding level for Major and
Minor Construction, particularly considering the rapidly advancing age
and condition of its infrastructure. It is time for Congress to take
the necessary steps to reverse this course before the VA system
collapses on itself.
The Independent Budget co-authors have ongoing concerns about the
lack of investment in Medical and Prosthetic Research. While we
recognize that the Administration requested an increase in the research
account for FY 2015, the $3 million increase does not even keep pace
with inflation. If the VA is to remain a world leader in research, it
is imperative that the Administration get serious about requesting real
dollars and that Congress provide adequate resources to continue those
efforts. With this point in mind, The Independent Budget recommends
$611 million for Medical and Prosthetic Research funding for FY 2015.
Similarly, we recommend at least $50 million in Major Construction and
$175 million in Minor Construction and NRM to address the deteriorating
state of VA research infrastructure. Failure to make these investments
will undermine the VA's ability to continue to attract the best medical
professionals into the research field and promote cutting edge
advancements to benefit the men and women who have made great physical
and mental sacrifices in defense of this Nation.

Advance Appropriations for FY 2016

Just as we did for the first time last year, The Independent Budget
once again offers baseline projections for funding through advance
appropriations for the medical care accounts for FY 2016. While we have
previously deferred to the Administration and Congress to provide
sufficient funding through the advance appropriations process, we have
growing concerns that this responsibility is not being taken seriously.
For FY 2016, The Independent Budget recommends approximately $62.5
billion for total medical care. The Administration's Budget Request
includes approximately $62.0 billion for total medical care--$58.7
billion in discretionary spending and approximately $3.3 billion in
medical care collections. We appreciate the fact that the
Administration has offered a substantial increase in healthcare funding
from FY 2015 to FY 2016 (as a part of its advance appropriations
request).
For FY 2016, The Independent Budget recommends approximately $50.8
billion for Medical Services. Our Medical Services recommendation
includes the following recommendations:

Current Services Estimate............................... $49,193,067,000
Increase in Patient Workload............................   1,074,225,000
Additional Medical Care Program Costs...................     510,000,000
Total FY 2015 Medical Services.......................... $50,777,292,000

Our growth in patient workload is based on a projected increase of
approximately 67,000 new unique patients--priority groups 1-8 veterans
and covered nonveterans. We estimate the cost of these new unique
patients to be approximately $746 million. The increase in patient
workload also includes a projected increase of 83,350 new Operation
Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF), as well as
Operation New Dawn (OND) veterans at a cost of approximately $328
million.
Lastly, The Independent Budget believes that there are additional
projected funding needs for VA. For FY 2016, we believe that an
additional $375 million should be invested to address the spectrum of
long-term care issues within the VA. Additionally, we believe that a
continued increase in centralized prosthetics funding will be
essential. In order to meet the continued increase in demand for
prosthetics, the IB recommends an additional $135 million.
For Medical Support and Compliance, The Independent Budget
recommends approximately $6.0 billion. Finally, for Medical Facilities,
The Independent Budget recommends approximately $5.7 billion. Our
Medical Facilities recommendation includes the addition of $900 million
to the baseline for Non-Recurring Maintenance (NRM). Last year, the
Administration's recommendation for NRM reflected a projection that
would place the long-term viability of the healthcare system in serious
jeopardy.

Advance Appropriations for all VA Accounts

The Independent Budget co-authors are concerned that the broken
appropriations process continues to have a negative impact on the
operations of the VA. Once again this year Congress failed to fully
complete the appropriations process in the regular order. In fact, many
federal operations were shuttered as part of a partial government
shutdown in October 2013. This had a significant negative impact on
many of the services provided by the VA. While VA healthcare was
shielded from this political disaster, benefits services, research
activities, and general operations for the rest of the VA were
impacted. Additionally, many of the operations that support the
healthcare system, particularly through the Information Technology
system, were negatively impacted complicating the VA's ability to
delivery timely, quality healthcare.
We also have real concerns about the advance appropriations process
as it currently functions. Our intent for this process was for the
Administration to request an advance appropriation for a given fiscal
year (two years ahead of the start of that fiscal year), and then
revise that recommendation in its next budget request immediately prior
to the start of the fiscal year in question. We appreciate the fact
that the Administration's FY 2015 Budget Request does include a
significant revision for Medical Services reflecting an increased need
for funding of approximately $368 million. However, during past budget
cycles, the Administration has offered very little revision in its
advance appropriations requests essentially asking for the same funding
level. Moreover, we believe that Congress has not done its due
diligence to adequately analyze the advance appropriations
recommendations and make any necessary changes through supplemental
appropriations. In fact, once Congress has approved an advance
appropriations level for VA, it has not revised its previous years'
decision in any appreciable way. This undermines the principle benefit
of advance appropriations--having additional time to ensure that
sufficient funds are provided.
With this in mind, we call on Congress to immediately approve
legislation that would extend advance appropriations to all VA
discretionary and mandatory appropriations accounts. Advance
appropriations have shielded VA healthcarefrom most of the harmful
effects of the partisan bickering and political gridlock that has
paralyzed Washington in recent years. Now Congress must provide the
same protections to all remaining discretionary programs, including
Medical and Prosthetic Research, General Operating Expenditures,
Information Technology, the National Cemetery Administration, Inspector
General, Major Construction, Minor Construction, State Home
Construction Grants, State Cemetery Grants and other discretionary
accounts, and all mandatory funded programs, including disability
compensation, pension, education benefits, and dependency and indemnity
compensation.
Chairman Miller and Ranking Member Michaud, the co-authors of The
Independent Budget sincerely appreciate your commitment to this effort
and we applaud your introduction and advocacy to ensure that H.R. 813,
the ``Putting Veterans Funding First Act,'' was passed by the House of
Representatives. We commit to you our steadfast support to see this
legislation through to final passage and enactment. Enactment of H.R.
813 will generally free all VA services from the political gridlock
that has crippled the appropriations process in Congress.
In the end, it is easy to forget that the people who are ultimately
affected by wrangling over the budget are the men and women who have
served and sacrificed so much for this nation. We hope that you will
consider these men and women when you develop your budget views and
estimates, and we ask that you join us in adopting the recommendations
of The Independent Budget.
This concludes our statement. We would be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Information Required by rule XI 2(g)(4) of the House of
Representatives
Pursuant to rule XI 2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, the
following information is provided regarding federal grants and
contracts.
Fiscal Year 2013
National Council on Disability--Contract for Services--$35,000.
Fiscal Year 2012
No federal grants or contracts received.
Fiscal Year 2011
Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, Administered by the Legal
Services Corporation--National Veterans Legal Services Program--
$262,787.

Statement of Raymond C. Kelley, Director National Legislative Service
Veterans Of Foreign Wars Of The United States, Committee On Veterans'
Affairs, United States House Of Representatives

with respect to

VA's Budget Request For Fiscal Year 2015

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
On behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States (VFW) and our Auxiliaries, I would like to thank you
for the opportunity to testify today. The VFW works alongside the other
members of the Independent Budget (IB)--AMVETS, Disabled American
Veterans and Paralyzed Veterans of America--to produce a set of policy
and budget recommendations that reflect what we believe would meet the
needs of America's veterans. The VFW is responsible for the IB's
Construction Programs, so I will limit my remarks to that portion of
the budget.
The vastness of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) capital
infrastructure is rarely fully seen or understood. VA currently manages
and maintains 6,016 buildings and almost 34,000 acres of land with a
plant replacement value (PRV) of approximately $45 billion. Although VA
has addressed a number of critical infrastructure gaps, 4,049 gaps
remain that will cost between $56 and $68 billion to close, including
$10 billion in activation costs. This is an increase of $2 billion from
a year ago.
With shrinking requests and appropriations from the Administration
and Congress, VA is moving further behind in closing known safety,
utilization, and access gaps and continues to fail to prevent future
gaps from arising. To only maintain VA infrastructure in its current
condition, VA's Non-Recurring Maintenance (NRM) account would need
$1.35 billion per year, based on the estimated plant replacement value
the IB partners have calculated. The Administration has requested that
NRM be funded at $462 million. More funds will need to be invested to
prevent the documented NRM backlog of $18 billion to $22 billion from
growing even larger. To address the gaps in safety, access, and
utilization, VA will need to invest between $26 billion to $31 billion
in major and minor construction and leasing.
In addition, the Strategic Capital Investment Planning (SCIP)
process is intended to help VA make more informed decisions on capital
investments. A key element missing from the gap analysis criteria is a
comprehensive assessment of the resources that exist outside of the VA
through existing contracts and sharing agreements. Unlike VA-built or
VA-leased space, contracts can be amended, cancelled, or sited
differently to respond to any geographic changes and healthcare needs
of veterans eligible for this care. This difference is especially
relevant in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) because VA,
Congress, and the IB partners have increasingly supported leveraging
community resources to provide accessible care to veterans in rural and
underserved areas. Without a comprehensive understanding of the
healthcare resources that exist within and outside of VA, the
Department cannot make sound decisions on capital investments and on
right sizing its inventory for the near-, mid-, and long-term periods.
Another apparent flaw of the SCIP process is the lack of transparency
on the costs of VA's future real property priorities, which hinders
VA's ability to make informed decisions. This shortcoming was among the
findings in a report, titled VA Real Property: Realignment Progressing,
but Greater Transparency about Future Priorities is Needed, which the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued on January 31, 2011.
The IB partners fully support the GAO's recommendation in this
report that the VA must enhance transparency by submitting an annual
report to Congress on the results of the SCIP process, subsequent
capital planning efforts, and details on the costs of future projects.
The IB partners also support the inclusion of new gap-analysis criteria
that consider resources that are available to the VHA through existing
contracts and sharing agreements. The IB partners, in turn, will be
monitoring the level of funding for each of the infrastructure accounts
to ensure that all current gaps are met within 10 years and that
emerging and future gaps will be closed by sufficient funding.
Quality, accessible healthcare continues to be the focus for the IB
partners, and to achieve and sustain that goal, large capital
investments must be made. Presenting a well-articulated, completely
transparent capital-asset plan, which VA has attempted to do, is
important, but funding that plan at nearly half of the prior year's
appropriated level, and at a level that is only 25 percent of what is
needed to close the access, utilization, and safety gaps, will not
fulfill VA's requirements, nor will it serve veterans' best interests.
Major Construction Accounts: Decades of underfunding in amounts
between $18.1 billion and $22.1 billion have led to a major
construction backlog. Currently, the VHA has 21 major construction
projects dating back to 2007 that have been only partially funded. In
the Administration's budget request for fiscal year (FY) 2015, VA
requested funding for only four major projects that include partial
funding for seismic corrections and extended care facility expansion,
and fully fund a spinal cord injury center. The total unobligated
amount for all currently budgeted major construction projects exceeds
$2.3 billion. Yet, the total budget proposal for FY 2015 major
construction accounts is $562 million.
To finish existing projects and to close current and future gaps,
VA will need to invest more than $18 billion over the next 10 years. At
current requested funding levels, it will take 32 years to complete
VA's 10-year plan.
In the short-term, VA must start requesting and Congress must start
funding major construction at a level that begins to reduce the
backlog. The IB partners recommend providing VA with $2.8 billion in
major construction funding in FY 2015. These increased funds will
eliminate the most severe safety gaps and complete funding on the
longest standing projects. VA must also begin presenting long-term
proposals that will outline how the Department will close all major
construction gaps.
Minor Construction Accounts: To close all the minor construction
gaps within a 10-year timeline, VA will need to invest between $6.7
billion and $8.2 billion. For several years, VA minor construction was
funded at a level to meet its 10-year goal. However, the Administration
has abandoned their long-term commitment to increased appropriations
and proposed yet another drastic funding decrease for minor
construction that would only provide $495 million for FY 2015.
The IB partners believe that minor construction accounts can be
brought back on track by investing approximately $831 million per year
over the next decade to close existing gaps and to prevent unmanageable
future gaps in minor construction.
Additionally, for capital infrastructure, renovations, and
maintenance, we recommend $50 million or more for up to five major
construction projects in VA research facilities and $175 million in
non-recurring maintenance and Minor-Construction funding. This increase
would address Priority 1 and 2 deficiencies identified in the 2012 VA
research capital infrastructure report (in accounts that are separate
from VA's other major, minor, and maintenance and repair
appropriations).
Nonrecurring Maintenance Accounts: Even though non-recurring
maintenance (NRM) is funded through VA's Medical Facilities account,
and not through a construction account, NRM is critical to VA's capital
infrastructure. NRM embodies the many small projects that together
provide for the long-term sustainability and usability of VA
facilities. NRM projects are one-time repairs, such as modernizing
mechanical or electrical systems, replacing windows and equipment, and
preserving roofs and floors. Nonrecurring maintenance is a necessary
component of the care and stewardship of a facility. When managed
responsibly, these relatively small, periodic investments ensure that
the more substantial investments of major and minor construction
provide real value to taxpayers and to veterans as well.
VA is moving away from closing current NRM safety, utilization, and
access gaps and continues to fall behind on preventing future gaps.
Just to maintain in the status quo, VA's NRM account must be funded at
$1.35 billion per year, based on the estimated Plant Replacement Value
(PRV). The Administration is requesting $462 million for NRM in FY
2015. More will need to be invested to prevent the $21.9 billion NRM
backlog from growing larger.
The IB partners believe VA should develop a PRV metric and publish
its results. Adding the PRV to the SCIP will allow VA to more
accurately determine the appropriate amount to request for NRM and
objectively decide when a facility becomes more costly to maintain than
to replace. Using the PRV as a tool, VA can more accurately determine
the annual funding levels needed for NRM by facility, allowing for the
reduction in the NRM backlog and fully funding future needs in a way
that would be the most cost effective. The industry goal for NRM is
around two percent of the PRV. At that rate, facilities can operate for
50 years or more without outspending replacement cost. Knowing what
percentage of the PRV is being spent and taking a long view of capital
planning would allow Congress and VA to assess when a facility will
need to be replaced.
Because NRM accounts are organized under the Medical Facilities
appropriation, they have traditionally been apportioned using the
Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) formula. This formula was
intended to allocate health-care dollars to those areas with the
greatest demand for healthcare and is not an ideal method to allocate
NRM funds. When dealing with maintenance needs, this formula may prove
counterproductive by moving funds away from older medical centers and
reallocating the funds to newer facilities where patient demand is
greater, even if the maintenance needs are not as great. We are
encouraged by actions the House and Senate Veterans' Affairs Committees
have taken in recent years requiring NRM funding to be allocated
outside the VERA formula, and we hope this practice will continue.
Capital Leasing: The fourth cornerstone to VA's capital planning is
leasing. The current lease plan calls for a little more than $1.1
billion over the next 10 years. VA leases properties to use for each
agency within VA, ranging from community-based outpatient clinics
(CBOC) and medical centers to research and warehouse space. These
leases do not fall under the larger construction accounts, but under
each Administration and staff office operating accounts.
Since the 1990s, Congress has helped improve VA health-care access
and patient satisfaction by authorizing and funding nearly 900 VA
CBOCs. These facilities have provided local, convenient and cost-
effective primary care for millions of veterans. In a 2012 policy
shift, the Congressional Budget Office changed its accounting practice
on how major capital leases are to be funded, effectively halting
Congressional authorization of future leases. This is the third year
without passing lease authority and there are now 32 major capital
leases, totaling nearly $288 million, for which VA has requested
Congressional authorization. These leases are in limbo and Congress
needs to pass H.R. 3521.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony and I look forward to any
questions you or the Committee may have.

Information Required by Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, VFW has
not received any federal grants in Fiscal Year 2013, nor has it
received any federal grants in the two previous Fiscal Years.

Statement Of Paul R. Varela, Director,

DAV Assistant National Legislative

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Members of the
Committee:
On behalf of the DAV and our 1.2 million members, all of whom are
wartime disabled veterans, I am pleased to present recommendations of
The Independent Budget (IB) for the fiscal year (FY) 2015 budget
related to veterans' benefits and the Veterans Benefits Administration
(VBA). The IB is jointly produced each year by DAV, AMVETS, Paralyzed
Veterans of America and Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States.
This year's IB contains numerous recommendations to improve veterans'
benefit programs and the claims processing system; however, in today's
testimony I will highlight just some of the most critical ones for this
Committee to consider.
Mr. Chairman, the timely delivery of earned benefits to the
millions of men and women who have served in our Armed Forces is one of
the most sacred obligations of the federal government. The award of a
service-connected disability rating does more than provide compensation
payments; it is the gateway to an array of benefits that support the
recovery and transition of veterans, their families and survivors.
However, when these benefits are delayed or unjustly denied, the
consequences to veterans and their families can be devastating. For
those wounded heroes who file claims for disability compensation, the
wait to receive an accurate rating decision and award can take anywhere
from a few months to several years; longer if they have to appeal
incorrect decisions.
In early 2010, Secretary Shinseki laid out an extremely ambitious
goal for VBA to achieve by 2015: process 100 percent of claims in less
than 125 days, and do so with 98 percent accuracy. Since that time, VBA
has worked to completely transform their IT systems, business processes
and corporate culture, while simultaneously continuing to process more
than a million claims each year. VBA is actively rolling out new
organizational models and practices, and continuing to develop and
deploy new technologies almost daily.
Today there are about 685,000 claims for compensation and pension
awaiting decisions at VBA. At the beginning of 2013, there were more
than 860,000 pending claims for disability compensation and pension. By
the end of the year, that number had dropped by more than 20 percent,
down to about 685,000 pending. The number of claims in the backlog--
greater than 125 days pending--dropped by about a third, from more than
600,000 in January 2013 to just over 405,000 in January 2014. The VBA
increased the number of claims completed each month from an average of
about 89,000 during the first four months of the year to more than
114,000 during the succeeding six months prior to the government
shutdown. Claims production dropped significantly following the
shutdown and during the subsequent holiday period.
In the midst of this massive transformation, it can be hard to get
the proper perspective to measure whether their final systems will be
successful, but we believe there has been sufficient progress to merit
continued support of the current transformation efforts. Now is not the
time to stop or change direction.
We urge this Committee and Congress to provide the support and
resources necessary to complete this transformation as currently
planned, while continuing to exercise strong oversight to ensure that
VBA remains focused on the long-term goal of creating a new claims
processing system that decides each claim right the first time. In
particular, the proposed FY 2015 budget for VBA includes additional
funding for scanning and conversion of existing paper claims files,
absolutely critical for VBA to complete its transformation from an
outdated, paper-based claims system to a modern, paperless, automated
claims system.
Mr. Chairman, one of the most important aspects needed to assure
ongoing positive changes within the VBA is their willingness to remain
open and partner with veterans service organizations. Our organizations
possess significant knowledge and experience of the claims process and
collectively we hold power of attorney (POA) for millions of veterans
who are filing or have filed claims. VBA recognized that close
collaboration with VSOs could not only reduce its workload, but also
increase the quality of its work. We make VBA's job easier by helping
veterans prepare and submit better claims, thereby requiring less time
and resources for VBA to develop and adjudicate them.
The IB veterans service organizations (IBVSOs) have been consulted
about initiatives proposed or underway at VBA, including Fully
Developed Claims (FDC), Disability Benefit Questionnaires (DBQs), the
Veterans Benefit Management System (VBMS), the Stakeholder Enterprise
Portal (SEP), and the update of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
Schedule for Rating Disabilities (VASRD). Both Secretary Shinseki and
Under Secretary Hickey have reached out to consult and collaborate with
VSOs and we are confident that VBA's success going forward will require
a continued and enhanced partnership that will result in better service
and outcomes for veterans.
Since 2009, VBA has made some significant changes in how claims are
processed. The most important amongst these is the development of the
VBMS, its new IT system. VBMS has been rolled out to all 56 Regional
Offices and VBA was able to complete implementation of the VBMS ahead
of schedule in June; by the end of 2013, nearly all of VBA's pending
claims were processed using electronic files. It is important to
remember that VBMS is not yet a finished product; rather, it continues
to be developed and perfected as it is deployed so it is still
premature to judge whether it will ultimately deliver all of the
functionality and efficiency required to meet VBA's future claims
processing needs.
Another very important milestone was VBA's decision and commitment
to scan all paper claims files for every new or reopened claim
requiring a rating-related action, and creating digital e-folders to
serve as the cornerstone of the new VBMS system. E-folders facilitate
instantaneous transmission and simultaneous reviewing of claims files.
At present, there are an estimated 500,000 e-folders and that number
will continue to grow as the remaining ROs convert to VBMS this year.
In addition, the Appeals Management Center (AMC) is now working in
VBMS and able to review e-folders. The Board of Veterans Appeals (BVA)
will also begin receiving appeals in VBMS on a pilot basis.
VBA also continues to strengthen its e-Benefits and SEP systems,
which allow veterans and their representatives to file claims, upload
supporting evidence and check on the status of pending claims. VBA has
rolled out a new transformation organizational model (TOM) to every
Regional Office that has reorganized workflow by segmenting claims into
different processing lanes depending upon the complexity of the issues
to be decided for each claim. Other key process improvements that we
strongly support include the FDC program, which expedites ready-to-rate
claims, and DBQs, which standardize and encourage the collection of
private medical evidence to aid in rating decisions. To improve the
accuracy of their work, VBA also fulfilled one of our long-standing
recommendations by creating local Quality Review Teams (QRTs), whose
primary function is to monitor claims processing in real time to catch
and correct errors before rating decisions are finalized.

Claims Processing Recommendations

Over the next year, Congress must continue to perform aggressive
oversight of VBA's ongoing claims transformation efforts, particularly
new IT programs, while actively supporting the completion and full
implementation of these vital initiatives. In order for VBA's current
transformation plans to have any reasonable chance of success, VBA must
be allowed to complete and fully implement them. Congress must continue
to fully fund the completion of VBMS, including providing sufficient
funding for digital scanning and conversion of legacy paper files, as
well as the development of new automation components for VBMS. At the
same time, the IBVSOs recommend that Congress encourage an independent,
expert review of VBMS while there is still time to make course
corrections.
Congress must also encourage and support VBA's efforts to develop a
new corporate culture based on quality, accuracy and accountability, as
well as strengthen the transmission and adoption of these values and
appropriate supportive policies throughout all VBA Regional Offices.
The long-term success of all of VBA's transformation efforts will
depend on the degree to which these changes are institutionalized and
disseminated from the national level to the local level. In addition to
strengthening training, testing and quality control, VBA must be
encouraged to properly align measuring and reporting functions with
desired goals and outcomes for both its leadership and employees.
For example, as long as the most widely reported metric of VBA's
success is the Monday Morning Workload Reports, particularly the weekly
update on the size of the backlog, there will remain tremendous
pressure throughout VBA to place production gains ahead of quality and
accuracy. Similarly, if individual employee performance standards set
unrealistic production goals, or fail to properly credit ancillary
activity that contributes to quality but not production, those
employees will be incentivized to focus on activities that maximize
only production. VBA must develop more and better measures of work
performance that focus on quality and accuracy, both for the agency as
a whole and for individual employees.
Furthermore, VBA must ensure that employee performance standards
are based on accurate measures of the time it takes to properly perform
their jobs.
Congress must also ensure that VBA does not change its reporting or
metrics for the sole purpose of achieving statistical gains, commonly
referred to as ``gaming the system,'' in the absence of actual
improvements to the system. For example, VBA recently announced that
they will change how errors are scored for multi-issue claims.
Previously, a claim would be considered to have an error if one
mistake on at least one issue in the claim was detected during a STAR
review. Under the new error policy, if there are 10 issues in the claim
and a single error is found on one of the issues, that would now be
scored as only 0.1 errors for that claim. While this may be a more
valid way of measuring technical accuracy, it also has the effect of
lowering the error rate without actually lowering the number of errors
committed. For instance, if VBA measures errors by issue, then the
backlog of claims would not be the reported 405,000, but a multiple of
that based upon the total number of issues, which would be in the
millions. Likewise, VBA's allowance rate must be adjusted with this
type of change in reporting to accurately reflect the number of issues
allowed out of the total number of issues claimed, which would be
significantly lower than the current allowance rate per claim. In
essence, VBA cannot simply change the metrics to suit their need to
reflect gains or improvements; they must change all corresponding
metrics such as claims v. issues, allowances v. denials and remands or
similar.
Additionally, to make the system more efficient, Congress should
enact and promote legislation and policies that maximize the use of
private medical evidence to conserve VBA resources and enable quicker,
more accurate rating decisions for veterans. The IBVSOs have long
encouraged VBA to make greater use of private medical evidence when
making claims decisions, which would save veterans time and VBA the
cost of unnecessary examinations.
DBQs, many of which were developed in consultation with IBVSO
experts, are designed to allow private physicians to submit medical
evidence on behalf of veterans they treat in a format that aids rating
specialists. However, we continue to receive credible reports from
across the country that many Veterans Service Representatives (VSRs)
and Rating Veterans Service Representatives (RVSRs) do not accept the
adequacy of DBQs submitted by private physicians, resulting in
redundant VA medical examinations being ordered and valid evidence
supporting veterans' claims being rejected.
Although there are currently 81 approved DBQs, VBA has only
released 71 of them to the public for use by private physicians. In
particular, VBA should allow private treating physicians to complete
DBQs for medical opinions about whether injuries and disabilities are
service connected, as well as DBQs for PTSD, which current VBA rules do
not allow; only VA physicians can make PTSD diagnoses for compensation
claims. Congress should work with VBA to make both of these DBQs
available to private physicians.
To further encourage the use of private medical evidence, Congress
should amend title 38, United States Code, section 5103A(d)(1) to
provide that, when a claimant submits private medical evidence,
including a private medical opinion, that is competent, credible,
probative, and otherwise adequate for rating purposes, the Secretary
shall not request a VA medical examination. This legislative change
would require VSRs and RVSRs to first document that private medical
evidence was inadequate for rating purposes before ordering
examinations, which are often unnecessary.

VBA Staffing and Resource Recommendations

Compensation Service Staffing

In recent years, VBA has seen a significant staffing increase
because Congress recognized that rising workload, particularly claims
for disability compensation, could not be addressed without additional
personnel and thus provided additional resources each year to do so.
More than 5,000 full-time employee equivalents (FTEE) were added to VBA
over the past five years, a 33 percent increase, with most of that
increase going to the Compensation Service. In FY 2013, VBA's budget
supported an additional 450 FTEE above the FY 2012 authorized level,
and the FY 2014 level added less than 100 new FTEE, and for FY 2015 the
level of staffing remains unchanged.
Since the early part of 2013, the VBA has clearly made positive
strides toward increasing productivity, reducing the backlog of
disability claims and, by the end of 2015, reaching the Secretary's
goal of completing all claims in less than 125 days with 98 percent
accuracy. Over the past year, the total number of claims pending
dropped by about 20 percent, and the number in the backlog (over 125
days) decreased by more than a third. The VBA has employed a variety of
aggressive initiatives, such as processing all claims pending longer
than two years and then, when completed, moving to process all claims
pending longer than one year.
We believe allowing the VBA to again hire employees for a two-year
temporary term could supplement and/or alleviate the reliance on
mandatory overtime and further reduce the backlog of disability claims
to help reach the Secretary's goal by the end of 2015. Such an
initiative would also provide an outstanding opportunity for VBA to
have a generous pool of fully trained, qualified candidates to choose
from as replacements for full-time VBA employees who will undoubtedly
be lost over the next few years because of attrition.
However, rather than hiring ``new'' employees who need training and
time to become fully productive, VBA would have instantly productive
replacements ready and would have the ability to hire only the best of
these candidates. Therefore, we urge Congress to provide the funding
and resources necessary for VBA to hire a minimum of 1,000 new
employees for a temporary two-year term.

Board of Veterans' Appeals Staffing

Based on historical trends, the number of new appeals to the Board
averages approximately five percent of all claims received, so as the
number of claims processed by the VBA is expected to rise
significantly, so too will the Board's workload rise accordingly. Yet
the budget provided to the Board has been declining, forcing it to
reduce the number of employees. Although the Board had been authorized
to have up to 544 FTEE in FY 2011, its appropriated budget could
support only 532 FTEE that year. In FY 2012, that number was further
reduced to 510. At present, due to cost-saving initiatives, the Board
may be able to support as many as 518 FTEE with the FY 2013 budget;
however, this does not correct the downward trend over the past several
years, particularly as workload continues to rise.
The FY 2014 budget actually proposed cuts to funding for the Board
and further reduced staffing down to 492 FTEE, despite expected
workload increases each year. Projecting for FY 2014, the IBVSOs
recommended a modest increase in staffing to 544 FTEE.
We are pleased Congress supported this recommendation and actually
went beyond the suggested number by providing enough funding for BVA to
increase staffing to approximately 640 FTEE to be in place by the end
of FY 2014 and an FY 2015 budget request to increase the number of FTEE
to 650.

Vocational Rehabilitation

Employment Service Staffing

In FY 2012, VA's Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E)
program, also known as the VetSuccess program, had 121,000 participants
in one or more of the five assistance tracks of VR&E's VetSuccess
program, an increase of 12.3 percent above the FY 2011 participation
level of 107,925 veterans. In FY 2012, VR&E had a total of 1,446 FTEE,
and anticipates an increase of approximately 150 FTEE for FY 2013.
Given the estimated 10 percent workload increases for both FY 2013 and
FY 2014, the IB estimated VR&E would need an additional 230 counselors
in FY 2014 in order to reduce their counselor-to-client ratio down to
their stated goal of 1:125.
An extension for the delivery of VR&E assistance at a key
transition point for veterans is through the VetSuccess on Campus
program. This program provides support to student veterans in
completing college or university degrees. VetSuccess on Campus has
developed into a program that places a full-time Vocational
Rehabilitation Counselor and a part-time Vet Center Outreach
Coordinator at an office on campus specifically for the student
veterans attending that college. These VA officers are there to help
the transition from military to civilian and student life. The
VetSuccess on Campus program is designed to give needed support to all
student veterans, whether or not they are entitled to one of VA's
education benefit programs.
In FY 2015, Congress must provide the Vocational Rehabilitation and
Employment Service with sufficient funding to support an adequate
number of FTEE to meet growing demand of the program and achieve its
current caseload target of one counselor for every 125 veteran clients
and equitably allocate resources among VAROs in a manner to achieve
that target. This includes assuring that as other programs, such as the
VetSuccess on Campus staffed with tenured VR&E counselors, the
workforce gaps left behind at the ROs are backfilled to keep pace with
local workload demands.

IT Enhancements

In addition, the VBMS was ultimately intended to include all of
VBA's business lines so that no matter where a veteran or survivor
applied for benefits, the VBMS would seamlessly connect them to all
benefits they may be entitled to receive. While some programs, such as
Education Service, have developed adequate IT systems in recent years,
others, especially the Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E)
service, are in dire need of a complete IT overhaul. VR&E's processing
system, called the Corporate Winston-Salem, Indianapolis, Newark,
Roanoke, Seattle (CWINRS) system, is incapable of managing the many
needs of this program. Rather than invest in short-term upgrades and
patches, the IBVSOs believe that VBMS development for VR&E should be
accelerated.
VBA must complete the full development and integration of the VBMS
to the AMC, BVA, and Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims as well as to
the other VBA business lines and in particular VR&E.
The IBVSOs are pleased that the Administration's budget request for
FY 2015 is approximately $200 million more than the FY 2014 IT funding,
and we support that level of funding. More importantly, Congress must
ensure that from the total IT funding made available to VBA, that VR&E
receives the necessary resources and support to upgrade its antiquated
IT systems.

Recommendations for Improvements to VA Benefits

Annual Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA)

Congress has annually authorized increases in compensation and
dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) by the same percent as
Social Security is increased.
Under current law, the government monitors inflation throughout the
year and, if inflation occurs, automatically increases Social Security
payments by the percent of increase for the following year, which the
Congress then applies to veterans' programs.
While Congress has always increased compensation and DIC based on
inflation, there have been years when such increases were delayed,
which puts unnecessary financial strain on veterans and their
survivors.
The IBVSOs urge Congress to enact legislation indexing compensation
and DIC to Social Security COLA increases.

End Rounding Down of Veterans' and Survivors' Benefits Payments

In 1990, Congress, in an omnibus reconciliation act, mandated that
veterans' and survivors' benefit payments be rounded down to the next
lower whole dollar. While this policy was initially limited to a few
years, Congress has continued that policy.
The cumulative effect of this provision of the law effectively
levies a tax on totally disabled veterans and their survivors. Congress
should repeal the current policy of rounding down veterans' and
survivors' benefits payments.
On November 21, 2013, with the President's signature, the Veterans'
Compensation Cost-of-Living Adjustment Act became Public Law 113-52.
The Act provided a 1.5% increase in veterans' disability compensation,
DIC and other related veterans benefits, effective December 1, 2013.
Unlike COLAs in the past, this COLA did not include the provision of
rounding down increases to the nearest whole dollar amount.
The IBVSOs urge Congress not to return to a policy of rounding down
veterans' and survivors' benefits payments.

Reject Any Proposal to Use the ``Chained CPI''

In the past year, there has been much discussion about replacing
the current CPI formula used for calculating the annual Social Security
COLA with the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) new formula commonly
termed the ``chained CPI.'' Such a change would be expected to
significantly reduce the rates paid to Social Security recipients, and
thereby help to lower the federal deficit. Since the Social Security
COLA is also applied annually to the rates for VA disability
compensation, DIC, and pensions for wartime veterans and survivors with
limited incomes, its application would mean systematic reductions for
millions of veterans, their dependents and survivors who rely on VA
benefit payments. The IBVSOs urge Congress to reject any and all
proposals to use the ``chained CPI'' for determining Social Security
COLA increases, which would have the effect of significantly reducing
the level of vital benefits provided to millions of veterans and their
survivors.
The IBVSOs also note that the CPI index used for Social Security
does not include increases in the cost of food or gasoline, both of
which have risen significantly in recent years. While no inflation
index is perfect, the IBVSOs believe that VA should examine whether
there are other inflation indices that would more appropriately
correlate with the increased cost of living experienced by disabled
veterans and their survivors.

End Prohibition against Concurrent Receipt of VA Disability
Compensation and Military Longevity Retired Pay

Many veterans retired from the armed forces based on longevity of
service must forfeit a portion of their retired pay, earned through
faithful performance of military service, before they receive VA
compensation for service-connected disabilities. This is inequitable--
military retired pay is earned by virtue of a veteran's career of
service on behalf of the nation, careers of usually more than 20 years.
Entitlement to compensation, on the other hand, is paid solely because
of disability resulting from military service, regardless of the length
of service. Most nondisabled military retirees pursue second careers
after serving in order to supplement their income, thereby justly
enjoying a full reward for completion of a military career with the
added reward of full civilian employment income. In contrast, military
retirees with service-connected disabilities do not enjoy the same full
earning potential since their earning potential is reduced commensurate
with the degree of service-connected disability.
In order to place all disabled longevity military retirees on equal
footing with nondisabled military retirees, there should be no offset
between full military retired pay and VA disability compensation. To
the extent that military retired pay and VA disability compensation
offset each other, the disabled military retiree is treated less fairly
than is a nondisabled military retiree by not accounting for the loss
in earning capacity. Moreover, a disabled veteran who does not retire
from military service but elects instead to pursue a civilian career
after completing a service obligation can receive full VA disability
compensation and full civilian retired pay--including retirement from
any federal civil service position.
While Congress has made progress in recent years in correcting this
injustice, current law still provides that service-connected veterans
rated less than 50 percent disabled who retire from the armed forces on
length of service may not receive disability compensation from VA in
addition to full military retired pay. The IBVSOs believe the time has
come to remove this prohibition completely. Congress should enact
legislation to repeal the inequitable requirement that veterans'
military longevity retired pay be offset by an amount equal to the
disability compensation awarded to disabled veterans rated less than 50
percent, the same as exists for those rated 50 percent or greater.

SURVIVOR BENEFITS

Increase DIC for Surviving Spouses of Service Members

The current rate of compensation paid to the survivors of certain
deceased veterans rated permanently and totally disabled and deceased
service members is inadequate and inequitable. Under current law, the
surviving spouse of a veteran who had a total disability rating is
entitled to the basic rate of DIC. A supplemental payment is provided
to those spouses who were married for at least eight years during which
time the veteran was rated permanently and totally disabled.
However, surviving spouses of veterans or military service members
who die before the eight-year eligibility period, or who die on active
duty, respectively, only receive the basic rate of DIC.
Insofar as DIC payments are intended to provide surviving spouses
with the means to maintain some semblance of financial stability after
losing their loved ones, the rate of payment for service-related deaths
of any kind should not vastly differ. Surviving spouses, regardless of
the status of their sponsors at the time of death, face the same
financial hardships once deceased sponsors' incomes no longer exist.
Congress should authorize DIC eligibility at increased rates to
survivors of service members who died either before the eight-year
eligibility period passes or while on active duty at the same rate paid
to the eligible survivors of totally disabled service-connected
veterans who die after the eight-year eligibility period.

Repeal of the DIC-SBP Offset

The current requirement that the amount of an annuity under the
Survivor Benefit Plan (SBP) be reduced on account of, and by an amount
equal to, DIC is inequitable. A veteran disabled in military service is
compensated for the effects of service-connected disability. When a
veteran dies of service-connected causes, or following a substantial
period of total disability from service-connected causes, eligible
survivors or dependents receive DIC from the VA. This benefit
indemnifies survivors, in part, for the losses associated with the
veteran's death from service-connected causes or after a period of time
when the veteran was unable, because of total disability, to accumulate
an estate for inheritance by survivors.
Career members of the armed forces earn entitlement to retired pay
after 20 or more years of service. Survivors of military retirees have
no entitlement to any portion of the veteran's military retirement pay
after his or her death, unlike many retirement plans in the private
sector. Under the SBP, deductions are made from the veteran's military
retirement pay to purchase a survivor's annuity. This is not a
gratuitous benefit, but is purchased by a retiree.
Upon the veteran's death, the annuity is paid monthly to eligible
beneficiaries under the plan. If the veteran died from other than
service-connected causes or was not totally disabled by service-
connected disability for the required time preceding death,
beneficiaries receive full SBP payments. However, if the veteran's
death was a result of military service or after the requisite period of
total service-connected disability, the SBP annuity is reduced by an
amount equal to the DIC payment. When the monthly DIC rate is equal to
or greater than the monthly SBP annuity, beneficiaries lose the SBP
annuity in its entirety.
The IBVSOs believe this offset is inequitable because no
duplication of benefits is involved. Payments under the SBP and DIC
programs are made for different purposes. Under the SBP, coverage is
purchased by a veteran and at the time of death, paid to his or her
surviving beneficiary. On the other hand, DIC is a special indemnity
compensation paid to the survivor of a service member who dies while
serving in the military, or a veteran who dies from service-connected
disabilities. In such cases, DIC should be added to the SBP, not
substituted for it. Surviving spouses of federal civilian retirees who
are veterans are eligible for DIC without losing any of their purchased
federal civilian survivor benefits.
The offset penalizes survivors of military retirees whose deaths
are under circumstances warranting indemnification from the government
separate from the annuity funded by premiums paid by the veteran from
his or her retired pay.
Congress should repeal the inequitable offset between DIC and the
SBP because there is no duplication between these two distinct
benefits.

Retention of Remarried Survivors' Benefits at Age 55

Congress should lower the age required for remarriage for survivors
of veterans who have died on active duty or from service-connected
disabilities to be eligible for retention of DIC to conform with the
requirements of other federal programs.
Current law allows retention of DIC on remarriage at age 57 or
older for eligible survivors of veterans who die on active duty or of a
service-connected injury or illness. Although the IBVSOs appreciate the
action Congress took to allow restoration of this rightful benefit, the
current age threshold of 57 years is arbitrary.
Remarried survivors of retirees of the Civil Service Retirement
System, for example, obtain a similar benefit at age 55. This would
also bring DIC in line with SBP rules that allow retention with
remarriage at the age of 55. Equity with beneficiaries of other federal
programs should govern Congressional action for this deserving group.
Congress should enact legislation to enable survivors to retain DIC on
remarriage at age 55 for all eligible surviving spouses.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement and I would be happy to
answer any questions you or other members of the Committee may have.

Statement of Diane M. Zumatto, Director,

of

AMVETS NATIONAL LEGISLATIVE

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud and distinguished Members
of the committee, as an author of The Independent Budget (IB), I
appreciate this opportunity to share with you the IB's recommendations
in what we believe to be the most fiscally responsible way of ensuring
the quality and integrity of the care and benefits earned by American
veterans.
The venerable and honorable history of our national cemeteries
spans roughly 150 years when the earliest military graveyards were, not
surprisingly, situated at battle sites, near field or general hospitals
and at former prisoner-of-war sites. With the passage of the National
Cemeteries Act of 1973 (PL 93-43), the Department of Veterans' Affairs
(VA) became responsible for the majority of our national cemeteries.
The single most important obligation of the National Cemetery
Administration (NCA) is to honor the memory of America's brave men and
women who have selflessly served in this Nation's Armed Forces. As of
late 2010, there were more than 20,021 acres of cemetery landscape,
funerary monuments, grave markers, as well as, other architectural
features and memorial tributes, much of it historically significant,
included within established installations in the NCA which are
therefore representative of the very foundations of these United
States.
The signing of the Veterans Programs Enhancement Act of 1998 (PL
105-368) officially re-designated the National Cemetery System (NCS) to
the now familiar National Cemetery Administration (NCA). The NCA
currently maintains stewardship of 133 of the nation's 147 national
cemeteries, as well as 33 soldiers' lots, including two new national
cemeteries scheduled to open in 2015. Since 1862 when President Abraham
Lincoln signed the first legislation establishing the national cemetery
concept, more than 3.5 million burials have taken place in national
cemeteries currently located in 39 states and Puerto Rico, with
approximately 128,100 interments expected in 2015.
There are an estimated 22.4 million veterans alive today and with
the transition of an additional 1 million service members into veteran
status over the next 12 months, this number is expected to continue to
rise until approximately 2017. On average, 14.4 percent of veterans
choose a national or state veterans' cemetery as their final resting
place. As new national and state cemeteries continue to open, and as
our aging veterans' population continues to grow and we continue to be
a nation at war, the demand for burial at a veterans' cemetery will
continue to increase.
The Independent Budget veterans service organizations (IBVSOs)
would like to acknowledge the devotion and commitment demonstrated by
the NCA leadership, especially Undersecretary Steve Muro, and his staff
in their continued dedication to providing the highest quality of
service to veterans and their families. It is in the opinion of the
IBVSOs that the NCA continues to meet its goals and the goals set forth
by others because of its true dedication and care for honoring the
memories of the men and women who have so selflessly served our nation.
We applaud the NCA for recognizing that it must continue to be
responsive to the preferences and expectations of the veterans'
community by adapting or adopting new interment options and ensuring
access to burial options in the national, state and tribal government-
operated cemeteries. We also believe it is important to recognize the
NCA's efforts in employing both disabled and homeless veterans.

NCA Accounts

While NCA's operating budget has remained fairly stagnant at around
$250 million for 4 out of the last 5 years, their workload has been
anything but static and this trend is expected to continue for the
foreseeable future. The IBVSOs are appreciative of the roughly $8
million increase in NCA's overall FY 2015 budget, however, that
increase comes with a simultaneous $8.4 million reduction in the
National Shrine account.
Between FY 2014 and FY 2015, the number of gravesites needing
maintenance will increase by approximately 2.4%, while interments will
increase by roughly 1.9%.
The NCA was also able to award 44 of its 48 minor construction
projects and had four unobligated projects that will be moved to FY
2012. Unfortunately, due to continuing resolutions and the current
budget situation, the NCA was not able to award the remaining four
projects.
The IBVSOs support the operational standards and measures outlined
in the National Shrine Commitment (PL 106-117, Sec. 613) which was
enacted in 1999 to ensure that our national cemeteries are the finest
in the world. While the NCA has worked diligently improving the
appearance of our national cemeteries, they are still a long way from
where they should be.
The NCA has worked tirelessly to improve the appearance of our
national cemeteries, investing an estimated $39 million into the
National Shrine Initiative in FY 2011. According to NCA surveys, as of
October 2011 the NCA has continued to make progress in reaching its
performance measures. Since 2006, the NCA has improved headstone and
marker height and alignment in national cemeteries from 67 percent to
70 percent and has improved cleanliness of tombstones, markers and
niches from 77 percent to 91 percent. Although the NCA is nearing its
strategic goal of 90 percent and 95 percent, respectively, for height
and alignment and cleanliness, more funding is needed to continue this
delicate and labor-intensive work. Therefore, the IBVSOs recommend the
NCA's Operations and Maintenance budget to be increased by $20 million
per year until the operational standards and measures goals are
reached.
The IBVSOs recommend a minimum Operational and Maintenance budget
of $260 million for the National Cemetery Administration for FY 2015,
so it can meet the demands for interment, gravesite maintenance and
related essential elements of cemetery operations. This request
includes $34.5 million for the National Shrine Initiative to ensure
that our national cemeteries meet or exceed the highest standards of
appearance required by their status as national shrines.
The national shrine funds would be used, among other things, to
maintain:

Occupied graves;

Developed acreage;

Historic structures; and

Cemetery infrastructure

The IBVSOs call on the Administration and Congress to provide the
resources needed to meet the critical nature of the NCA's mission and
to fulfill the nation's commitment to all veterans who have served
their country so honorably and faithfully.

State Cemetery Grant Programs

The State Cemetery Grants Program (SCGP) complements the National
Cemetery Administration's mission to establish gravesites for veterans
in areas where it cannot fully respond to the burial needs of veterans.
Several incentives are in place to assist states in this effort. For
example, the NCA can provide up to 100 percent of the development cost
for an approved cemetery project, including establishing a new cemetery
and expanding or improving an established state or tribal organization
veterans' cemetery. New equipment, such as mowers and backhoes, can be
provided for new cemeteries. In addition, the Department of Veterans'
Affairs may also provide operating grants to help cemeteries achieve
national shrine standards.
In FY 2011 the SCGP operated on an estimated budget of $46 million,
funding 16 state cemeteries. These 16 state cemeteries included the
establishment or ground breaking of five new state cemeteries, three of
which are located on tribal lands, expansions and improvements at seven
state cemeteries, and four projects aimed at assisting state cemeteries
to meet the NCA national shrine standards. Since 1978 the Department of
Veterans' Affairs has more than doubled the available acreage and
accommodated more than a 100 percent increase in burials through this
program.
With the enactment of the ``Veterans Benefits Improvement Act of
1998,'' the NCA has been able to strengthen its partnership with states
and increase burial services to veterans, especially those living in
less densely populated areas without access to a nearby national
cemetery. Through FY 2010, the state grant program has established 75
state veteran's cemeteries in 40 states and U.S. territories.
Furthermore, in FY 2011 VA awarded its first state cemetery grant to a
tribal organization.
The Independent Budget veteran's service organizations recommend
that Congress fund the State Cemetery Grants Program at $48 million for
FY 2015. The IBVSOs believe that this small increase in funding will
help the National Cemetery Administration meet the needs of the State
Cemetery Grant Program, as its expected demand will continue to rise
through 2017. Furthermore, this funding level will allow the NCA to
continue to expand in an effort of reaching its goal of serving 94
percent of the nation's veteran population by 2015.

Veteran's Burial Benefits

Since the original parcel of land was set aside for the sacred
committal of Civil War Veterans by President Abraham Lincoln in 1862,
more than 3 million burials have occurred in national cemeteries under
the National Cemetery Administration.
In 1973, the Department of Veterans' Affairs established a burial
allowance that provided partial reimbursement for eligible funeral and
burial costs. The current payment is $2,000 for burial expenses for
service-connected deaths, $300 for non-service-connected deaths and a
$700 plot allowance. At its inception, the payout covered 72 percent of
the funeral costs for a service-connected death, 22 percent for a non-
service-connected death and 54 percent of the cost of a burial plot.
Burial allowance was first introduced in 1917 to prevent veterans
from being buried in potter's fields. In 1923 the allowance was
modified. The benefit was determined by a means test until it was
removed in 1936. In its early history the burial allowance was paid to
all veterans, regardless of their service connectivity of death. In
1973, the allowance was modified to reflect the status of service
connection.
The plot allowance was introduced in 1973 as an attempt to provide
a plot benefit for veterans who did not have reasonable access to a
national cemetery. Although neither the plot allowance nor the burial
allowance was intended to cover the full cost of a civilian burial in a
private cemetery, the recent increase in the benefit's value indicates
the intent to provide a meaningful benefit. The Independent Budget
veterans' service organizations are pleased that the 111th Congress
acted quickly and passed an increase in the plot allowance for certain
veterans from $300 to $700 effective October 1, 2011. However, we
believe that there is still a serious deficit between the original
value of the benefit and its current value.
In order to bring the benefit back up to its original intended
value, the payment for service-connected burial allowance should be
increased to $6,160, the non-service-connected burial allowance should
be increased to $1,918 and the plot allowance should be increased to
$1,150. The IBVSOs believe Congress should divide the burial benefits
into two categories: veterans within the accessibility model and
veterans outside the accessibility model.
Congress should increase the plot allowance from $700 to $1,150 for
all eligible veterans and expand the eligibility for the plot allowance
for all veterans who would be eligible for burial in a national
cemetery, not just those who served during wartime. Congress should
increase the service-connected burial benefits from $2,000 to $6,160
for veterans outside the radius threshold and to $2,793 for veterans
inside the radius threshold.
Congress should increase the non-service-connected burial benefits
from $300 to $1,918 for all veterans outside the radius threshold and
to $854 for all veterans inside the radius threshold. The
Administration and Congress should provide the resources required to
meet the critical nature of the National Cemetery Administration's
mission and to fulfill the nation's commitment to all veterans who have
served their country so honorably and faithfully.

March 2014
The Honorable Representative Jeff Miller, Chairman
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Cannon House Office Building,
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Chairman Miller:

Neither AMVETS nor I have received any federal grants or contracts,
during this year or in the last two years, from any agency or program
relevant to the 12 March 2014, House Veterans Affairs Committee hearing
on the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Budget Request for Fiscal
Year 2015.

Sincerely,

Diane M. Zumatto, Director
AMVETS National Legislative Biographical Sketch

Diane M. Zumatto of Spotsylvania, VA joined AMVETS as their
National Legislative Director in August 2011. Ms. Zumatto, a native New
Yorker and the daughter of immigrant parents decided to follow in her
family's footsteps by joining the military. Ms. Zumatto is a former
Women's Army Corps (WAC) member who was stationed in Germany. Zumatto
was married to a CW4 aviator in the Washington Army National Guard and
is the mother of four adult children. Ms. Zumatto is extremely proud
that two of her children have chosen to follow her footsteps into
military service.
Ms. Zumatto has more than 20 years of experience working with a
variety of non-profits in increasingly more challenging positions,
including: the American Museum of Natural History; the National
Federation of Independent Business; the Tacoma-Pierce County Board of
Realtors; the Washington State Association of Fire Chiefs; Saint
Martin's College; the James Monroe Museum; the Friends of the
Wilderness Battlefield and the Enlisted Association of the National
Guard of the United States. Diane's non-profit experience is extremely
well-rounded as she has variously served in both staff and volunteer
positions including as a board member and consultant.
After receiving her B.A. in Historic Preservation from the
University of Mary Washington in 2005, Diane decided to diversify her
experience by spending some time in the ``for-profit'' community.
Realizing that her creativity, energy and passion were not being
effectively challenged, she left the world of corporate America and
returned to non-profit organization.
AMVETS National Headquarters, 14647 Forbes Boulevard, Lanham,
Maryland 20706-4380, Business Phone: (301) 683-4016,

[emailprotected]
.

Statement of the American Legion

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Members of the
Committee:
On behalf of National Commander Dan Dellinger and the 2.4 million
members of The American Legion, we welcome this opportunity to comment
on the federal budget and specific funding programs of the Department
of Veterans Affairs.
The American Legion is a resolution based organization; we are
directed and driven by the millions of active legionnaires who have
dedicated their money, time, and resources to the continued service of
veterans and their families. Our positions are guided by nearly 100
years of consistent advocacy and resolutions that originate at the
grassroots level of the organization--the local American Legion posts
and veterans in every congressional district of America. The
Headquarters staff of the Legion works daily on behalf of veterans,
military personnel and our communities through roughly 20 national
programs, and hundreds of outreach programs led by our posts across the
country.
As thousands of troops return from deployments to Afghanistan and
elsewhere in the world, and the United States shifts its policies in
Iraq and Afghanistan, thus producing a new national security focus, The
American Legion reminds the Committee that national security changes do
not change the fact that veterans of these wars, as well as prior
conflicts, must still be taken care of, and this care will extend for
these veterans and their caregivers for approximately the next sixty
years.
In September of last year National Commander Dellinger provided the
Committee The American Legion's guidance for a robust Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) budget that adequately provides for the
healthcare and benefits for veterans of all wars during this period of
difficult fiscal times. The VA will continue to be faced with thousands
of new patients and claimants even though the wars are winding down,
and if the Department of Defense carries through in their plan to
reduce the active and reserve forces by more than a hundred thousand
troops, then the VA will need to prepare for one of the most
significant increases in patients and claimants in it's 84 year
history. Active and reserve members who otherwise downplayed illnesses
and injuries incurred or aggravated on active duty will now begin to
seek treatment and file compensation claims in droves. Further, as the
VA begins to serve veterans returning from deployment who are entitled
to 5 years of VA care after they return, compounded by veterans who
will choose VA care over Affordable Care Act plans, our VA system and
infrastructure will be challenged much more than it has been for the
past 10 years.
While grateful for prior VA funding, The American Legion remains
vigilant to ensure that VA is not going to be shortchanged of the
funding it truly needs, because lack of appropriate funding will
ultimately endanger veteran care and benefits. The American Legion has,
for years, reminded Congress and the American people that the cost of
war, especially prolonged war, is more expensive than just the cost of
bullets and bombs; and that the true costs are only realized decades
after the war is over. Last year the Harvard Kennedy School issued a
report that projected the total cost of these current conflicts to cost
between $4 and $6 trillion. The report goes on to say;

``The single largest accrued liability of the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan is the cost of providing medical care and
disability benefits to war veterans. Historically, the bill for
these costs has come due many decades later. The peak year for
paying disability compensation to World War I veterans was in
1969--more than 50 years after Armistice. The largest
expenditures for World War II veterans were in the late 1980s.
Payments to Vietnam and first Gulf War veterans are still
climbing. The magnitude of future expenditures will be even
higher for the current conflicts \1\ ''

\1\ Bilmes, Linda J. Harvard Kennedy School. The Financial Legacy
of Iraq and Afghanistan: How Wartime Spending Decisions Will Constrain
Future National Security Budgets Faculty Research Working Paper Series.
March 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ensure Adequate Oversight and Sufficient Funding for Lifetime Joint
Medical Records

The Department of Defense (DoD) and VA have already squandered more
than a billion dollars of taxpayer money and have wasted years in an
ultimately empty pursuit of a joint electronic medical record system
that would have streamlined and simplified logistics between the two
agencies. The war fighter turned veteran is the same patient, and
deserves a system that honors that person with continuous care and
seamless transition between agencies. It is unforgivable that DoD and
VA have spent the past several years infighting rather than actively
developing a comprehensive solution that is in the best interest of the
American service member.
At the end of January VA and DoD both issued Requests for Proposals
(RFPs)--however the problem remains that they issued these RFPs
independently. It will be extremely difficult, if not impossible, for
two separate agencies to issue two separate RFPs for similar projects,
and end up with a single software solution unless they hire the same
vendor. If DoD and VA aren't forced to ensure that their respective
vendors work together from the beginning, then Congress needs to
withhold authorization of further disbursements until they can prove
that their respective plans are in tandem and complement each other,
ultimately resulting in a single electronic medical records keeping
system that can be readily accessed by both VA and DoD without the need
for any additional software or compatibility efforts. In February DoD
and VA were supposed to deliver a joint plan to Congress on how they
were going to execute this program. So far, their plan is incomplete
and does not satisfy the full requirements of how they plan to jointly
accomplish getting this system implemented. These need to be the same
system that can integrate with both agencies--no substitutions, no
excuses.

VA Leased Facilities in Jeopardy

In FY 2012 H.R. 2646 authorized the VA sufficient appropriations to
continue to fund and operate leased facility projects that support our
veterans all across the country. In November of 2012 the FY 2013
appropriations for the same facilities were eliminated from
appropriations due to a ``scoring change'' initiated by the
Congressional Budget Office (CBO). While the locations, projects,
leases, and funding requirements did not change, the way in which CBO
scored the projects did, which resulted in the appearance that the
project would cost more than 10 times the actual needed revenue. As a
result of CBO's adjustment in scoring review, Congress refused to
introduce the FY 2013 appropriations bill needed to keep these
community based centers open. As these leases now become due, there are
27 major medical facilities that need to be authorized.
The American Legion implores Congress to fund these centers as
originally planned and applauds Chairman Miller and this Committee for
passing the Department of Veterans Affairs Major Medical Facility Lease
Authorization Act of 2013.

Advance Appropriations for FY 2016

The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) manages the largest
integrated health-care system in the United States, with 152 medical
centers, nearly 1,400 community-based outpatient clinics, community
living centers, Vet Centers and domiciliaries serving more than 8
million veterans every year. The American Legion believes those
veterans should receive the best care possible.
The needs of veterans continue to evolve, and VHA must ensure it is
evolving to meet them. The rural veteran population is growing, and
options such as telehealth medicine and clinical care must expand to
better serve that population. Growing numbers of female veterans mean
that a system that primarily provided for male enrollees must now
evolve and adapt to meet the needs of male and female veterans,
regardless whether they live in urban or rural areas.
An integrated response to mental healthcare is necessary, as the
rising rates of suicide and severe post-traumatic stress disorder are
greatly impacting veterans and active-duty servicemembers alike.
If veterans are going to receive the best possible care from VA,
the system needs to continue to adapt to the changing demands of the
population it serves. The concerns of rural veterans can be addressed
through multiple measures, including expansion of the existing
infrastructure through CBOCs and other innovative solutions,
improvements in telehealth and telemedicine, improved staffing and
enhancements to the travel system.
Patient concerns and quality of care can be improved by better
attention to VA strategic planning, concise and clear directives from
VHA, improved hiring practices and retention, and better tracking of
quality by VA on a national level.
And finally, mandatory funds must be included in Advanced
Appropriations along with full discretionary funding of all VA
accounts. Veterans and dependents having their compensation and
disability checks delayed because Congress refuses to pass an annual
budget before being forced to close the federal government is
reprehensible. Pass full advanced appropriations now.

Better Care for Female Veterans

A 2011 American Legion study revealed several areas of concern
about VA healthcare services for women. Today, VA still struggles to
fulfill this need, even though women are the fastest-growing segment of
the veteran population. Approximately 1.8 million female veterans make
up 8 percent of the total veteran population, yet only 6 percent use VA
services.
VA needs to be prepared for a significant increase of younger
female veterans as those who served in the War on Terror separate from
active service. Approximately 58 percent of women returning from Iraq
and Afghanistan are ages 20 to 29, and they require gender-specific
expertise and care. Studies suggest post-traumatic stress disorder is
especially prevalent among women; among veterans who used VA in 2009,
10.2 percent of women and 7.8 percent of men were diagnosed with PTSD.
The number of female veterans enrolled in the VA system is expected
to expand by more than 33 percent in the next three years. Currently,
44 percent of Iraq and Afghanistan female veterans have enrolled in the
VA health-care system.
VA needs to develop a comprehensive health-care program for female
veterans that extends beyond reproductive issues. Provider education
needs improvement. Furthermore, as female veterans are the sole
caregivers in some families, services and benefits designed to promote
independent living for combat-injured veterans must be evaluated, and
needs such as child care must be factored into the equation.
Additionally, many female veterans cannot make appointments due to the
lack of child-care options at VA medical centers. Since the 2011
survey, The American Legion has continued to advocate for improved
delivery of timely, quality healthcare for women using VA. The American
Legion is encouraged that the President's budget recognizes the need
for additional funding in this critical area, and has proposed an
increase of $32 million, almost 9 percent over last year's
authorization levels, which combined with years 2009 through 2014
represents an increase in funding of nearly 240 percent to deal with
this growing segment of the veteran population.

Repair Problems in Mental Health

During the past half decade, VA has nearly doubled their mental
healthcare staff, jumping from just over 13,500 providers in 2005 to
over 20,000 providers in 2011. However, during that time there has been
a massive influx of veterans into the system, with a growing need for
psychiatric services. With over 1.5 million veterans separating from
service in the past decade, 690,844 have not utilized VA for treatment
or evaluation. The American Legion is deeply concerned about nearly
700,000 veterans who are slipping through the cracks unable to access
the healthcare system they have earned through their service.
Post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury are the
signature wounds of today's wars. Both conditions are increasing in
number, particularly among those who have served in Operation Iraqi
Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom. The President's request for a
57 percent increase in funding in this area is appropriate considering
that a 2011 Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs survey of 319 VA
mental health staff revealed that services for veterans coping with
mental health issues and TBI are lacking considerable support. Among
the findings:

New mental health patient appointments could be
scheduled within 14 days, according to 63 percent of
respondents, but only 48.1 percent believed veterans referred
for specialty appointments for PTSD or substance abuse would be
seen within 14 days.

Seventy percent of providers said their sites had
shortages of mental health space.

Forty-six percent reported that a lack of off-hours
appointments was a barrier to care.

More than 26 percent reported that demand for
Compensation and Pension (C&P) exams pulled clinicians away
from direct care.

Just over 50 percent reported that growth in patient
numbers contributed to mental health staff shortages.

VHA and, at the request of Congress, VA's Office of the Inspector
General have studied the problem since the survey was conducted. On
April 23, 2012, the VAOIG released the report, ``Review of Veterans'
Access to Mental healthcare.'' It found that VHA's mental health
performance data was neither accurate nor reliable. In VA's FY 2011
Performance and Accountability Report, VHA grossly over-reported that
95 percent of first-time patients received a full mental health
evaluation within 14 days. However, it was found that VHA completed
approximately 64 percent of new-patient appointments for treatment
within 14 days of their desired date, but approximately 36 percent of
appointments exceeded 14 days. VHA schedulers also were not following
procedures outlined in VHA directives, and were scheduling clinic
appointments on the system's availability rather than the patient's
clinical need.
The American Legion believes VA must focus on head injuries and
mental health without sacrificing awareness and concern for other
conditions afflicting servicemembers and veterans. As an immediate
priority, VA must ensure staffing levels are adequate to meet the need.
The American Legion also urges Congress to invest in research,
screening, diagnosis and treatment for PTSD and TBI and will continue
to monitor VA to ensure that they remain good stewards of the people's
money
Although The American Legion supports advance appropriations, we
remain concerned accurate projections on population and utilization and
other challenges still remain.
One such challenge is with the procurement of medical equipment and
Information Technology (IT) purchases. When IT within the VA was
combined together across the entire agency it was implemented to
improve efficiency, contracting, management, and other challenges
inherent with three disjointed IT management teams. This has proved
somewhat successful. However, we are hearing that procurement of
medical equipment and IT is hampered at medical facilities due to
budget implementation failures through continuing resolutions. While a
VA medical center director might have his/her operational funding
beginning October 1 because of advance appropriations, much needed IT
or medical equipment might be delayed due to a continuing resolution
impasse in Congress. This has a detrimental impact on the veteran and
his/her care. Therefore, The American Legion recommends the IT portion
of the budget be added to advance appropriations and help smooth those
budget challenges. Additionally, The American Legion remains committed
to working with the VA in any way possible to move the VA toward their
goal of becoming a paperless system. We are eager to see how the VA
plans to spend the $155 million improving the Veterans Benefits
Management System, and the $136.4 million that is proposed to convert
the paper to electronic files.

Medical Services

Over the past two decades, VA has dramatically transformed its
medical care delivery system. Through The American Legion visits to a
variety of medical facilities throughout the Nation during our System
Worth Saving Task Force, we see firsthand this transformation and its
impact on veterans in every corner of the Nation.
While the quality of care remains exemplary, veteran healthcare
will be inadequate if access is hampered. Today there are over 23
million veterans in the United States. While 8.3 million of these
veterans are enrolled in the VA healthcare system, a population that
has been relatively steady in the past decade, the costs associated
with caring for these veterans has escalated dramatically.
For example between FYs 2007 and 2010, VA enrollees increased from
7.8 million to 8.3 million. \2\  During the same period, inpatient
admissions increased from 589,000 to 662,000. Outpatient visits also
increased from 62 to 80.2 billion. Correspondingly, cost to care for
these veterans increased from $29.0 billion to $39.4 billion. This 36
percent increase during those 2 years is a trend that dramatically
impacts the ability to care for these veterans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Source: Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health
Administration, Office of the Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for
Health for Policy and Planning. Prepared by the National Center for
Veterans Analysis and Statistics
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While FY 2010 numbers seemingly leveled off--to only 3 percent
annual growth--will adequate funding exist to meet veteran care needs?
If adequate funding to meet these needs isn't appropriated, VA will be
forced to either not meet patient needs or shift money from other
accounts to meet the need.
Even with the opportunity for veterans from OIF/OEF to have up to 5
years of care following their active duty period, we have not seen a
dramatic change in overall enrollee population. Yet The American Legion
remains concerned that the population estimates are dated and not
reflective of the costs. If current economic woes and high unemployment
rates for veterans remain and with the Vietnam Era veterans beginning
to retire and needing healthcare that may no longer be provided by
their employers, VA medical care will become enticing for a veteran
population that might not have utilized those services in the past.
Finally, ongoing implementation of programs such as the PL 111-163
``Caregiver Act'' will continue to increase demands on the VA
healthcare system and therefore result in an increased need for a
budget that can adequately deal with the challenges.
In order to meet the increased levels of demand, even assuming that
not all eligible veterans will elect to enroll for coverage, and keep
pace with the cost trend identified above, there must be an increase to
account for both the influx of new patients and increased costs of
care.

Medical Support and Compliance

The Medical Support and Compliance account consists of expenses
associated with administration, oversight, and support for the
operation of hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, and domiciliaries.
Although few of these activities are directly related to the personal
care of veterans, they are essential for quality, budget management,
and safety. Without adequate funding in these accounts, facilities will
be unable to meet collection goals, patient safety, and quality of care
guidelines.
The American Legion has been critical of programs funded by this
account. We remain concerned patient safety is addressed at every
level. We are skeptical if patient billing is performed efficiently and
accurately. Moreover, we are concerned that specialty advisors/
counselors to implement OIF/OEF outreach, ``Caregiver Act''
implementation, and other programs are properly allocated. If no need
for such individuals exists, should the position be placed within a
facility? Simply throwing more money at this account, increasing staff
and systems won't resolve all these problems.
During the previous budget, this account grew by nearly 8 percent
to $5.31 billion. The American Legion questions the necessity for that
rate to continue at this time.

Medical Facilities

During FY 2012, VA unveiled the Strategic Capital Investment
Planning (SCIP) program. This 10-year capital construction plan was
designed to address VA's most critical infrastructure needs. Through
the plan, VA estimated the 10-year costs for major and minor
construction projects and non-recurring maintenance would total between
$53 and $65 billion over 10 years.
The American Legion is supportive of the SCIP program which
empowers facility managers and users to evaluate needs based on patient
safety, utilization, and other factors. While it places the onus on
these individuals to justify the need, these needs are more reflective
of the actuality as observed by our members and during our visits. Yet,
VA has taken this process and effectively neutered it through budget
limitations thereby underfunding the accounts and delaying delivery of
critical infrastructure.
So while failing to meet these needs, facility managers will be
forced to make do with existing aging facilities. While seemingly
saving money in construction costs, the VA will be expending money
maintaining deteriorating facilities, paying increased utility and
operational costs, and performing piecemeal renovation of properties to
remain below the threshold of major or minor projects.
This is an inefficient byproduct of budgeting priorities. Yet, as
will be noted later, the reality remains that the SCIP program is
unlikely to be funded at levels necessary to accomplish the 10 year
plan. Therefore, this account must be increased to meet the short term
needs within the existing facilities.

Medical and Prosthetic Research

The American Legion believes VA research must focus on improving
treatment for medical conditions unique to veterans. Because of the
unique structure of VA's electronic medical records (VISTA), VA
research has access to a great amount of longitudinal data incomparable
to research outside the VA system. Because of the ongoing wars of the
past decade, several areas have emerged as ``signature wounds'' of the
Global War on Terror, specifically Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), Post-
traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and dealing with the effects of
amputated limbs.
Much media attention has focused on TBI from blast injuries common
to Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) and PTSD. As a result, VA has
devoted extensive research efforts to improving the understanding and
treatment of these disorders. Amputee medicine has received less
scrutiny, but is no less a critical area of concern. Because of
improvements in body armor and battlefield medicine, catastrophic
injuries that in previous wars would have resulted in loss of life have
led to substantial increases in the numbers of veterans who are coping
with loss of limbs.
As far back as 2004, statistics were emerging which indicated
amputation rates for US troops were as much as twice that from previous
wars. By January of 2007, news reports circulated noting the 500th
amputee of the Iraq War. The Department of Defense response involved
the creation of Traumatic Extremity Injury and Amputation Centers of
Excellence, and sites such as Walter Reed have made landmark strides in
providing the most cutting edge treatment and technology to help
injured service members deal with these catastrophic injuries.
However, The American Legion remains concerned that once these
veterans transition away from active duty status to become veteran
members of the communities, there is a drop off in the level of access
to these cutting edge advancements. Ongoing care for the balance of
their lives is delivered through the VA healthcare system, and not
through these concentrated active duty centers.
Many reports indicate the state of the art technology available at
DoD sites is not available from the average VA Medical Center. With so
much focus on ``seamless transition'' from active duty to civilian life
for veterans, this is one critical area where VA cannot afford to lag
beyond the advancements reaching service members at DoD sites. If a
veteran can receive a state of the art artificial limb at the new
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center (WRNMC) they should be
able to receive the exact same treatment when they return home to the
VA Medical Center in their home community, be it in Gainesville, Battle
Creek, or Fort Harrison.
American Legion contact with senior VA healthcare officials has
concluded that while DoD concentrates their treatment in a small number
of facilities, the VA is tasked with providing care at 152 major
medical centers and over 1,700 total facilities throughout the 50
states as well as in Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa and the
Philippines. Yet, VA officials are adamant their budget figures are
sufficient to ensure a veteran can and will receive the most cutting
edge care wherever they choose to seek treatment in the system.
The American Legion remains concerned about the ability to deliver
this cutting edge care to our amputee veterans, as well as the ability
of VA to fund and drive top research in areas of medicine related to
veteran-centric disorders. There is no reason VA should not be seen as
the world's leading source for medical research into veteran injuries
such as amputee medicine, PTSD and TBI.
In FY 2011 VA received a budget of $590 million for medical and
prosthetics research. Only because of the efforts of the House and
Senate was this budget kept at that level during the FY 2012 and 2013
budgets, due to significant pressure from The American Legion. Even at
this level, The American Legion contends this budget must be increased,
and closely monitored to ensure the money is reaching the veteran at
the local level.

Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF)

In addition to the aforementioned accounts which are directly
appropriated, medical care cost recovery collections are included when
formulating the funding for VHA. Over the years, this funding has been
contentious because they often included proposals for enrollment fees,
increased prescription rates, and other costs billed directly to
veterans. The American Legion has always ardently fought against these
fees and unsubstantiated increases.
Beyond these first party fees, VHA is authorized to bill healthcare
insurers for nonservice-connected care provided to veterans within the
system. Other income collected into this account includes parking fees
and enhanced use lease revenue. The American Legion remains concerned
that the expiration of authority to continue enhanced use leases will
greatly impact not only potential revenue, but also delivery of care in
these unique circumstances. We urge Congress to reauthorize the
enhanced use lease authority with the greatest amount of flexibility
allowable.
In May 2011, the VA Office of Inspector General (OIG) issued a
report auditing the collections of third party insurance collections
within MCCF. Their audit found that ``VHA missed opportunities to
increase MCCF by . . . 46 percent.'' Because of ineffective processes
used to identify billable fee claims and systematic controls, it was
estimated VHA lost over $110 million annually. In response to this
audit, VHA assured they'd have processes in place to turn around this
trend.
Yet even if those reassurances were met, the MCCF collection would
not meet the quarterly loss beneath the budgeted amounts. Without those
collections, savings must be garnered elsewhere to meet these
shortfalls, thereby causing facility administrators and VISN directors
to make difficult choices that ultimately negatively impact veterans
through a lack of hiring, delay of purchasing, or other savings
methods.
It would be unconscionable to increase this account beyond the
previous levels that were not met. To do so without increasing co-
payments or collection methods would be counterproductive and mere
budget gimmickry. While we recognize the need to include this in the
budget, The American Legion cannot be part of a budget that penalizes
the veteran for administrative failures.

Appropriations for FY 2015

The remainder of the accounts within VA are being allocated funding
for FY 2015. These include funding for general operation of VA Central
Office (VACO), the National Cemetery Administration (NCA) and Veteran
Benefits Administration (VBA).

Veteran Benefits Administration

National Commander Dellinger testified in September that when
speaking to The American Legion National Convention in August 2010, VA
Secretary Eric Shinseki declared VA would ``break the back of the
backlog by 2015'' by committing to 98 percent accuracy, with no claim
pending longer than 125 days. Over the past four years, VA has gone
backward, not forward, in both of these key areas.
According to VA's own figures, over 56 percent of veterans with
disability benefits claims have been waiting longer than 125 days for
them to be processed. In contrast, when Secretary Shinseki made his
promise, only 37 percent of claims had been pending longer than 125
days. The American Legion has found through its field research the
problem varies greatly by regional office. While some regional offices
may have an average rate of 76 days per claim, others take 336 days--a
troubling inconsistency.
Unfortunately, accuracy is also a problem, according to Legion site
visits and field research. VA's own accuracy metrics place the rate in
the 90s. The American Legion's Regional Office Action Review (ROAR)
team typically finds a higher error rate, sometimes up to two thirds of
all claims reviewed.
VA is hopeful that the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS)
will eliminate many of the woes that have led to the backlog, but
electronic solutions are not a magic bullet. Without real reform for a
culture of work that places higher priority on speed rather than
accuracy, VA will continue to struggle, no matter the tools used to
process claims.
The American Legion has long argued that VA's focus on quantity
over quality is one of the largest contributing factors to the claims
backlog. If VA employees receive the same credit for work, whether it
is done properly or improperly, there is little incentive to take the
time to process a claim correctly. When a claim is processed in error,
a veteran must appeal the decision to receive benefits, and then wait
for an appeals process that may take months and months to resolve and
possibly years before delivery of the benefit.
The American Legion believes VA must develop a processing model
that puts as much emphasis on accuracy as it does on the raw number of
claims completed. America's veterans need to have confidence in the
work done by VA.
The VBMS system could allow VA to develop more effective means of
processing claims, such as the ability to separate single issues that
are ready to rate, starting a flow of relief to veterans while more
complex medical issues are considered and decided.

Information Technology

In addition to the VBMS system, the greatest long awaited project
is the launch of the joint VA and Department of Defense (DoD) lifetime
record--Virtual Lifetime Electronic Record (VLER). The American Legion
supports a single unified medical record for military members and
veterans. \3\  We have heard from VA that this initiative is still
vital and an important piece of their overall solution, but The
American Legion remains concerned that DoD has yet to commit to
ensuring this project is completed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Resolution 42-2012 ``Virtual Lifetime Electronic Record''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the previous budgeting, VA was unable to provide information
on the overall cost of creating such a system, but assured veteran
advocates there was enough flexibility to address any costs associated
with the project. In the meantime, several releases and announcements
have been issued by VA towards the continued evolution of this project,
but there is little to demonstrate we're any closer to producing a
ready model. The American Legion calls upon Congress to continue to
pressure VA and DoD to move towards this system as expeditiously as
possible. With the development and launch of VBMS nearly complete, the
entire IT focus should center on VLER.
In order to provide the necessary resources for the nationwide
rollout of VBMS and still maintain efforts towards development of VLER,
The American Legion believes a small increase is justified within IT.

Major and Minor Construction

After two years of study the VA developed the Strategic Capital
Investment Planning (SCIP) program. It is a ten-year capital
construction plan designed to address VA's most critical infrastructure
needs within the Veterans Health Administration, Veterans Benefits
Administration, National Cemetery Administration, and Staff Offices.
The SCIP planning process develops data for VA's annual budget
requests. These infrastructure budget requests are divided into several
VA accounts: Major Construction, Minor Construction, Non-Recurring
Maintenance (NRM), Enhanced-Use Leasing, Sharing, and Other Investments
and Disposal. The VA estimated costs were between $53 and $65 billion.
The American Legion is very concerned about the lack of funding in
the Major and Minor Construction accounts. Based on VA's SCIP plan,
Congress underfunded these accounts. Clearly, if this underfunding
continues VA will never fix its identified deficiencies within its 10-
year plan. Indeed, at current rates, it will take VA almost sixty years
to address these current deficiencies.
The American Legion also understands there is a discussion to refer
to SCIP in the future as a ``planning document'' rather than an actual
capital investment plan. Under this proposal, VA will still address the
deficiencies identified by the SCIP process for future funding requests
but rather than having an annual appropriation, SCIP will be extended
to a 5-year appropriation, similar to the appropriation process used by
the Department of Defense as its construction model. Such a plan will
have huge implications on VA's ability to prioritize or make changes as
to design or project specifications of its construction projects. The
American Legion is against this 5-year appropriation model and
recommends Congress continue funding VA's construction needs on an
annual appropriations basis.
The American Legion recommends Congress adopt the 10-year action
plan created by the SCIP process. Congress must appropriate sufficient
funds to pay for needed VA construction projects and stop underfunding
these accounts. In FY 2015 Congress must provide increased funding to
those accounts to ensure the VA-identified construction deficiencies
are properly funded and these needed projects can be completed in a
timely fashion.

State Veteran Home Construction Grants

Perhaps no program facilitated by the VA has been as impacted by
the decrease in government spending than the State Veteran Home
Construction Grant program. This program is essential in providing
services to a significant number of veterans throughout the country at
a fraction of the daily costs of similar care in private or VA
facilities. As the economy rebounds and states are pivoting towards
resuming essential services, taking advantage of depressed construction
costs, and meeting the needs of an aging veteran population, greater
use of this grant program will continue. As our baby boomer population
continues to transition into retirement, many more of these veterans
are retiring to state veteran homes due to their excellent reputation
for care and cost. The popularity of these retirement options will
cause any surplus of space to become consumed. The American Legion
encourages Congress to increase the funding level of this program.

National Cemetery Administration (NCA)

No aspect of the VA is as critically acclaimed as the National
Cemetery Administration (NCA). In the 2010 American Customer
Satisfaction Index, the NCA achieved the highest ranking of any public
or private organization. In addition to meeting this customer service
level, the NCA remains the highest employer of veterans within the
federal government and remains the model for contracting with veteran
owned businesses.
While NCA met their goal of having 90 percent of veterans served
within 75 miles of their home, their aggressive strategy to improve
upon this in the coming five years will necessitate funding increases
for new construction. Congress must provide sufficient major
construction appropriations to permit NCA to accomplish this goal and
open five new cemeteries in the coming five years. Moreover, funding
must remain to continue to expand existing cemetery facilities as the
need arises.
While the costs of fuel, water, and contracts have risen, the NCA
operations budget has remained nearly flat for the past two budgets.
Unfortunately recent audits have shown cracks beginning to appear. Due
predominantly to poor contract oversight, several cemeteries
inadvertently misidentified burial locations. Although only one or two
were willful violations of NCA protocols, the findings demonstrate a
system about ready to burst.
To meet the increased costs of fuel, equipment, and other resources
as well as ever-increasing contract costs, The American Legion believes
a small increase is necessary. In addition, we urge Congress to
adequately fund the construction program to meet the burial needs of
our nation's veterans.

State Cemetery Grant Program

The NCA administers a program of grants to states to assist them in
establishing or improving state-operated veterans' cemeteries through
VA's State Cemetery Grants Program (SCGP). Established in 1978, this
program funds nearly 100% of the costs to establish a new cemetery, or
expand existing facilities. For the past two budgets this program has
been budgeted $46 million to accomplish this mission.
New authority granted to VA funds Operation and Maintenance
Projects at state veterans cemeteries to assist states in achieving the
national shrine standards VA achieves within national cemeteries.
Specifically, the new operation and maintenance grants have been
targeted to help states meet VA's national shrine standards with
respect to cleanliness, height and alignment of headstones and markers,
leveling of gravesites, and turf conditions. In addition, this law
allowed VA to provide funding for the delivery of grants to tribal
governments for native American veterans. Yet we have not seen the
allocation of funding increased to not only meet the existing needs
under the construction and expansion level, but also the needs from
operation and maintenance and tribal nation grants. Moreover, as these
cemeteries age, the $5 million limitation must be revoked to allow for
better management of resources within the projects.

Additional Concerns of The American Legion

Turn Military Experience Into Careers

Servicemembers and veterans receive some of the finest technical
and professional training in the world. Many have experience in
healthcare, electronics, computers, engineering, drafting, air-traffic
control, nuclear energy, mechanics, carpentry, and other fields. Many
of these military acquired skills require some type of license or
certificate to qualify for civilian jobs. In too many cases, this
license or certificate requires schooling already completed through
military training programs. The American Legion is fighting for a major
overhaul of the licensure and certification policies as they relate to
military job skills, on the national and state levels alike. As demand
for qualified workers in a diverse range of occupations continues to
grow, veterans offer skills, training, dedication and discipline that
translate well into specialized fields and trades.
The American Legion is working with credentialing and licensing
agencies to help veterans receive credit for their experiences,
maximize their abilities and move quickly into productive careers.
While the VOW to Hire Heroes Act and the Veterans Skills to Jobs Act of
2012 are important steps that The American Legion strongly supported
and helped shape, they are only a good start in a long march to improve
career opportunities for those who have served in uniform.

Ensuring Quality Care to Rural Veterans

The American Legion's System Worth Saving task force travels the
country to evaluate VA medical facilities and ensure they are meeting
the needs of veterans. From November 2013 to May 2014, the task force
has been conducting site visits to VA medical facilities and town hall
meetings to receive feedback from local veterans who utilize VA to
receive their healthcare.
The Task Force, in its 10th program year, is focusing on VA's
accomplishments and progress over the past decade, current issues and
concerns, and VA's five-year strategic plan for several program areas.
These areas of focus are VA's budget, staffing, enrollment/outreach,
hospital programs (e.g. mental health, intensive care unit (ICU), long-
term services and support, homelessness programs) information
technology and construction programs.
During each site visit, a town hall meeting is hosted by an
American Legion Post. The town hall meetings have consistently
illustrated that veterans are worried VA has turned a deaf ear to their
concerns and is intentionally ignoring their complaints. We have seen
firsthand where VA has closed intensive care departments, downgrading
emergency departments to urgent care clinics, or has proposed to closed
or reconfiguring hospital services under the guise of ``realigning
services closer to where veterans live'', such as the reconfiguration
proposal at the VA Black Hills healthcare System, which has served the
veterans of Hot Springs, South, Dakota for over 100 years.
The American Legion urge Congress to evaluate VA's plan in rural
areas and to stop VA from closing hospitals and community-based
outpatient clinics unless existing requisite community services are
meet or exceed that VA currently provides to veterans.

Ease the Military-to-Civilian Transition

Unfortunately, this transition has been hampered by poor
communication and coordination between DoD and VA. Efforts have been
made to correct the process, which is improving, but too many veterans
still slip through the cracks and fail to receive the benefits they
earned and deserve or the support they need to restart their lives.
Transition Assistance Programs (TAP) are now mandatory across all
branches of military service, a change The American Legion commends.
While TAP will require much fine tuning to accurately deliver what
veterans need, implementing the program universally already is a major
improvement.
Current DoD policy requires new inductees to enroll in the
eBenefits portal, which will help all future generations of veterans.
While VA and DoD still try to iron out differences in electronic data
systems necessary to make the Virtual Lifetime Electronic Record (VLER)
effective, the eBenefits portal holds great promise.
Fast-tracking the VLER program to ensure seamless transfer of
medical records must be a top priority, and necessary funds must be
allocated to fulfill it. The delays that have plagued this program are
inexcusable. The American Legion urges Congress and the administration
to work together to put the program back on track.
While The American Legion is encouraged by the progress made in
TAP, the program is still new and will require dedicated oversight and
attention to ensure it is meeting the needs of the servicemembers it is
designed to help.

Conclusion

In conclusion, The American Legion is optimistic the President has
proposed a budget that addresses many of the needs that the almost two
million service members who are returning after deployments in support
of the Global War on Terror will soon need. We're hopeful savings
generated through downsizing of the military are leveraged against the
need of thousands of servicemembers who are or soon will be discharged
to create the savings. However, The American Legion has seen in
previous years, these are not used to provide the care and benefits
afforded to our nation's veterans. Too often while veteran advocates
celebrate dramatically increased budgets, the veteran patient,
claimant, or widow is left wondering where the money went.
Our nation's veterans deserve adequate and responsible funding to
the fullest extent possible. After over a decade of service, our newest
era of veterans will now join the ranks of generations of their
brothers and sisters who served in prior wars and conflicts and all are
owed a great debt.
The American Legion looks forward to working with the Committee, as
well as VA, to find solutions that work for America's veterans. For
additional information regarding this testimony, please contact Mr.
Louis J. Celli, Jr. at The American Legion's Legislative Division,
(202) 861-2700 or
[emailprotected]
.
