- VA'S LONGSTANDING INFORMATION SECURITY WEAKNESSES CONTINUE TO ALLOW EXTENSIVE DATA MANIPULATION

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VA'S LONGSTANDING INFORMATION SECURITY
WEAKNESSES CONTINUE TO ALLOW EXTENSIVE
DATA MANIPULATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-90

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
96-133                      WASHINGTON : 2015
________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              DINA TITUS, Nevada
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
DAVID JOLLY, Florida
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Nancy Dolan, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C O N T E N T S

----------

Tuesday, November 18, 2014

Page

VA's Longstanding Information Security Weaknesses Continue to
Allow Extensive Data Manipulation..............................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Gus M. Bilirakis, Vice Chairman..................................     1
Jeff Miller, Chairman
Prepared Statement...........................................    43
Michael Michaud, Ranking Member..................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Stephen Warren, Executive in Charge and Chief Information
Officer, Office of Information ` Technology, Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    44
Accompanied by:
Mr. Stan Lowe, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of
Information ` Technology, Office of Information
Security, Department of Veterans Affairs
And
Ms. Tina Burnette, Executive Director for Enterprise Risk
Management, Department of Veterans Affairs
Ms. Sondra McCauley, Deputy Assistant Inspector for Audits and
Evaluations, Office of Inspector General, Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    47
Accompanied by:
Mr. Michael Bowman, Director, Information Technology and
Security Audit Office, Office of Inspector General,
Department of Veterans Affairs
Mr. Greg Wilshusen, Director of Information Security Issues, GAO.     6
Prepared Statement...........................................    55

VA'S LONGSTANDING INFORMATION SECURITY WEAKNESSES CONTINUE TO ALLOW
EXTENSIVE DATA MANIPULATION

----------

Tuesday, November 18, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:41 p.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Gus M. Bilirakis
[vice chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Cook, Walorski, Jolly,
Michaud, Brown, Takano, Brownley, Kirkpatrick, Ruiz, Kuster,
O'Rourke, and Walz.

OPENING STATEMENT OF VICE CHAIRMAN GUS M. BILIRAKIS

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. Good
afternoon. I want to welcome you to today's full committee
hearing. For at least the last 18 months this committee has
held hearings, conducting briefings and participating in
discussions in a bipartisan manner. I am sure you will agree
with that. The committee is seeking corrective action on
longstanding issues in the VA's Office of Information and
Technology.
On May 29th, 2014 the VA Office of the Inspector General
noted that VA's information technology is still plagued by
material weaknesses for the 16th straight year, unacceptable as
far as I am concerned. Looking back nearly 18 months Mr. Warren
testified to the committee that he had an 18-month plan to
resolve the problems in VA's network. However, as GAO's report
released yesterday tells us there are continued problems. Of
great concern, VA could not provide supporting material for at
least one of the serious problems it claimed to have resolved.
The weaknesses in VA's network have contributed to the data
manipulations related to the recent wait times scandal. Today
we want to discuss these issues.
As you probably noticed, Chairman Miller is attending
another congressional, he has got congressional business on the
steering committee. Therefore I would like to submit his
written statement for the record. Hearing no objections, so
ordered.

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER MICHAEL MICHAUD

The Chairman. Thank you all once again for being here. With
that, I will yield to the Ranking Member Mr. Michaud for as
much time, at least five minutes, thank you.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. As a
committee we could have had a week of hearings to thoughtfully
get to the bottom of the many issues that will be raised by the
witnesses this afternoon. The Department of Veterans Affairs
has many longstanding IT security problems, these problems that
have been raised time and again by the Inspector General and
the GAO. It is time that the VA address these issues quickly
and effectively. Today we need to have a frank and open
discussion about our expectation of VA's IT security and
whether or not the VA has the resources, capabilities, and the
leadership to meet these expectations. One of the biggest
challenges we will discuss today is scheduling software used by
the VHA. In their testimony VA indicated these problems of an
antiquated scheduling system is recognized and being addressed.
I look forward to hearing what VA is doing to address these
problems and when we can discuss the solutions to be
implemented.
I would also like to hear from VA how they are ensuring
that veterans' personal data and information is uncorrupted and
protected. Federal IT security laws require a balance among
security, mission, and cost. We must also keep in mind that IT
is not the end, but rather the means by which VA accomplishes
its missions. This recognition should not blind us to the real,
very real, IT security issues facing the VA. It does not, is
not an excuse of ongoing security problems that should have
been addressed a long time ago, but recognizing the need for
balance will better enable us to figure out what the VA needs
to do today and down the road.
In February the administration needs to submit a budget
that gives the department all of the necessary resources to
address these IT security issues once and for all. And I hope
all of my colleagues here today will continue to fight to give
VA those needed resources. And I hope that they will fight to
ensure these resources are used properly as well. At the end of
the day the American people must have confidence that VA's
ability to keep veterans' data and information safe and secure
and I am hopeful that today's hearing will begin that
establishment of that credibility on some issues and show us
that we are still able to work together.
For a number of years there has been a growing level of
frustration and distrust between the VA and Congress. Within
that climate we sometimes lose sight of the need to work
together to deliver the promises we made to our veterans. IT
security is critical and we simply must do all that we can
working together to ensure that veterans' personal information
is protected and that data is credible and that the VA has the
tools it needs to do its job.
It is clear to me that our recent hearings and the change
in VA leadership is having a positive effect. We have seen more
open senior leader engagement and more responsiveness from the
department and I want to thank you and appreciate all of that.
I am hopeful that these changes can expand to VA and Congress
working together to address IT security issues and that today's
conversation is the first step of this process in this new
environment. So I want to thank you all for coming here today.
I look forward to your testimony. And I want to thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for having this very important hearing. And with that
I yield back the balance of my time.

[The prepared statement of Michael H. Michaud appears in
the Appendix]

The Chairman. All right, very good. We will now begin with
today's hearing with our first and only panel of witnesses who
are already seated at the witness table. Joining us from the
Department of Veterans Affairs is Mr. Stephen Warren, Executive
in Charge and Chief Information Officer. Mr. Warren is
accompanied by Mr. Stan Lowe, Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Office of Information and Technology; and Ms. Tina Burnette,
Executive Director for the Enterprise Risk Management. Joining
us from the Department of Veterans Affairs Office of the
Inspector General is Ms. Sondra McCauley, Deputy Assistant
Inspector General for Audits and Evaluations. Ms. McCauley is
accompanied by Mr. Michael Bowman, Director, Information
Technology and Security Audit Office. Finally, joining us from
the Government Accountability Office is Mr. Greg Wilshusen, who
is the Director of Information Security Issues. Thank you all
for attending today. And we will begin with our testimony and
we will start with Mr. Warren. Please proceed with your
testimony, thank you.

STATEMENTS OF MR. STEPHEN WARREN, EXECUTIVE IN CHARGE AND CHIEF
INFORMATION OFFICER, OFFICE OF INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; ACCOMPANIED BY MR. STAN LOWE,
DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF INFORMATION AND
TECHNOLOGY, OFFICE OF INFORMATION SECURITY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS; AND MS. TINA BURNETTE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR
ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS; MS. SONDRA MCCAULEY, DEPUTY ASSISTANT INSPECTOR
GENERAL FOR AUDITS AND EVALUATIONS, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR
GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; ACCOMPANIED BY
MR. MICHAEL BOWMAN, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND
SECURITY AUDIT OFFICE, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; AND MR. GREGORY WILSHUSEN,
DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION SECURITY ISSUES, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN WARREN

Mr. Warren. Thank you, Chairman Bilirakis, Ranking Member
Michaud, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
Department of Veterans Affairs and how we endeavor to find the
appropriate balance between information protection and the
delivery of care, services, and benefits to our nation's
veterans.
Before proceeding I would like to recognize the valuable
role of the Office of the Inspector General and the General
Accountability Office for forming and offering insights that
validate actions and efforts underway, or as important identify
areas where we need to improve or redouble our efforts. Though
there are times when we may not agree on specific findings,
conclusions, or statements, that does not diminish the great
weight I give to their contributions as we take on the
difficult to deal with challenges of this organization.
Securing veterans' data in an enterprise as large and as
complex as VA is a dynamic and constantly involving process
that includes contributions from the OIG and the GAO. I am
disappointed that in spite of the significant efforts by our
employees over the past year that the OIG maintained an IT
material weakness. I am committed to redoubling our efforts to
put in place the processes and disciplines to address these
issues, building upon the extensive layered in depth strategy
that we already have in place. To that end after receiving the
findings from the OIG last week, I have directed an additional
$60 million to be added to our information security efforts
this year. This will provide additional resources to our
facilities to implement configuration management as well as
vulnerability remediation. In February we will reevaluate and
if significant progress has not been made additional resources
will be applied.
We should not overlook that VA faces the same threats as
departments and many businesses. We believe we are taking
responsible actions to deal with these persistent threats. My
written testimony contains information on the many actions
completed and significant milestones achieved in the past year.
But instead of repeating that material in my oral statement I
would like to highlight four key points.
First, it is important to make a distinction between issues
relating to access to care and VA's information security
efforts. I believe there is no causal relationship between
alleged appointment manipulation and findings in the OIG's
FISMA audit. To my knowledge there have been no indications
that appointments were changed or canceled other than through
the normal way that the software was designed to do, though in
this case inappropriately.
Second, there is no disagreement that the technology
underlying the current appointment scheduling system is
cumbersome and outdated. Since the scheduling software was
originally deployed the focus has been to add more
functionality as well as correct differences in how the
software worked versus the scheduling process. In hindsight,
more focus should have been given to improving the usability of
the tool. In summary, VA should have driven harder and earlier
to replace it.
Third, it is also important to note resourcing
recommendations for IT investments are made by each of the
administrations based on business priorities and using those
prioritized requirements we follow a consensus based process to
not only develop our IT submission to the President's budget
but also in developing our IT investment budget at the start of
each year.
Fourth, IT risk management is a process of assembling
information upon which leadership can make judgments and
decisions. The identification of hazards or weaknesses in an
operating environment contribute to your risk profile and have
impact on its ability to achieve business objectives, but these
weaknesses are but one component of assessing risks.
Fundamentally managing IT risk at VA is not just about
assessing and quantifying all the things that could go wrong,
but more importantly understanding all the things that need to
go right for the VA to be successful. For me, finding and
keeping that balance while delivering benefits and services to
veterans is a personal obligation, one that motivates me to
serve veterans.
The veteran for me is my grandfather, William, who was
wounded in the trenches in World War I, and went on to serve in
the British channel and the Mediterranean in World War II. It
is my father, Steve, my father-in-law Grengel, both deceased.
My brother-in-law Ted, Navy Retired. My brother Alex, Army
National Guard Separated. My nephews, Michael and Duncan,
presently serving on active duty. My brother Chuck, Army
National Guard, killed in action, Baghdad, 2005. His widow
Carol, along with his two orphans, my nephew Jackson and my
niece Maddy, a niece who will never meet her father. They as
well as many of the friends I served with in the Air Force
shape my decisions and actions as I endeavor to find that
appropriate balance of risk between information protection and
the delivery of care, services, and benefits to our nation's
veterans.
This concludes my oral statement. I would be happy to take
your questions.

[The prepared statement of Stephen Warren appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Warren. And now I will call on
Ms. McCauley for your testimony. Please proceed.

STATEMENT OF SONDRA MCCAULEY

Ms. McCauley. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the OIG's work
regarding VA's management of its IT security program. With me
today is Mr. Michael Bowman, Director of the OIG's IT and
Security Audits Division.
Secure IT systems and networks are critical to support VA's
missions of providing medical care, benefits, and services to
veterans. However, for over a dozen consecutive years our
independent auditors have identified VA's IT security as a
material weakness. In March, 2012 VA instituted the Continuous
Readiness in Information Security Program, CRISP, to ensure
year-round IT monitoring and work to resolve the IT material
weakness. Our fiscal year 2014 audit identified more focused VA
efforts to standardize IT security controls, such as
implementing predictive scanning and an IT tool for assessing,
authorizing, and monitoring VA security. However, as in prior
years we continue to see systemic deficiencies in four key
areas.
Configuration management, we found critical systems were
not timely patched and securely configured to mitigate known
vulnerabilities. Access controls, we identified default
passwords, weak passwords, and vulnerable third party
applications providing well-known attack points from malicious
users. Security management, we noted instances of outdated
security management documentation, background reinvestigations
not performed timely, and plans of action and milestones
updated or closed without written justification. Contingency
planning, we found backup tapes that were not encrypted prior
to storage and contingency plans that did not reflect the
current operating environment. We continue to find these
control activities were not well designed or operating
effectively.
We also disclosed significant technical weaknesses in
databases, servers, and network devices for transmitting
sensitive information among VA medical centers, data centers,
and VA central office. Particularly disconcerting were the
significant number of critical and high-severity
vulnerabilities at data centers more than five years old.
Moving forward VA must fully implement an enterprise
information security program and improve monitoring to ensure
security controls are operating as intended at all facilities.
Consistent and proactive enforcement of established policies
and procedures is critical to remediate IT security
deficiencies across VA's dispersed portfolio of legacy
applications and newly implemented systems. Effective
communication between VA management and field offices is also
needed to notify the appropriate personnel of identified
security deficiencies so that they can timely implement
corrective actions.
Our fiscal year 2014 FISMA report discussing these IT
security challenges is anticipated for release in Spring, 2015.
We expect that most of the 35 outstanding recommendations will
remain open. However, this year VA must also address concerns
not previously highlighted. These include systemic deficiencies
with temporary authorizations to operate systems based on
incomplete security reviews, ineffective protections for
medical devices containing sensitive patient data, foreign
hackers on the VA network, sensitive VA data transmitted over
unsecure internet connections, and the need for an effective
patient scheduling system to minimize veteran delays and ensure
accurate wait time data.
In conclusion, VA has made improvements in its IT security
but more remains to be done. Until a proven process is in place
to ensure control enterprise-wide, the IT material weakness
will stand and VA's systems and sensitive veterans' data will
remain at risk. IT weaknesses and vulnerabilities can expose
millions of veterans to potential loss of privacy, identity
theft, and other financial crimes. Mr. Chairman, this concludes
my statement. We would be happy to answer any questions you or
other members of the committee may have.

[The prepared statement of Sondra McCauley appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. McCauley. Now we will
recognize Mr. Greg Wilshusen to proceed with his testimony.
Thank you. You are recognized, sir.

STATEMENT OF GREG WILSHUSEN

Mr. Wilshusen. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify at today's hearing on information security at the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Securing its information and
computing systems is vital because VA collects and maintains a
large volume of sensitive personal information in performing
its mission of promoting the health, welfare, and dignity of
our nation's veterans. As you know, VA has faced longstanding
challenges in its efforts to secure its information and
information systems. My statement today summarizes the key
findings and recommendations from the report we released
yesterday on VA's efforts to address previously identified
security vulnerabilities. The weaknesses we reviewed pertained
to the department's incident response efforts, two key web
applications, and devices connected to its network.
Before I begin, Mr. Chairman, if I may, I would like to
recognize several individuals who were instrumental in
performing the audit work that underpins my testimony. With me
today are Jennifer Franks, Tyler Mountjoy, Hal Lewis, and Chris
Warweg. I would also like to recognize Jeff Knott, Naba
Barkakati, Lon Chin, and Lee McCracken, who are back at the
office.
Mr. Chairman, while VA has taken actions to mitigate the
vulnerabilities we reviewed they were insufficient to ensure
that the weaknesses were fully addressed. Although the
department acted to contain and eradicate an incident detected
in 2012 involving the intrusion of its network, it could not
demonstrate that these actions were effective. For example, VA
officials could not locate a forensic analysis report and did
not retain digital evidence after 30 days, contrary to federal
guidelines which call for the agencies to maintain records
associated with security incidents for three years. VA also had
not implemented at the time of our review a solution intended
to address an underlying vulnerability that contributed to the
incident. It had taken other limited actions but these were not
sufficient to prevent recurrence of a similar incident. In
addition the department's Network and Security Operations
Center, or NSOC, did not have sufficient visibility into
computer networks across the department. As a result NSOC can
not be assured that the incident was fully contained and
eradicated. NSOC has initiatives underway to further improve
its incident response capabilities. However, it has not yet
established a time frame for completing these actions.
Regarding the two key applications we reviewed as of June,
2014, VA resolved six of nine vulnerabilities that NSOC
identified, including a critical vulnerability which VA
corrected within one week of discovery. However, VA had not
developed plans of actions and milestones for the three
remaining high risk vulnerabilities, thereby diminishing
assurance that it will correct these weaknesses in a timely and
effective manner.
VA also has not conducted software source code scans for
one of the two applications. This type of analysis can help
developers identify and reduce or eliminate potential flaws. At
the time of our review VA officials stated that they had
drafted a policy requiring the use of these tools but it had
not yet been approved.
Regarding devices on its network, VA has not always applied
critical software patches within 30 days in accordance with
this policy. For example as of May, 2014 VA had not implemented
ten critical patches which had been available for periods
ranging from four to 31 months. The patches were intended to
resolve a total of 301 vulnerabilities and each one was missing
on numerous devices or instances, ranging from about 9,200
instances to about 286,000 instances. In addition, VA scans for
non-Windows based systems were not comprehensive because they
were not performed in an authenticated mode. As a result,
increased risk exists that VA will not detect vulnerabilities
and take steps to mitigate them.
While the department has established an organization to
improve its remediation efforts it has not yet identified the
specific actions, priorities, and milestones for accomplishing
these tasks thereby limiting its effectiveness. In our report
we made eight recommendations to assist VA in addressing these
matters. The department agreed with our recommendations and
stated that it had already taken actions to address six of the
eight recommendations and plans to address the other two. We
have not yet verified these actions to determine whether they
effectively addressed the issues raised in our report. But we
intend to do so as part of our normal follow up procedures.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, this concludes my
statement. I would be happy to answer your questions.

[The prepared statement of Gregory Wilshusen appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much. We appreciate it very
much. Thank you all for your testimony. And I will recognize
myself now for five minutes to ask questions.
We will start with Mr. Warren. As confirmed by the OIG and
the recent wait times report, fake patient appointments called
the ZZ test appointments were used to secure appointment times.
The fake appointments made it appear as though the provider had
a full appointment schedule and it prevented veterans from
obtaining timely appointments. According to the emails obtained
by the committee investigators there are hundreds of
appointments being taken by ZZ test patients just in one VA
facility alone in Portland, Oregon. To me it seems that some VA
employees were deliberately and knowingly withholding care from
our veterans. Inexcusable. Can you explain how the VA network
allowed for this to happen?
Mr. Warren. Sir, I am not aware of the incident you are
referring to in terms of using I think you said ZZ patient as a
category. Glad to take that back to the team to understand it.
If folks are using false accounts or false patients to block
veterans getting appointments, I find that as abhorrent as you
do, sir. So we will, I will gladly take that back.
The Chairman. You are not, you are not aware of that?
Mr. Warren. I am not aware of that, sir.
The Chairman. You are not aware of that by another title,
other than ZZ patients?
Mr. Warren. I am not aware of that but I will definitely
take that back and get back to you with what we find, sir.
The Chairman. Well please get back to us as soon as
possible.
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you. Anyone else want to comment on
this particular subject in the panel? Okay. Next question for
Ms. McCauley. In its Phoenix report OIG explained that the
VistA system audit trail was not on. The lack of audit trails
limits and in some cases blocks review efforts looking for data
manipulation and destruction. Did your work identify this
concern in other systems and other sites?
Ms. McCauley. Yes. As part of the consolidated financial
statement review as well as the FISMA work that we do every
year we found that event logs were not turned on consistently.
And this does pose a problem when we as auditors try to go in
and do an independent assessment of a system to see the
activity on the system. We need the historic data to see
whether or not there was abuse of the system or any malicious
intent by any users.
The Chairman. Which locations? Would you, can you tell me
which locations?
Ms. McCauley. I do not have that information but I could
take that for the record.
The Chairman. Can you get back to us on that? I appreciate
that. All right. Ms. McCauley, how effective has the Continuous
Readiness and Information Security Program, CRISP, been in
improving VA's information security posture?
Ms. McCauley. Every year as part of our FISMA work we have
seen improvements in VA's IT security. With the inception of
CRISP in 2012 we have seen the institution of continuous
monitoring. We have seen predictive scanning of VA networks;
role-based and security awareness training for users to ensure
that they understand the policies and regulations; contingency
planning testing; fewer outdated background investigations;
more consistent compliance with U.S. government baseline
standards; as well as use of a governance, risk, and compliance
tool to monitor and assess VA's IT posture. However, we are
still looking at these improvements because many of them take
time to mature and demonstrate their effectiveness.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Next question is for Mr.
Wilshusen. Based on the previous identified vulnerabilities
that continue to exist at VA, what impact could these
vulnerabilities have on allowing data manipulation of veterans'
sensitive information?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well sir, I think they could have. They
increase unnecessarily the risk that such information could be
compromised. For example, the patches that had not been
installed could potentially lead to increased risk that a
veteran's information, including his personal information,
could be affected----
The Chairman. Okay. Give us an example of some of the
information that could be manipulated.
Mr. Wilshusen. Well this would be information that may be
stored on various different work stations throughout the
organization. And it could be any type of particularly
sensitive information that may be maintained relative to the
veterans.
The Chairman. All right, next question for Mr. Warren. Are
you aware that because audit controls are sometimes inactive VA
employees are able to have unauthorized access to modify or
delete patient records? Are you aware of this, Mr. Warren?
Mr. Warren. Sir, I am not aware that folks have gone in and
changed records. And in fact when the audit team raised the
issue to us that auditing was not turned on for the scheduling
systems we turned it on. And not only did we turn it on but it
reflected our history of a decentralized program where every
site controlled what was turned on or off. We pulled the
ability to turn it off at the local sites away from them.
The Chairman. I understand this is only for the scheduling
system and not the other part of the network?
Mr. Warren. This is for, for the scheduling system. And
based upon which system you are speaking with, different
systems have different levels of monitoring on them in terms of
records changed or not, and different levels of logging of
events that are taking place. Based upon what the GAO
identified for us, we have gone back and we have raised, or if
you will extended the time of how long we keep logs. Because
they flagged for me a concern that we did not have material
that you could see if you needed to come back and check. So we
have used that input for us to improve what we are doing.
The Chairman. Okay. Does OIG want to testify on that
particular subject? I would appreciate it if somebody would
speak up on this.
Ms. McCauley. No, I do not have much to add on that. Yet as
we conducted the Phoenix wait times review we did alert OI&T
that the logs were not on and they did turn them on. We also
asked OI&T to discontinue removing the names of former
employees from the, system and putting them rather in a
disabled state so that we can do our work, our investigative
work.
The Chairman. Okay, thank you. I now yield to Ranking
Member Michaud. You are recognized for five minutes or so.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The IG, you
testified that you expect that most of the 35 recommendations
to remain open in the next year's report. In this year's report
the VA recommended that most of the recommendations be closed.
I guess the question for the IG is can you speak to this
apparent disconnect between what you are recommending and what
the VA is saying?
Ms. McCauley. Yes. As I stated previously, for more than a
dozen years we have identified IT as a security weakness. And
in our reports we have continued to find pervasive problems
with information security control deficiencies across the
agency. We have issued recommendations with our reports year
after year and most of those recommendations have carried
forth. Some of the recommendations are over five years old. In
terms of the vulnerabilities we are finding that, and will be
reporting for this year's FISMA report, that for the last three
years the number of vulnerabilities at the critical and high
severity level, they have remained pretty much constant. And so
because of these as well as other control deficiencies,
including access controls, configuration management controls,
security management issues, and contingency planning issues,
our independent auditors have determined that the IT material
weakness will continue to stand until they are addressed. The
OI&T has provided some information for us to close the
recommendations. But based on the results of our testing and
our FISMA look, we have determined that the actions are not
adequate to close the material weakness.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you. Mr. Warren, would you address that
as well? Why is there, appears to be a disconnect between what
the VA is recommending and what the Inspector General has
stated?
Mr. Warren. Thank you, Ranking Member Michaud. We delivered
evidentiary material to the audit team for 18 of 35 of the
FISMA findings and seven of the 21 FISCAM findings. The
feedback we received from the audit team was that there was not
enough evidentiary material to support that so we are going
back to understand what additional documentation is necessary
to support those specific findings.
We recognize, I recognize, and it is one of the reasons I
applied more resources and I push on the team very, very hard,
this is just the down payment, if you will, of the things that
we need to do and the things that we have been doing. We are
still overcoming our legacy of a large decentralized
organization in terms of making sure at those 1,300 facilities
everybody is complying with the standards and that we are
implementing the changes that are necessary and appropriate at
that time.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you. Can you also, Mr. Warren, tell me a
little bit about the RFP process for the new scheduling
software? What are the key requirements? Is there a provision
for self-scheduling capabilities within that?
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir. The RFP to replace the existing
scheduling software, and again it is one of three parallel
paths but let me just talk about the replacement. That RFP is
supposed to be on the street this Friday. I got a note from the
acquisition community guaranteeing that, or promising that this
morning everything is on track that we will be on the street
with that this coming Friday. Key aspects of this acquisition
is we are buying a commercial product, recognition that
capability to do scheduling exists today. So key point,
commercial product. Second key point is we did full and open.
So instead of just doing, having vendors who have a
relationship with the federal government being able to compete,
we opened it up for all vendors. Anybody who has provided that
type of capability, we wanted them to come to the table. Also
key is we are running a two-step process. We are asking for
folks to bid, a written response to the things being asked in
terms of capabilities. We will down select and then we will go
to a demo period in terms of having the vendor show the
capability. And the evaluators will include schedulers from the
sites because we want to make sure the tool will meet their
need. So once that comes in, we expect to award that contract
end of March, no later than end of March. And then we are going
to be on six-month cycles dropping capability out to the sites
as we bring on what is needed.
With respect to veteran self-scheduling, we have a parallel
path for that to bring online an app that will allow veterans
first to request an appointment and then build on it such that
they actually can schedule an appointment. And we are making
sure we synchronize that mobile app with whatever that final
commercial product is.
Mr. Michaud. And does that address security issues and
would deter improper data manipulation as well?
Mr. Warren. Sir, we have built into the requirement that
logging needs to be there. But by definition a scheduling piece
of software allows the changing and cancelling of appointments.
So making sure the logging is on, the audit trail is on, will
allow teams to look for unusual patterns of cancellations or
changes. So that is built into the requirement, to have that
type of auditing and logging on it so if that type of behavior
happens folks can see it and take the appropriate action.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Now I will recognize Mr. Lamborn
for five minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Warren, one of
the concerns I have with the VA's ability to safeguard our
veterans' personal information is the fact that there are no
user based restrictions in place in VistA that would ensure
that employees only have access to the information that their
job positions call for. Now given reports of unauthorized
access and zeroing out of appointments, do current systems
create an auditable log that shows who accessed specific data
or made a scheduling change? I know we already touched on that
some but I want a full answer on that.
Mr. Warren. Sir, there is, there are two categories of
applications that are in use within the VistA constellation or
universe today. The majority of them actually log if, when a
person accesses a particular thing or makes a change. There is
a second class of tools that started to be introduced in 2006
that we are slowly transferring out that actually do not carry
the appropriate log on it. So the majority of cases it is
flagged and it is logged. But there are certain pieces of
software where those logging and control does not take place.
Mr. Lamborn. How soon will you be at the point where only
the system administrator can turn off the logging aspect?
Mr. Warren. So for logging, which is running on a parallel
track, we have actually pulled back the ability for folks
locally to change logging. So now you cannot do it locally. It
has to be done nationally based upon the observations that the
audit team gave us that was specific to scheduling. I will go
back and confirm for the other modules if we have done the same
thing in terms of pulling that authority back. But I will bring
that back for the record, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Yes, and if you could bring that back for the
record, thank you.
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Wilshusen, you state in your report that
the VA said that they were doing six of the eight
recommendations but there were two that were not satisfactorily
addressed. Which two were those?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well those were actually two recommendations
that they still plan to address. It is not that they disagreed
with our recommendations----
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. But they still plan to do
those.
Mr. Lamborn. And which two are those?
Mr. Wilshusen. Those particular recommendations, let me
just check first.
Mr. Lamborn. And I am looking at page five and six of the
latest GAO report.
Mr. Wilshusen. Right. The----
Mr. Lamborn. Or Mr. Warren, could you----
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, I will have to get back----
Mr. Lamborn [continuing]. Can you jump in on this, Mr.
Warren?
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir. The two areas where we did not ask
for closure because more work needed to be done is on the time
frames for completing initiatives to improve an incident
response capability. It actually is a follow up from another
GAO report, where we are putting in the notifications as well
as the follow up actions that are required not only for the
incident teams at the NSOC but as we cascaded down into the
sites. The second area, which is a harder challenge for us from
a technical standpoint, was referred to in the opening remarks
and it deals with scanning non-Windows based systems. Because
of the way those systems are designed it is not easily able to
scan them from a central location. So we have reached out to
our vendors who provide those systems and asked them how can we
roll the accounts up into a centralized area such that we can
do the types of scans being asked for us. So those two are open
because we still have work to do on those.
Mr. Wilshusen. And that is correct.
Mr. Lamborn. And Mr. Wilshusen, what is your response to
their stated intention on those two unresolved areas?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well if they address the areas and implement
those actions effectively then that could address the intent of
our recommendation and hopefully will mitigate part of the
weakness. It is something we will follow up on as part of our
audit follow up process, to determine the effectiveness of
their actions once taken.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you all for your answers and for
being here. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. I appreciate it. Now we will
recognize Mr. Takano for five minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Warren, the
Inspector General found that the, ``VA specific guidance for
integrating security into the budgeting process does not
exist.'' In light of this, does the VA have a clear picture of
what the ultimate costs are for the scheduling software and
VistA modernization efforts? And whether or not security is
being properly integrated into the budgeting process for these
efforts?
Mr. Warren. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Takano. There is actually three pieces, if I can hit those.
Mr. Takano. Okay.
Mr. Warren. The first one deals with how do we lay out the
guidance and instructions to the organization to plan for
security as part of any investments or operating costs? That
change was implemented as part of the fiscal year 2015
execution budget and the 2016 planning budget, the budget that
Mr. Chairman referred to showing up in February. So put it in
place, build it into how we do that. With respect to VistA
evolution, one of the key aspects of VistA evolution, part of
the architectural change in referring to Mr. Lamborn's question
earlier, that architectural change to make sure all components
within the VistA constellation actually audit appropriately are
part of VistA evolution. So we have built in security into the
architecture. We have also just moved out and we have reached
to a third party to come in and do an architectural review of
VistA evolution and we are also reaching out to the open source
community to have them look at what our designs are going
forward to make sure we have not missed anything. The third one
I believe was on VBMS, unless I missed that piece, sir. That is
actually built into the original design and there are very,
very stringent access controls within VBMS because it is a new
software and we were able to build it in from the start.
Security was key in today's era, security was key in the last
five years. More than five years ago, security was not
necessarily a key design criteria when we were delivering a new
product. And the whole industry is actually dealing with that
change, sir.
Mr. Takano. So I just want to repeat, do we have a clear
understanding of what the ultimate costs are going to be?
Mr. Warren. For information protection, I have a budget
that is laid out for 2015. Intent had been to clear the
material weakness, 2014. We fell short. Again, why I applied
more resources on top of what was already budgeted for 2015. We
identified areas where we needed to do more, we needed to do
different. So brought in more resources to take that on. We
have that as a base program going through into 2017 and 2018.
So we expect to continue that same level of resourcing. It is
sitting at about $160 million to $180 million. But that does
not include the staffing. So again, if you look at my workforce
I have approximately 5,500 employees who are out in the field.
Security is half of their job, day to day. So that is an
additional $300 million a year in salary costs on top of that.
So I have a pretty good sense of what the costs are to deal
with the issues identified. But recognizing that the threat
keeps evolving and we are going to keep adjusting what we need
to bring in in case there are surprises that come out or,
again, as the, our partners the auditors identify, you missed
it here and you may think something at headquarters is
happening right. But out in the field it is not, you need to go
in and redouble your efforts in those areas.
Mr. Takano. Can you, can you elaborate a little bit more on
this open source community? And how that may, is or is not an
advantage of the VistA system, which I understand is owned by
the VA?
Mr. Warren. The VistA system is a government owned product.
It was developed with tax dollars. What we recognized about
three years ago is there was actually a community of medical
centers and organizations that were using VistA as part of care
delivery outside of the VA. In fact, Indian Health Service is
based upon a VistA variant.
Mr. Takano. So these are entities outside the VA?
Mr. Warren. Outside of the VA and----
Mr. Takano. How extensive is this, are these entities? I
mean, just I want to get a sense of the size of these
communities.
Mr. Warren. It is worldwide. I believe the country of
Norway uses VistA as their healthcare delivery system.
Mr. Takano. Oh, really?
Mr. Warren. We have engagement with Jordan, where they are
actually converting to VistA as their primary system. We will
gladly get you back for the record a map and a list of all of
the local communities----
Mr. Takano. I would like to get a clear picture. Because I,
it is one of the things that we are----
Mr. Warren. Glad to.
Mr. Takano [continuing]. Of course this integration with
DoD and even future integration with non-VA providers,
understanding VistA and its, and its advantages and
shortcomings is really going to be important to me as far as,
since it is a wholly owned piece of property by the federal
government.
Mr. Warren. And we have actually placed it out there.
Because the challenge we had in the past was for individuals to
use VistA code they had to do a Freedom of Information Act
Request.
Mr. Takano. Yes.
Mr. Warren. So all kinds of process you had to go through.
So the reason we established and supported that open source
community was to remove that burden from people taking VistA
and using it. So it is out there and folks are using the code
and maturing the code as they go forward.
Mr. Takano. My time has run out but I would like to explore
more about this open source nature of this, of this software.
Mr. Warren. Glad to, sir.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Takano. And what we will do is
maybe after this first round if anyone else has any additional
questions----
Mr. Takano. Sure. Thank you.
The Chairman [continuing]. I will give you the opportunity.
Mr. Takano. I appreciate that.
The Chairman. Thank you. Dr. Roe, you are recognized for
five minutes.
Dr. Roe. I thank the chairman. And if you would indulge me
for just a minute, I do not know whether this will be the last
time I have an opportunity to serve with the Ranking Member
Mike Michaud. But Mike and I have served on this committee
together for six years, and my entire time in Congress. I have
gone to Afghanistan with Mike. I think he truly has the
veterans' best interest at heart. He has worked in a very
bipartisan way. And I would just like to take this opportunity
personally, Mike, to thank you for your service.
[Applause.]
Dr. Roe. I sincerely mean that. And it will be a real loss
to our committee and I look forward to continuing our
friendship once you leave the U.S. Congress. And again, thank
you for your service. And Mr. Warren, thank you and your family
for your service to the country. And my heart goes out to you
for your loss. I share that as a fellow veteran and I want to
thank you for your, your family is a true patriotic family so
thank you for your service to our country.
You know, I have a hard enough time turning on a PDA, okay?
So some of this is going over my head, past my head, or
whatever. Just for a simple technologically challenged fellow
like myself, could you tell me what a material weakness is? And
the reason I bring that up is because if you look in a
hospital, where I practiced, and a nurse gives somebody one
Tylenol instead of two, that is a drug, a medication error. It
goes down as a medication error but it really does not hurt
anything. Are these things significant that you talk about in
material weakness? And would it cause a significant problem or
glitch if this were to not be addressed? And anybody can touch
base on that.
Mr. Warren. Sir, if I could it is--why don't you go ahead
since it comes out of the audit community, and if I could
follow up.
Ms. McCauley. Yes. The IG declared information security a
material weakness as part of its consolidated financial
statement audits. Annually we are required to review the
consolidated financial statements for their accuracy as well as
to examine the financial systems that support them to make sure
that there is no material misstatement in the statements. And
as part of that we found out that there were the weaknesses in
the systems that support the financial transactions of the
department. There are several levels or categories of weakness,
or we say risk, and the material weakness is the highest of
them. There are also significant deficiencies. And there is a
dollar threshold associated with that material weakness as
well. And so based on the pervasive problems across the
department we have ascribed material weakness to information
security because there are so many risks involved.
Dr. Roe. So if it is not addressed a significant occurrence
could happen? A breach could occur?
Ms. McCauley. Exactly. We are looking at it from a risk
standpoint.
Dr. Roe. Risk standpoint. I think the question, Mr. Warren,
for you, and when you begin to get the scheduling system. And I
can assure you, I hope the scheduling system works better than
the one they have now because it is terrible now. I get
complaints about it all the time and I hope that it is not
punch one, two, three, four, and then you start all over again.
The airlines do it very well right now. Quite frankly you can
book an airline flight and your seat on the airplane and so
forth. Once this gets started, how long will it take to ramp it
up where it is actually functional?
Mr. Warren. So two items, if I may. The first one to deal
with the difficulty in accessing the screen. So instead of just
waiting for the replacement of the software we actually put on
contract in August, we get the first delivery coming in in
December, January, which is to take in the existing system all
of those separate screens and pull them into a single screen so
it is easy for them to use. So we wanted to make sure we did
the replacement right but we also wanted to get relief to the
scheduler. So there would be reason not to get that scheduler
done right and no reason not to make sure those right items are
there. So relief on the way for the schedulers to make sure
they have that usability to deal with the difficulty of it.
With respect to the replacement for the existing system,
right now the, again we are laying a timeline with some
assumptions about the number of bidders. We are expecting to go
through the two-step process and award by March. So end of
March, no later than. So we are pushing very, very aggressive
on this for something that is an open competition. So a lot
folks are, not cutting corners, but streamlining every darn
thing we can.
We are, we have laid out notionally, we are saying we want
six-month deliveries. So four deliveries so we can make sure as
soon as we can we are using that commercial product. So we are
not asking for somebody to build us a new scheduling----
Dr. Roe. So by the end of 2015 maybe it is ramped up?
Mr. Warren. We are expecting to get capability online in
2015, starting it, and then basically rolling it out in phases
across the complex as well as adding capability to it over that
two-year period.
Dr. Roe. Okay. So a couple of years. Okay. That makes
sense. And one other thing. We go to many classified briefings
and some of those I think concern veterans' records and the
amount of foreign entities that may be hacking those records.
Are you able to identify that when that is happening? Is the
system secure enough to keep a foreign entity from putting
malware on something that is then backdooring into another
system?
Mr. Warren. Sir, we actually do not care where it comes
from. If somebody is trying to come after veterans' records,
that is what we are interested in. And the way the system is
set up, and we start from the outside with Homeland Security.
They have Einstein 3 which basically covers our back and
maintains the perimeter. So scanning on their end. We also work
our way inward in terms of at our boundaries and multiple
locations. One of the things that the IG identified for us as
part of the audit, there were a couple of areas where we had
blind spots. And so we are moving out and filling those blind
spots. But we track all traffic coming in and all traffic going
out through four key points. So all traffic is gated and then
monitored as it is coming in and leaving the perimeter. So we
believe we have pretty good visibility. Because we know malware
will end up on desktops. Right? Folks click on the stupidest
emails, that human condition, whatever it is, that causes you
to want to see some picture or some thing--sir, please do not,
it is not good. But we know that is going to happen. So the
protections that are in place and the multilayers that are in
place is to deal with folks doing bad things. Because I cannot
stop them from going to the internet because it is pervasive in
how we do our business.
Dr. Roe. I thank you and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Now Ms. Brownley, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Warren, I just
wanted to follow up again on, I am glad to hear that your, the
RFP is going out for this new system, and you seem to be on
track with that. You mentioned the self-scheduling solution.
And is that going to be part of this RFP that you are speaking
of that is going to happen this Friday, I think I heard you
say?
Mr. Warren. Ma'am, we actually are running parallel--I am
going to lean over so I can----
Ms. Brownley. I know, we have to look across.
Mr. Warren. We are actually running on parallel tracks. So
it is one of the options that is on the commercial product we
are asking for. The second piece is we actually doing
development for an app in terms of figuring out can we provide
that and we would do it in as a two-step. The first step would
be for veterans to ask for an appointment, so it does not have
that deep connection in and make the changes. I do not know if
we have briefed the complexity of it. We actually pull
information from 71 systems when you actually try to schedule
and then you have to send information back out to another 41.
So basically two-phased. First phase to allow it to ask for an
appointment. So it would get to a scheduler and they would work
it. And then phase two is to make the connections so they
actually could see what the availability was and start doing
that negotiation online. And that is, that is probably a year
and a bit out to get that full functionality. Because it is not
a trivial thing to do and we want to make sure we do it right.
Ms. Brownley. Okay. It seems to me that it is, and again
like Dr. Roe I am not a master of IT issues at all. But it
seems to me that, I mean there are apps out there in the
private industry now for self-scheduling. It seems to me like
it would be rather simple, particularly when we have the issues
of canceled appointments, etcetera, and being able to, you
know, use every single day efficiently and making sure that
each one of those appointments are full, that it seems like it
is a pretty easy process as opposed to a complex one.
Mr. Warren. So the fact that the marketplace has matured to
the point where folks can do schedulings online and those tools
are out there is what drove us to buying a commercial product.
So many years ago when this was tried before it was there was
nothing out there, the market was not mature, we had to build
it ourselves. The recognition and the America COMPETES Act that
we did two years ago, the competition, again validated yes
there were commercial products that were ready to be done. And
we were also able to validate how you test it and prove it.
Because the challenge for us is not that commercial product but
how do we make sure when it connects into all of the existing
capabilities that it does it right? Because when we schedule it
is more than just the patient available, the veteran, it is the
clinician, it is the room, it is the equipment, it is the
assistance, it is the consumable products that need to be used.
So we want to make sure we do that right. But we are building,
if you will, we are counting on the fact that yes, that
capability exists out there today and you are able to do those.
Now we have to do the hard part as the vendor bring it in and
the connections and making sure those connections work
correctly.
Ms. Brownley. And so when is the timeframe for completion
of all of that?
Mr. Warren. So the RFP for the replacement of the system
goes out by this Friday.
Ms. Brownley. Yes.
Mr. Warren. We were trying to pull it in a little bit
earlier but this Friday is a guaranteed it will be out.
Ms. Brownley. Yes.
Mr. Warren. We expect it, because it is a two-step, making
sure that we have schedulers as part of the evaluation process,
award of the contract by the end of March. And then what we are
asking for is four six-month deliveries of capability. So in
other words, all the things you need to do to schedule are
many. It is more than just an appointment. We also want to
figure out how we bring in televideo scheduling into it.
Ms. Brownley. Yes, I am just talking about the, you know,
the potential of having an app, a veteran on their phone, have
an app, and be able to make their own appointment.
Mr. Warren. So the app for a veteran to ask for an
appointment is supposed to come out in 2015.
Ms. Brownley. In 2015?
Mr. Warren. So that is what is laid out. And that is
separate from the replacement of the existing scheduling
system. But glad to, for the record, lay out the schedule of
those critical components. We have come up and briefed the
staff with the detail but glad to bring another copy up with an
update, ma'am.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much. And I might not have
time but I will at least get the question out. It seems to me
in reviewing the total number of security incidents as reported
across all federal agencies, the total number of security
incidents reported at the VA is less. It is clear that the VA
has a greater problem with non-cyber incidences. And so I guess
my question really is, you know, what is the VA doing around
non-cyber? You know, paper flow, paper information, hard
copies, and so forth with regards to security training programs
and, and other mitigations to address that?
Mr. Warren. Mr. Chairman, can I answer?
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Warren. So if I could I would like to use this as an
opportunity, something that we have been doing is we have been
doing a monthly report. It has been in tabular form so this is
everything that happens in a month. But what we did this past
month is it is so hard to read this table we actually turned it
into a chart. And to your point, ma'am, our incidents where we
have fallen short have been in people and process steps, where
folks did the wrong thing. They sent the wrong paper to the
wrong person, or they downloaded the information and lost
control of it. What we do with those incidences, it is part of
our data breach core team. Anytime where there is the potential
that a veteran's information was put at risk, and in the past
month it was 536 times in October, we fell short of our
responsibilities. Each of those veterans received credit
monitoring. We also went back into the leadership chain to the
organization where the failure took place and we identify was
it a process failure? Was it a people failure? Was it an
organizational failure? And we leave it to their chain to make
the appropriate corrective actions. We build it into our annual
training, so we look at what happened in the prior year. And
every employee and contractor working with the VA is required
to take security training before they can use systems. And we
refresh that to point out do not do this, do not do that, look
out for this, be aware of that.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
your indulgence.
The Chairman. How long has this been in place?
Mr. Warren. Sir, the actual tabular reporting has been out
there for at least three years, if not four. But the, it has
been hard to understand. And so as part of our transparency is
how do we put it into an info graphic so it really lays out
what is the threat and where have we fallen short? Because we
think it is important for that to be visible and folks to be
aware.
The Chairman. Thank you. Dr. Benishek, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Dr. Benishek. All right, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a
question concerning the VistA program and your answer to Mr.
Lamborn. As I understand it there is audits. You are not sure
if the audits are taking place in all areas of VistA?
Mr. Warren. So what I asked was to be able to go back and
confirm for which systems what auditing is turned on at what
level. For scheduling I know it is turned on.
Dr. Benishek. Well why, do you not know, do you not know
that answer?
Mr. Warren. Sir, I did not come prepared with that answer
at my fingertips but I will be glad----
Dr. Benishek. Well how many different parts of VistA are
there?
Mr. Warren. I believe the reports vary between 86 to 128
different modules or applications.
Dr. Benishek. So like the patient, but it is all patient
data, right?
Mr. Warren. Patient data and where the data is held is
actually a very small component of VistA.
Dr. Benishek. Well I guess I do not understand why these
audits are not in place. Why can somebody get access to a
record without a record of them accessing it? Any case?
Mr. Warren. So for the majority of applications that
individuals use to access veterans' data or to do actions that
result in veterans' data, the majority of those there is
logging of who accessed the data and what they did and what
data was changed. For a couple of applications starting in 2006
a particular tool was used to deploy that software. It does not
have the appropriate auditing in place. We are working through
to actually replace all of that software.
Dr. Benishek. All right. As I understand it there was like
eight major areas that were addressed by the GAO and the IG and
you have addressed six of the eight but the other two areas
were not addressed. Is that right, Mr. Wilshusen? Is that the
testimony?
Mr. Wilshusen. No, it is not that they were not addressed.
VA responded that it concurred with all eight of our
recommendations and that it had already taken actions to
implement six of those recommendations and that it plans to
perform actions to complete the other two recommendations.
Dr. Benishek. And how long has it been now since that came
out?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well the report just came out, was issued on
November 13th and we released it yesterday. But we had briefed
VA on our recommended actions and activities before then.
Dr. Benishek. So there is a plan, then, Mr. Warren to
respond?
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir. For the eight items identified, six
of those actions either underway or actions we needed to
change. Two of them it took more work, so we are not able to
come in and say we believe we have things underway to ask for
closure. Two of them took more work and will take more work,
one of which needs time, the other one trying to deal with the
technical challenge in terms of how do we do what the audit,
what GAO asked us to do.
Dr. Benishek. All right. I still am somewhat concerned
about this, this access to data issue. You know, I worked at
the VA and I have seen data change in the system without
adequate explanation why it occurred. And you know, that is a
very concern to me especially in view of the fact that there is
risk of foreign entities accessing the data. Is that not
occurring today? Has that patch been done?
Mr. Warren. Sir, if you have a specific instance where data
changed, and it was somebody you were seeing, and you have a
question about why it changed, definitely ask. Because we can--
--
Dr. Benishek. Well no, I did that at the time but I did not
get an answer.
Mr. Warren. And when was that, sir?
Dr. Benishek. That was before I came here. It would have
been prior to 2011. But you know, a chart changed. And there
was no, there was no, I mean it was a pathology report that
initially was benign and then came back malignant with no
evidence of anybody changing it except for the fact that I had
told the patient that the path report was benign, and then when
it came back the next time I had to tell him that the path
report was malignant because it, and I did not have a piece of
paper to document the fact that it was benign before. So it
made me look bad.
Mr. Warren. Sir, I would----
Dr. Benishek. Do you understand what I am saying?
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir. I would----
Dr. Benishek. And that is the kind of stuff that I am
concerned about, especially if there is foreign access. Now the
IG and the GAO, is there a possibility for foreign access to
the VA system at this time?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well with respect to foreign access let me
just say in terms of external access----
Dr. Benishek. Okay.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. Regardless of the source, the
findings that we identified are vulnerabilities in VA systems
that have not yet been----
Dr. Benishek. At this time.
Mr. Wilshusen [continuing]. Corrected including ten
critical patches that address up to 301 vulnerabilities. So the
risk, is unnecessarily increased that unauthorized access could
occur.
Dr. Benishek. Is it still present today?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes. As far as when we did our review in, as
of June, 2014, those vulnerabilities had not been addressed.
Dr. Benishek. All right. Mr. Warren, do you have any answer
to that? What are we going to do about that with the 5,500
employees that you have?
Mr. Warren. So managing vulnerabilities and particular
patching of software. So that is one of the most dynamic parts
of the job. If I can set aside the group that the IG identified
for us that our financial system is out of date and the
software actually cannot be patched. So that software cannot be
patched, will not be patched, without breaking the finance
systems at the VA. So we have compensating controls around that
to put increased protections in place while we do it. For
systems that exist outside of that pool, if I can. We have a
very active if you will prioritization in terms of what we
patch when and why. We count a lot on the fact that we have
multiple layers of defenses on top of it. There is a balance
between patching something, testing something before you patch
it, because we have had instances in the past where the
manufacturer sends us the patch, we push it out to the site,
and we bring the site down. Because the software that runs on
top of those work stations or servers run differently than how
the vendor expected them to act. So we are always working a
list of criticals, to highs, to mediums.
Dr. Benishek. But--all right.
Mr. Warren. And again, we run a punch list. We deal with
the highs, I am sorry, we deal with the criticals and then we
work--I am sorry, sir.
Dr. Benishek. Sorry, my time is up.
The Chairman. No, that is okay. Thank you, doctor. Yes, I
want to ask OIG, Ms. McCauley, do foreign entities have the
ability to enter the network?
Ms. McCauley. We certainly continue to have concerns in
that regard. I would like to ask Mr. Bowman to address that
question, if I may?
The Chairman. You are recognized, sir.
Mr. Bowman. Every year we identify access control issues,
configuration management issues, well known vulnerabilities.
And these are all attack points by foreign nation states. So
that possibility, that threat still exists. And once inside the
VA network, such as the case where domain control was
infiltrated, they can use that as a pivot point to laterally
move throughout the VA network. So that threat still exists and
we continue to identify vulnerabilities that need to be
addressed.
The Chairman. Thank you. I would like to recognize Ms.
Kirkpatrick for five minutes.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Let me first add to Dr. Roe's comments and
thank our Ranking Member Mr. Michaud for your leadership. You
have been a dedicated public servant, committed to our
veterans, and it has just been an absolute pleasure serving
under your leadership. And I really appreciate the bipartisan
way that you have worked with the chairman and with the
committee, making this one of the most productive committees in
Congress. So thank you for that, and I wish you the very best
in your future endeavors. And I hope you will stay in touch, so
thank you.
The Chairman. I will second that.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
The Chairman. We will not count that time against you,
either.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Oh, okay. Well I will be brief, Mr.
Chairman. I am glad to hear that you are looking at a
commercial off the shelf version of the scheduling software.
But did you do a cost benefit analysis between the cost and
benefit of doing that versus continuing to invest in the VistA
program and patch that and reform that VistA program?
Mr. Warren. Looking at what the projected costs were for
building inside versus outside was something that was
evaluated. And when we looked at it there was a recognition
that we could get to a solution faster, which was one of our
driving goals, instead of us having to try and build it in
house. And just to revisit history, and again it is an ugly
history for us, from 1999 to 2009 the department tried for ten
years to build a scheduling software package. In 2009 we killed
that program. I was part of the team that said stop wasting the
dollars, kill this program. That was a serious contribution to
when we sat down and asked do we want to try this again and try
and build something? Or do we use what already exists in the
marketplace? And what drove us to it was it is there, it works,
it is viable. Let us build on that instead of trying to do
something that we have proven we could not do, specifically
with scheduling.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. How close are we to having VistA be
interoperable with the Department of Defense system and with
this new off the shelf scheduling system? Will they be
interoperable?
Mr. Warren. So if I could I would like to offer in for the
record, I brought in a four-slide deck and a copy for the
ranking member and the chairman and yourself, if you would
like. Glad to hand it up. I do not know how to do that. It
actually walks through how interoperability is happening. So I
believe we have--we do not have copies. I will give you my
copy, glad to give you my copy. And what it does is it lays out
how data is flowing today. And too often we talk about
interoperability as something that requires VA and DoD to use
the same system. I do not know how we do this. Glad to give you
that, ma'am, and we will get other copies up for the record.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
Mr. Warren. And what it does it lays out how data is
flowing in four areas. The first one is between VA and DoD. And
we actually move it first bidirectional. So if we have veterans
or servicemembers that are seeing care between the two
locations, we are moving that data back and forth today,
irrespective of what system we use. For servicemembers who
separate their medical record transfers over within 30 days and
it comes into the VA system and it is available if a veteran
ex-servicemember presents himself for care. Otherwise, we do
not see it. It is there. The third area is polytrauma. As soon
as a servicemember transfers to us the whole record comes over.
That is how we move data back and forth in the existing system.
Hard to see, it is in a panel somewhere else. JANUS, we have
talked about this integrated viewer. We now see this data in a
single view. Not just VA and DoD data, but all of the VA data.
In the past when a veteran went to three medical centers you
had to look at three places. Today you see it together in one
place. The third area covered in that deck lays out the
interoperability with third party providers. A lot of DoD care
is done out in the private sector. With the Veterans Access to
Care and Accountability Act, $10 billion of care is going to
happen over the next couple of years. What record we use or DoD
use has no effect on that data coming in. So laying out where,
exchanges where we have got relationships, I believe it is 28
organizations where we move data back and forth between the
two. And then also where they do not have the ability to view
back and forth, the secure transfer of data. We have nine
relationships with those and again that is in that four-page
deck. And the last one, it was a key commitment we made which
was break the medical record free from the institution, the
personal health record that a veteran can download and use. And
it lays out all of the downloads and all of the capabilities
that we put out there for veterans to take their record and go
with it if they want to do it physically, or how through My
HealtheVet they can see their information, how they can ask for
renewals of medications, and how they can do secure messaging
with their clinician, with their care provider if they have any
questions.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. And are you saying that capability is
available now?
Mr. Warren. That capability is there. And hopefully, I am
not sure where those four slides went, it lays out, we have
been working very hard on how do we clearly lay that out? We
have had a difficulty in saying this is how we do it. And
hopefully that information of use and glad to sit down with any
member and go through it, whether yourselves, with the staff,
to talk about the great progress I think we have made in moving
that data between not only us and DoD but also with those third
party providers. That is where the key risk for us in the
future is.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Yes.
Mr. Warren. Because we are moving that care out. So how do
we get the data back and make sure it is used as part of the
care?
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Right. Well I look forward to the slides.
And let me just conclude saying I would like to get the, a copy
of the map that you were talking with Mr. Takano about----
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kirkpatrick [continuing]. That shows the different
places that VistA is used.
Mr. Warren. I will be glad to submit it for the record with
not just in the U.S. but worldwide where VistA is used.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Huelskamp, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to
follow up and clarify something with Mr. Warren. If I
understand it correctly publicly you just said that no data has
been exfiltrated as a result of attacks from the VA network?
Mr. Warren. Let me go back and be very clear to your
question, sir. We have two instances that the team has
identified going back to 2010, 2010 and 2012. It was the point
of the hearing that we had 18 months ago. In those instances
what the forensics team has identified for us is user name and
password files were pulled from the enterprise. So that data
came out, not veteran data. As soon as that was identified we
went in, we cleaned the systems, and we reset the passwords. On
Friday, and because this question comes up and it is a concern
not just external but internal, we actually asked an
organization called Mandiant, I think you have probably heard
of them. We asked them to come in and look at those domain
controllers. Because if there is a question we want to make
sure it is more than just my team saying they are clean. Friday
they briefed us and said they are not seeing anything on those
domain controllers. Preliminary report, they will have a final
report by December. We will bring that report up and brief
yourself, the staff, the members, and have Mandiant there to do
it, which basically says ``they are clean''.
Dr. Huelskamp. So within the timeframe since 2010 you have
no knowledge that data has been exfiltrated out of the VA
network?
Mr. Warren. Sir, I have been briefed by my team of two
instances where specific data was removed, usernames and
passwords.
Dr. Huelskamp. And that happened when?
Mr. Warren. 2010 and 2012. We briefed the staff, glad to
come up and do that again, sir.
Dr. Huelskamp. And according to, I mean you make reference
to the committee hearing, a subcommittee hearing, numerous I
thought very reliable whistleblowers, they said the information
removed from the network was encrypted. So and I thought the VA
agreed they did not know what data was taken outside the
network. But now you do know what data was exfiltrated out of
the network?
Mr. Warren. What the team did is, and because there are
always unknowns, they looked at patterns and signatures in
terms of what did it look like. And what the team gave back and
briefed me, and we asked again and again, was they had
reasonable confidence that the information that was removed
from the VA was a file, the type of file that looks like what
you----
Dr. Huelskamp. So let me interrupt because I want to go
inside the network. So it was not encrypted? Or it was?
Mr. Warren. No sir, it was encrypted.
Dr. Huelskamp. It was encrypted, and you broke the
encryption so you know what the data was? You did not?
Mr. Warren. No, the team identified how the file looked and
what it looked like and where it came from, and said ``it has
the shape and characteristics of that particular type of
material.''
Dr. Huelskamp. Which allowed access throughout the network
then, as I understand from the OIG?
Mr. Warren. Again, it is an area where there is a serious
disagreement with the IG, which is why we asked Mandiant to
come in and have a look at it.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay.
Mr. Warren. When we became aware of it we basically changed
those passwords. We also reimaged----
Dr. Huelskamp. I understand what you did afterwards. I am
still trying to figure out what you knew that you really knew,
and when it was encrypted you did not break the encryption. I
want, now I want to go into within the network. Mr. Warren, how
would you know if someone manipulated data within the network?
Mr. Warren. Depending on which system you are referring to,
and what type of data, the triggers or the characteristics
would be different. So it is part of the monitoring that either
is built into systems where we are dealing with personnel
information, or it deals with monitoring that our NSOC does in
terms of----
Dr. Huelskamp. Well I understand the variance. But would
you not have to have audit controls in place and turned on in
order to know whether someone actually manipulated data?
Mr. Warren. Sir, we have audit controls turned on in many
places. And again----
Dr. Huelskamp. Are they always turned on? Are they always
on, the audit controls?
Mr. Warren. The audit team has identified for us where they
were not turned on in the past. And so we have gone in and
turned those on. Also again for the record we will bring back
are there any other places where those controls are not turned
on.
Dr. Huelskamp. Why would they have been turned off?
Mr. Warren. Again, dealing with our history where we ran in
a decentralized world, where every single location made their
own decisions, just basically overcoming that past where they
did not feel either auditing was important, or they did not
have the size or scope for it, or somebody turned it off by
mistake.
Dr. Huelskamp. But as of today you are confident that all
audit controls are turned on within the network? Because if
they are turned off, I mean, we agree you are vulnerable. And
you would not even know if you are vulnerable, and you would
not even know if anybody is manipulating data. And the OIG has
talked about this for years. I mean, this is just not an
occurrence, a few times. It is over the past plus decade, audit
controls are not always on for whatever reason. So but as of
today, what would happen if someone turned off an audit
control?
Mr. Warren. It would depend on which system we are speaking
to. I mean, one of the things that we have deployed in our data
centers is a way of measuring the configuration of a server so
that before a change takes place you can actually go back and
ask ``did that server get changed?'' So all of our servers and
data systems, we actually take a measurement of them. It is a
particular unique number that you use. And if somebody changes
something in the system, the number changes and it tells us,
``hey, something changed there.'' And it is a control that we
use in terms of managing configuration, but also as part of our
strengthening reliability of systems.
Dr. Huelskamp. So you are confident that they are all
turned on today?
Mr. Warren. For the record, I was going to come back where
we did not have them turned on, sir.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. I am looking forward. I just want to
make sure that every employee understands, you cannot turn
those off. Or else the system is vulnerable, so----
Mr. Warren. Sir, I believe we have been clear. And this
hearing, I actually sent a message out to all of my employees
that this was an important hearing to watch. So let me speak to
them. If you are an OI&T employee, or a contractor supporting
the VA, it is not your responsibility or obligation or right to
mess with audit controls.
Dr. Huelskamp. Period. And they will lose their job, why do
you not say that, too? Well, no. We cannot say that. I am
sorry.
Mr. Warren. Appropriate disciplinary action----
Dr. Huelskamp. It is not permitted. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Kuster, you are recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Warren. And I too want to add to the
accolades for my colleague and good friend from the neighboring
state, Mr. Michaud. Thank you for being a mentor to me in my
first term, I truly appreciate it. And I also want to thank you
and your family for your service to our country, and I am sorry
for your loss.
I would like to focus in on the scheduling. I want to not
ignore what has happened here, but get past that to what we can
look forward to. I was very interested when I tried to learn
more about this to have conversations with private vendors
about what is possible, what is available. And in particular, I
am looking at the highest and best and most frugal use of our
tax dollars for making sure that we are scheduling our
resources, our people, our physicians and caregivers, as well
as our physical plant most effectively, expeditiously.
And one of the things I learned about was the algorithms
now that are available. All across private sector, all
healthcare providers have a drop-off rate. Obviously, there are
people who miss appointments. But it turns out that they have
been able to do profiling to find out what type of patients are
more likely to miss appointments and what type of patients are
less likely. And then they are able to use these algorithms to
schedule in the morning the most reliable patients and then
double-book in the afternoon, later in the day, knowing that
the less reliable patients would miss out. And I just wanted to
get your thoughts.
I understand the complexity and having this work with
VistA, but can we look down the road to a place where we are
using tax dollars and federal resources more efficiently in
providing high-quality care, which is ultimately all of our
goal? A bipartisan goal, by the way.
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for that question. I will
actually take that back. I don't know if those particular
algorithms are built into the acquisition, but it is a great
idea.
Ms. Kuster. Yes.
Mr. Warren. And I am sure Dr. Tushman, who I think has come
up here before, who focuses on these types of things, would
also have an interest in terms of how do we effectively manage
and schedule those appointments and the critical resources. But
I will go back and I will ask that question.
Ms. Kuster. It was very impressive. And luckily I am not
trying to influence your decision, because I don't remember the
name of which of the vendors I spoke to. But it was just a very
interesting notion, something as simple as figuring out who is
likely to show up, using the time wisely, and then of course
getting to the place where you can have self-scheduling I think
is ultimately an important goal.
On the second issue, I just wanted to explore a little bit
more about the issue of the security based upon authorizations.
And I believe Ms. McCauley mentioned even people who had left
the VA continuing to have authorization. I know just in a small
law firm this was complex, people come and go and they still
have their passwords. But what steps have you taken both with
regard to access authorization, and secondly, the issue around
the missing laptop, have you taken steps to--about property and
how have you communicated those throughout the VA?
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am, great question. And it actually
allows me to talk about information protection as more than an
IT thing, because the question you are asking about is how do
we make sure when an employee leaves or a contractor leaves
that their access is removed. And we count on our HR systems,
our HR processes, to do that. And it is an area that has been
identified as a place where the systems are not connected. So
one of the things that we implemented this year was we actually
asked the HR community, ``hey, why don't you send us the list
of people at each site who left the place. While we figure out
the system stuff, how do we get the HR employees to actually
tell us who left, so we can go back in and remove their
access.''
So it is a combination of how do we get the process to
work, because too often folks leave and you don't know, with a
lot of the residents and a lot of the term appointments coming
in and out. And with the new HR system that the VA is rolling
across the complex, it is peaking up that management of people,
but until that comes into place we put in a manual safeguard,
which is tell us when they leave. Give us that report you
generate every two weeks and we will use that as part of us
removing from.
With respect to laptops, all of our laptops are now
encrypted, as well as our desktops. So we went to a Windows 7
conversion, the upgrade, it actually built in encryption to all
of the hard drives. So the issue we have had in the past where
a laptop or a desktop went awry, there was concerns about data
on it. In most cases, veteran information is actually not
stored on a desktop, it is actually stored back in servers and
main systems, which allows us some of those controls.
We are still wrestling with medical devices in terms of
they are not encrypted, because most medical devices there are
concerns about how the care delivery as part of the tool does
or does not work. And what we go through, it is a very arduous
and labor-intensive process, medical device or medical
application by each one actually go and encrypt. BCMA, which
was a bar code medication, it was not encrypted, it was one of
our biggest risks. But we spent many years working with the
medical community to show them and prove to them encrypting the
devices would not impact care, and now we are rolling out that
out across the complex. But many, many more years of work on
the medical device side to get them up to the same standard of
the devices I am responsible for.
Ms. Kuster. Great. Well, thank you, Mr. Warren. My time is
up. But I also appreciate--I understand from the materials that
you took a courageous stand in your just recent background and
I appreciate that. So thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup, you are recognized for five minutes.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Burnette, I do not want you to feel left out today and
I notice no one has asked you any questions. But I would--I am
curious to know the actual role of the Enterprise Risk
Management Program. If you could tell me what role you play in
protecting the confidentiality and integrity of our veterans'
records.
Ms. Burnette. The Office of Enterprise Risk Management is
relatively new to OI&T and recently, about a year after we set
up at OI&T, we now have an office VA-wide that has a risk
registry that supports the secretary.
The idea is, it is our number-one goal is to figure out how
can we forecast and get in front of those things that could
potentially preclude us from being successful in helping a
veteran have the experience that he should have trusting
reliability.
Dr. Wenstrup. So what type of background does somebody have
for say your job. What puts you in that position and what are
some of the things that you are forecasting or are trying to
look for in trying to be risk averse?
Ms. Burnette. We have about 55 risks currently on the risk
registry, 27 of them we are mitigating. And they range anywhere
from human capital competencies, do we have the right people
doing the right job, to our ability to move to the cloud in a
very efficient manner, to operational stability, does our
infrastructure have the stability. Again, all of these things
are based on forecasts, so that we can get in front of those
problems that we might encounter.
Dr. Wenstrup. So are there any things that you have
uncovered? Are there any thing that you identified as a
potential risk, and found it and eliminated it?
Ms. Burnette. Yes. As a matter of fact, IT-sensitive
equipment was a risk. It was written up in the GAO and the OIG
report about three years ago and we have come up with about 27
mitigating strategies. It used to be--or the GAO reported that
we were at 55-percent accuracy of knowing where that sensitive
equipment is and we are now at 90 percent as a result of those
mitigating strategies. Our goal is 95 percent. So we are still
working on those, but we are making great progress.
Dr. Wenstrup. I mean, do you look at everything from
staffing weaknesses----
Ms. Burnette. Yes.
Dr. Wenstrup [continuing]. You know, people within the
system that could be doing harm? How do you find those types of
things, how do you look at that?
Ms. Burnette. I don't know about looking in the system for
people that are doing harm, but we definitely look at what
kinds of technologies are on the horizon and do we have the
right competencies in our workforce, and what kind of training
modules do we need to develop to support those.
Dr. Wenstrup. How many people in your department, if you
will, in your section?
Ms. Burnette. I have about 20 people that do risk
management planning. So they go out and they look at the OIG
and the GAO reports, they work with risk champions, they look
at what's happening in the IT arena. And then we have about--we
have a total of 100, so the remaining 80 actually support
mitigating strategies. So they go out and do security-control
assessments. Many of the NIST controls that the OIG had
mentioned, we also support those.
It is the actual assessment process. So you need to go out
and we need to validate that, yeah, this is a forecasted risk
and start developing mitigating strategies, and we do that in
conjunction with the subject matter experts from the different
parts of the organization.
Dr. Wenstrup. I am just curious what type of background
someone has in this role. I mean, is there a degree in this?
Where does it come from?
Ms. Burnette. It is actually very new to the Federal
Government, Enterprise Risk Management. Like I said, my
organization, who does a phenomenal job, is only about two
years old. And OMB has recently issued----
Dr. Wenstrup. So there is no like--there is no specific
background to this?
Ms. Burnette. Well, I think we deal with risk every single
day. I mean, I have spent 20 years in the federal sector and I
have worked managing large-scale program management offices
that do weather site modernization and all the risks that are
associated with that, to managing large-scale acquisitions
for----
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, we are all in favor, I would say, of
preemptive action on things----
Ms. Burnette. Exactly.
Dr. Wenstrup [continuing]. Of course, and that sounds like
that is the role. How do we measure if we are getting the bang
for our buck?
Ms. Burnette. Well, I mean, I think one of the ways we
measure it is through the ITS, and inventory would be a good
example. I mean, certainly understanding where our equipment is
and ensuring that there is accuracy associated with that and
making sure that it is disposed of properly. All of those
things----
Dr. Wenstrup. Shouldn't those things be within their own
departments, though? Quality assurance, if you will? There is
accountability within each department? I am just trying to
figure out this role. I mean, I don't know if you are going
around patting people on the back, saying you are doing a great
job, keep it up, or what are we really--what are we really
getting from this entity? I am just curious, because I am not
familiar with it.
Mr. Warren. Congressman Wenstrup----
Dr. Wenstrup. Yes.
Mr. Warren [continuing]. Mr. Chairman, if I could?
Dr. Wenstrup. Sure.
Mr. Warren. Ms. Burnette's organization and her team I look
to, and we look to, to look over our horizon. Too often my day
and my leaders are all about operational delivery of
capabilities. We do fixate and focus to the now and the near.
We probably have a six-month to a nine-month time horizon where
this thing is due, where are you on that. Too often, because
you are looking down, you can't see something that is coming at
you. So we look at her team to actually broaden the view and
ask, okay, what is it that we are not seeing? What is it that
we are not dealing with right now? But if we don't do
something, we need to.
And so we count on the team and it is a two-part team. One
part is look over the horizon and use the reports from the
auditors, from outside folks, from other organizations what
they have seen. The other pieces we use for internal controls,
we actually send them out and do the checks. Because the IT
organization is so large, I actually make sure there are things
that we look at. As an example, we look at the top ten
travelers every year. Why did those people travel? Should they
be traveling that much? We also go out and look at, as Ms.
Burnette talked about, inventory. It was a big issue for us,
folks not tracking and managing their inventory.
And so we moved away based upon her team's counsel from a
once-a-year audit or inventory to right now every month ten
percent of the inventory is assessed. So you are not all of a
sudden at the end of the year going, oh, my gosh, we have lost
it all, but how do I look at ten percent at a time. And that we
embrace as a result of her team saying, you know, if you don't
get your arms around this, you have got a serious problem. You
have got a serious problem from an asset value, but also the
information protection side, things will be leaving.
So, again, over the horizon, but also a part of it is
looking to make sure are we doing the day-to-day things and
from an internal accountability standpoint, internal controls.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Mr. Warren. Hopefully that helps, sir.
Dr. Wenstrup. It was very helpful. Thank you, I appreciate
it.
The Chairman. Okay. Why don't we go with now Mr. O'Rourke.
You are recognized for five minutes. Thank you.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
A question for the GAO, Mr. Wilshusen, and then also for
Ms. McCauley. Some of the deficiencies that we have talked
about today, how bad are they relative to other federal
agencies or departments, you know, the 12 years of material
weakness in IT security? Do you see that in those who manage
Medicaid, Medicare, Social Security records, for example? Is
there a comparable we can look at, and if so, how does the VA
do against that comparable?
Mr. Wilshusen. Let me start off before Ms. McCauley may
speak.
One is, as Ms. McCauley mentioned, VA has a material
weakness in its information security controls. Within the 24
CFO Act agencies, those agencies covered by the Chief Financial
Officers Act, and include the major departments and agencies
within the Federal Government, and there are 24 of them, seven
of the 24 also reported a material weakness in fiscal year
2013. We don't have the information yet for 2014, but for 2013,
seven. So VA was one of seven agencies out of 24 that had a
material weakness in its information security program.
At the same time, there were 11 other agencies that had
significant deficiencies in their information security
controls. GAO has been identifying information security as a
government-wide high-risk area since 1997. So it is a problem
that extends beyond VA and touches upon many of the federal
agencies within the Federal Government.
Mr. O'Rourke. How about--so you have the data for those two
years, do you have--and the government has been tracking it
since `97--do you have any that since 2002 have had this
problem sustained over that period of time?
Mr. Wilshusen. Right. That would be relatively few of the
agencies, the exact number I can get to you, I don't have that
right now. But I do know as an example, the Internal Revenue
Service was one agency for which we have conducted the audit on
an annual basis and identified it having a material weakness
for a number of years. But over the last couple years, it made
strides in improving security to where we were able to upgrade
it to a significant deficiency.
Mr. O'Rourke. Great. And, Ms. McCauley, I don't know if you
have anything to add. I guess I am trying to find some context
to understand how VA is doing relative to other large agencies
or departments that may have had similar problems. Are they
reacting as quickly, more quickly, more slowly? How are they
doing?
Ms. McCauley. I really can't comment on that. In the OIG we
have purview of just the Department of Veterans' Affairs, their
information security program, and we haven't taken the
comparative look and really--the GAO is in a better position to
do that because they do the work government-wide.
Mr. O'Rourke. Right. So maybe from the GAO it would be
great to get----
Mr. Wilshusen. Sure. And just as another metric, if you
will. For fiscal year 2013, 21 out of the 24 agencies had their
Office of Inspectors General designate that agency as having a
major management challenge in information security. So it is an
issue that extends to most of the federal agencies within the
Federal Government.
Mr. O'Rourke. And for the two of you, the title of today's
hearing is VA's Longstanding Information Security Weaknesses
are Increasing Patient Wait Times and Allowing Extensive Data
Manipulation; is that a fact?
Mr. Wilshusen. We did not look at the patient wait issue.
As far as that is concerned, it relates primarily to VistA and
we didn't look at that as part of our review.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay. Did the IG look at that?
Ms. McCauley. We looked at the VistA system just as part of
the wait times review. And the issues that we found were mainly
related to the data integrity because of the use of unofficial
wait lists, and also the issue of the audit logs turned off.
But apart from that, we have not taken the look that would be
needed to identify any kind of other information security
deficiencies.
Mr. O'Rourke. And based on Mr. Warren's responses today to
your findings and to questions from the committee, do you have
any ongoing concerns about the level of urgency and attention
that VA is giving to the concerns that you have raised, the
deficiencies that you have outlined?
Ms. McCauley. The deficiencies with regard to the material
weakness?
Mr. O'Rourke. Correct. From his answers today and responses
taken so far, do you have any ongoing concerns?
Ms. McCauley. Well, the ongoing concern is that from year
to year we continue to issue recommendations for improvement
and many of these recommendations just continue to carry
forward. Of the 35 recommendations from last year, most again
will carry forward into the report for fiscal year 2014, and we
continue to see the deficiencies across all of the control
area. So, yes, we have a concern in not seeing the numbers go
down as a result of our scanning.
Mr. Wilshusen. And if I may just add with respect to our
report? As I mentioned earlier, we had eight recommendations,
to which VA agreed with all eight. But in their responses to
two of our recommendations they did not seem to directly
address the actions that we had recommended. One was to apply
missing security patches. In its response to that
recommendation, VA talked about its monthly scans, which are of
course a critical control. But the bottom line is once they
identify those patches, they need to apply them.
And then our other recommendation with respect to
identifying the actions, priorities and milestones for tasks
related to improving their vulnerability remediation process,
they really didn't address the priorities that they were to
establish.
Mr. O'Rourke. So unfortunately, and returning the time back
to the Chair, it sounds like we may be here next year talking
about these same issues.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Well, why aren't we implementing these
recommendations, sir? And quickly, just very brief, because I
want to get to Ms. Walorski.
Mr. Warren. We are--and, again, we are implementing the
recommendations. It is a question of whether the auditor
believes that we have made enough progress over enough time for
us to receive, if you will, credit for the work done. One of
the challenges--and we have a very good relationship and the
very good relationship is we have honest dialogue, what the
auditor has seen and what we are doing, what fits, what doesn't
fit.
The Chairman. Okay, very good.
You are recognized, Ms. Walorski, for five minutes.
Ms. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just think it is clear after almost two hours of
testimony that the findings presented here just continue to
reinforce the fact, and I guess Mr. O'Rourke's fact as well,
that the personal information of millions of veterans still
remains at risk. And to associate myself with your comment as
well, I would like to encourage my colleagues to support my
bill, H.R. 4370, that we have talked about in here before. The
bill is based on a federal industry best practices that
establishes an explicit plan of action to resolve VA's numerous
IT security weaknesses.
With that, Mr. Warren, phishing represented almost 70
percent of the total incidents reported to the U.S. Computer
Emergency Readiness Team in fiscal year 2013, but the VA
reported only one phishing incident throughout the entire year
and yet there were almost 1600 malicious code incidents
reported. That appears to be a striking imbalance. Given that
the goal of phishing is to deliver malware to the recipient, is
this where the high number of--high volume of malicious codes
are coming from?
Mr. Warren. I can't speak to other organizations. I will go
back and confirm that number just to make sure that what is
reported is correct. So I will come back with the actual number
for 2013.
But there are two things that the VA is different with
respect to the other organizations reported. We are the first
department that turned on Einstein 3, and Einstein 3 is the
latest that Homeland Security has brought to the table, and it
blocks most of those phishing and other malicious attempts out
of the email stream before it even gets to us. So there is a
lot of work that takes place outside.
We also have very complex systems at our boundary as well,
where we are picking those out and we are stopping them. We
stop more than 80 percent of the emails that come to our
boundary before they even get to a desktop.
So there is a lot of things that we have put in place as
part of our continuous monitoring, as part of our defense in
depth, that tries to stop those things from getting to us, so
the individual doesn't make that mistake of clicking on a link.
Ms. Walorski. Can you elaborate on a question that was
asked earlier about moving forward on this issue of encryption
on medical devices?
Mr. Warren. The encryption on medical devices, it is a hard
challenge for us and it starts with how the FDA certifies
medical devices. And a lot of, I believe, new rule making took
place in the last year, where prior to that rule making most
vendors believed that when their medical device was certified
or licensed no changes could be made to it, no encryption, no
patching, nothing. And so we have had to actually move those
devices into an isolation architecture. One of the things that
the audit team has pointed out for us, we need to do better
there, and there is a major effort this coming year to tighten
it up.
So we actually now work with manufacturers. There is
actually a command center in Atlanta that HHS runs where we
have our employees embedded with HHS and the Defense Health
service dealing with medical devices. How can you secure them?
Because it is an area of concern for the medical industry.
Ms. Walorski. And it has been pretty well--I think it has
been pretty well documented today by both the OIG and the GAO
representatives being here to a question that was asked earlier
about this issue of foreign entities potentially having access
to our domain controller. How long would you estimate, Mr.
Warren, it will take to put the patches and the different types
of security links into the system that will prohibit a foreign
entity from being able to access the system, how long will it
take?
Mr. Warren. So every day I get a new list of things to
patch. So----
Ms. Walorski. But how long will it be based upon----
Mr. Warren. We will never be patched, we will never be
patched. As an example, on Tuesday Microsoft released a patch
for something that has been in existence for 20 years. So every
day industry is finding new ways that things can be exploited.
Ms. Walorski. If we will never be patched, how will we ever
secure and have a vulnerable system to protect our veterans'
personal information, and how will we ever connect to a DoD
computer system if ours on the VA side is so vulnerable that we
would suddenly have a tunnel of potential foreign entities
right into the DoD system?
Mr. Warren. So patching, ma'am, is one part of a complex
set of tools.
Ms. Walorski. But you just said we will never be secure.
Mr. Warren. So patching is one piece, so patching is one
piece of defending systems.
Ms. Walorski. I understand, but you are the expert. You
patch, you siphon, you do all these things, how long is it
going to take to have the security of knowing that these domain
controllers cannot be attacked and infiltrated by a foreign
entity?
Mr. Warren. I believe----
Ms. Walorski. Because that opens the door to will we ever
connect with DoD.
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am. I believe, based upon what the team
has briefed me on and the third-party Mandiant that has come in
and looked at our domain controllers, that has happened today
and prior to today. Those domain controllers are secured, and
we continue to secure them and we continue to monitor them.
Ms. Walorski. So back to your comment that we will never be
secure. What will we never be secure on, our veterans'
information?
Mr. Warren. If I could clarify, ma'am?
Ms. Walorski. Sure.
Mr. Warren. I said things would not always be patched,
because patching of vulnerabilities is one part of a spectrum
of things that we need to do.
Ms. Walorski. So in your opinion today, you are really
disagreeing with these two here. You are basically saying, you
just said, that the domain controllers are safe and they cannot
be encrypted, they cannot be corrupted by a foreign entity?
Mr. Warren. The report we have received, and we brought in
a third party to look at it and we will bring that report up to
the committee and the staff, is they are seeing nothing on the
domain controllers that causes them to believe that they are
compromised. So I believe we have got that locked down.
With respect to patching, with respect to information
protection, there is a whole host of things that you do to try
and protect the enterprise; not just technical stuff, but
also----
Ms. Walorski. Are the veterans' personal information in my
district safe and secure today? 57,000 in the State of Indiana,
are they secure?
Mr. Warren. Ma'am, my data is in there. I will take the----
Ms. Walorski. You are not in my district. Are the 57,000
veterans in my district secure today?
Mr. Warren. I believe it is, ma'am, I believe it is. I
believe----
Ms. Walorski. Thank you.
I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Walz, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I too would like to thank the ranking member for his
service, not just as a member of this committee and as a leader
and a mentor, but as a veteran. I feel I was well served by his
leadership. So thank you, Mr. Michaud.
I am really interested, I am going to go with Ms. Burnette
in this over the horizon. I want to thank all of you for your
service, but the one thing I would say--and I was one of those,
as I said here, I was one of those 20 million veterans back in
May, 2006 in the data breach when the laptop was lost, you came
here. And then I still remember the day, it was a beautiful
fall day, it was September 26th, 2007. Mr. Wilshusen, you were
sitting right in that seat and I was sitting right in this
seat, so this is deja vu.
And I made the comment to Ms. Melvin, your associate, and I
said, ``I feel that the issue here is more about culture of the
VA and I am convinced that it is central before we can move
forward to really understand the IT implications.''
Ms. Melvin said, ``I would agree with you, definitely key
to this is cultural transformation that's necessary, along with
the actual implementation of new processes.''
I'm reading from the transcript of that day in this
hearing, in this room.
Mr. Wilshusen, you came forward then and said, ``And I
would just add that from an information security perspective
that the tone at the top has increased significantly with
regard to taking corrective actions to implement effective
security controls since that May 2006 data breach. I think it
was a watershed event, which really caused and highlighted the
need for strong information security that is coming.''
And at the end of mine I said, ``Great, I look forward to
that. And I yield back.''
Seven years and here we are. Was it still a watershed
event?
Mr. Wilshusen. In terms of recognition and awareness of the
need to detect and report on security incidents that have been
detected, I would say yes.
At that time, just to give you an example, the number of
incidents that were reported to U.S. CERT in fiscal year 2005-
2006 was about I think 5,500 or so. This past year, it was over
70,000. And so the number of incidents that have been reported
by agencies has increased significantly. Now, that can be for a
number of reasons. One, better reporting, better detection on
the part of agencies, the understanding of the need to report--
--
Mr. Walz. When I go through this whole transcript, some of
those fundamental issues have still not been corrected even
though they were pointed out on that day.
Mr. Wilshusen. Right, I would agree with that. But in terms
of being----
Mr. Walz. How do you explain that, Mr. Warren? That
suggestions were made, the OIG was here, Ms. Melvin was here,
Mr. Wilshusen was here, they suggested some of these, they
still have not been implemented.
Mr. Warren. So the cultural changes or the technical
changes?
Mr. Walz. Some of the technical, and I would argue the
cultural is certainly somewhat more subjective, but it gets
back to my central goal. You brought up a great point and I
think you are right, Mr. Warren, we can't limp from incident to
incident to incident, it has got to be the over-the-horizon
vision on this. I am still looking how this is all going to fit
in a longitudinal transformational plan, because at that time
what you were here for too was asking for more money, which you
yourself said on that day in 2007, ``We cancelled that program
that we were asking money for in 2009.''
Mr. Warren. So to the cultural question, the change started
as a watershed event. The fact that at that point when it
happened, IT was something that was buried in all the programs.
And with the help of this committee, we moved away from
something in the shadows to a single organization. It took
until 2009 where we actually moved out on the centralization.
We are recognizing that you have got to manage this as a
business enabler, which includes protecting the veterans'
information.
From there, we have moved to the point when we talked about
CRISP, this Continuous Readiness and Information Protection,
was that next level, which is it is not an IT thing. Too often
we say, yeah, the IT folks have got it. It is about how people
think about the data, how they manage the data and how they
protect the data. Over 90 percent of our incidents deal with
people, they deal with folks doing bad things. Taking stuff out
of systems, leaving it on paper----
Mr. Walz. That is cultural.
Mr. Warren [continuing]. Or throwing it away. That is
cultural and we focus on that. And what has really been key
with CRISP, that is another major step for us, leadership. Not
IT leadership, but the deputy secretary, the secretary, the
under secretaries all heard, and it was said from the
leadership down, this is key to us. And so this communication
about what it is and why it is.
This report that I talked about that comes out monthly,
that is a daily report that goes out to all of the VA
leadership of every incident where veterans' data was put at
risk. They have membership on this data breach team. So this it
happens out there and we don't worry about it has gone away.
Folks are aware of it and they understand what we need to do
about it.
Mr. Walz. How different will this hearing be in 2021 on
this issue?
Mr. Warren. I will tell you, sir----
Mr. Walz. Competent.
Mr. Warren [continuing]. I drive hard and one of the
things, I drag my folks through a knothole starting in April,
four nights a week. Where are we on? And when I say night, 6
o'clock every night. And we shut it down in the end August, as
we are waiting for the audit results, we are starting that back
up again as we get prepared for the audit team. And it is
constant attention, constant reinforcement, as well as you all
support from a resourcing standpoint and the mouthpiece of this
is important, because it is your data, it is my data, it is our
family's data, and it is key to getting quality----
Mr. Walz. I couldn't agree more. I just think it becomes
harder and harder and harder, especially on the resourcing, to
make the case. I think you understand that----
Mr. Warren. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walz [continuing]. And that is going to be the
challenge.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Brown, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and also
ranking member. I want to thank you for your leadership and
keeping this committee bipartisan, what has been the 22 years I
have been here.
And I also want to say that when I came to this committee
the main worry veterans was having was how to reconstruct their
files for benefits, because much of it was lost in St. Louis
fire. When we had Katrina, many of the veterans had real
problems trying to get their records, because it was in a
region and they could not access to other regions.
So my question, as we move forward we need to make sure
that, whether it is manmade or whether it is outside sources,
that we are able to get that information for the veterans as we
balance security and information.
Mr. Warren, thank you for your service, and can you tell me
how we are integrating that into the system?
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am. And to make a connection, my
father's records were lost in that St. Louis fire. So before I
even came to the VA, I was aware of how dramatic and traumatic
that event was for many, many veterans.
But with respect to bringing the information over so we can
make those benefits determinations, we look at that as two
major components. The first one, we have talked about this
before in terms of VBMS, moving away from a paper manual
process to an automated tool that is delivering and the
organization is using to meet the commitment we have made for
2015. We have moved from piles of paper to 95 percent, over 95
percent of those records are in electrons.
Ms. Brown. Just one quick question. But with Katrina, we
could not get those records.
Mr. Warren. So with Katrina, on the benefits side, you are
correct. But what was interesting on the health side, within 24
hours those medical records in VistA were available for the
folks who left the area when they came to other medical
locations. VistA was up, their data was there, and they were
able to get care based upon that.
So we have been applying that knowledge into how do we do
it on the benefits side. The first part is, get the tool in
place that allows us to move away from paper. The second piece
is the partnership with DoD in terms of moving that single
treatment record over. Traumatic, dramatic, the fact that as of
1 January, any service member who left service as of 1 January,
the DoD is sending over that single treatment record with the
certification on top of it. It allows us to move forward and
rate those claims. We are working with them to move back to get
the folks who left prior to 1 January. That is going to be a
heavy lift, the challenge is in the reserve component and the
guard component where the data is not in one place.
So it is an area we focused on. I know Under Secretary
Hickey spends a lot of time there. I know the deputy and the
secretary also are very interested in making sure we get what
is due to our veterans and part of that benefits piece is a key
one.
Ms. Brown. We had several meetings, not just with VA, but
with the banking community, because the question keeps coming
up about the foreign attacking the system, they have attacked
the banking system. I got a call from my bank saying someone
was charging my card in China. So it is clearly a problem. What
are we doing as we coordinate these efforts? It is not just the
VA, it is the entire system.
Mr. Warren. Great question, ma'am. And one of the things--
and I would limit, because I am focused on how do I protect the
veterans' data, and that is my fisc (?) in terms of--and my
team's--is how do we protect inward. But we also, with our
partnership with Homeland Security, we share with them all our
data feeds. All right? So what we see, what gets through their
defenses, how we respond to them, that gets to them. They also
send the same to us. But teaming in terms of how do we protect
the homeland, I would say that is probably the next area,
beyond my scope and charge, but my hope is somebody is going to
take that on.
Ms. Brown. I think that is pretty much all of my questions,
most of them was answered prior to. But I want to again thank
you for your service. And I think you have been in this
position since 2007?
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. It is refreshing.
Mr. Warren. I am here to stay the course, I have got a
commitment.
Ms. Brown. Last thing. People keep talking, my colleagues,
about the recommendations. And recommendations are very
important and I guess you have to prioritize those
recommendations. My question pertains to you all have made a
lot of progress and I don't know whether or not you all have
emphasized--some of those issues are going to be reoccurring,
but emphasized the improvement that has been made in the VA
system, and I would like for you all to give them a shout out
for what they are doing for the people back home just
listening.
Mr. Warren. Ma'am, I really appreciate the opportunity to
talk about the great work that my employees, that our employees
are doing. We are the first department that has continuous
monitoring in place and it is as a result of what they have
done. We are the first department that brought Einstein on
board in terms of those perimeters. The audit team has
recognized where we have done improvements. But with that and
with their dedication, and not just on the security side but
making sure we are enabling that delivery of benefits and
services, we know we have more to do. And we are committed to
doing that, because 56 percent of my employees are in the same
place I am, they are veterans. It is their data that they are
protecting, it is their benefits and services that they are
delivering to the buddies, their colleagues.
And so I appreciate their commitment and dedication every
day, and I am honored to serve as their leader. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
Can the IG answer that question also?
The Chairman. Yeah, absolutely.
Ms. Brown. All right. Would you, please?
Ms. McCauley. Could you repeat the question again?
Ms. Brown. Would you discuss the improvements that the VA
has made? And, you know, you have talked about some of the
issues will be back next year. Well, we have the same issues
every year on every committee, whether it is--so can you give a
shout out for the people that is listening to show the
improvements that the VA have made over this period?
Ms. McCauley. Certainly. Yes, as we conduct our FISMA
assessments every year, we do see incremental improvement, and
especially with the inception of CRISP in 2012. And as I
mentioned earlier, we are seeing the continuous monitoring and
the predictive scanning, and the improved training and testing
of contingency plans and what have you. We know that the teams
are working hard and we are continuing the dialogue with the
OI&T and the IT professionals to ensure that they understand
what requirements, the criteria that we are using to measure
their progress by. And we had that discussion just the other
day to ensure that we continue to talk about that and make sure
we are all clear in terms of the demonstrated progress, but
also the substantiating documentation that is needed.
Ms. Brown. It seems to me that a lot of the problems
pertain to training and I hope in your request you are asking
for the money for training, Mr. Warren, because a lot of the
problems, people taking things home, leaving information out,
is just--like you say, you constantly have to remind them----
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown [continuing]. Of their responsibilities.
Mr. Warren. It is a key component of making sure that
veterans' data is protected and we meet our stewardship
obligations.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
With the consent of the ranking member and myself, counsel
is permitted to ask questions. So, without objection, so
ordered.
We are going to start with the majority counsel. You are
recognized, sir.
Mr. Hannel. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Warren, as you have been testifying in the last 20
minutes, one of those outstanding IT employees of yours has
emailed me as a whistleblower, and he has provided a number of
emails. And in his emails it shows where he has been trying to
get a problem addressed and his supervisors have basically shut
him down. This is not speculation, I have looked at the emails.
My question to you is this. Based on what he is sharing
with us, with me, he has said that he recently mitigated 72,000
accounts that were not picked up by VA's audit tool. Of course,
these 72,000 accounts were for employees who have left the VA.
These accounts were never closed, locked out, secured, nothing,
they remained open. So these 72,000 former VA employees could
access VA's network for an extensive period of time. So my
question is how do you address this? How do you stop this? And
because he has been trying to deal with this issue and he has
been shut down by his supervisors, how do you deal with that?
Mr. Warren. So the first thing. For the employee, thank you
for coming forward. And if they are willing--all employees who
come forward with issues like that, so I take it outside of the
leadership chain, so they feel that they are getting the
support they need, I send them to my chief of staff, because
she is not in the chain for any of them. And we normally do
fact finding or AIBs, if it raises to that level. So if he is
willing to bring that information forward. I find it
problematic that he has been trying to solve something and his
chain did not support him. So if he is willing to do that or if
you are willing to share--again, if the employee is
uncomfortable--want to take that, want to take the appropriate
action. It is inappropriate for anybody in the chain not to
support individuals doing the right thing. And so if the
employee is willing to come forward, send me an email,

[email protected]
, and I will personally take that on.
Mr. Hannel. I will work with him and I will also--Mr.
Wilshusen, I saw you were curious of those emails, I will share
those with you as well.
Mr. Wilshusen. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Now I would like to recognize the minority counsel to ask
questions.
Mr. Tucker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no further
questions.
The Chairman. All right, very good.
I have one question and Ms. Brown, do you have any other
questions?
Ms. Brown. No.
The Chairman. Mr. Walz, do you have questions?
Mr. Walz. No, thank you.
The Chairman. Okay.
Ms. Brown. I would like to see the email also----
The Chairman. Absolutely.
Ms. Brown [continuing]. Because----
Mr. Wilshusen. Since it has been referenced.
Ms. Brown. Yeah, since it has been referenced, I would like
to see it.
The Chairman. Absolutely, absolutely.
One question. And it appears that almost--and, Mr. Walz, if
you want to follow up with this, please don't hesitate. It
appears that almost half of the cyber incidents reported came
from just two government agencies, the VA and HHS. VA had the
highest number of incidents reported overall and the highest
number of malware incidents reported. It is apparent that the
healthcare data has become and it has become a significant
target of attackers. Healthcare data is 10 to 20 times more
valuable now on the black market than credit card data.
Unbelievable.
So again I want to ask the question, but again we don't
want to be here next year discussing the same topics, and I
know Mr. Walz might want to add something. The question is what
is VA doing to lower these numbers systematically? And I will
ask Mr. Warren first.
Mr. Warren. Thank you for that question, because it
actually allows me to do a shout out to the VA employees,
because they do report. And we have seen when we look
comparatively for the rest of the Federal Government, given
that we are under the same threats, that if you do the
calculation of per head we report within the one hour. In fact,
U.S. CERT has said, stop telling us, you are reporting too
much, because we make sure we follow the letter of the law with
reporting.
The other big change that we are seeing is when we
converted to PIV cards, our increase in reporting as a result
of PIV cards, that is actually a security incident. And so our
year-to-year increase has been a result of since everybody has
gone to a PIV card, 360,000 of them, and we lose about a
hundred of them a month, and when you start adding those up,
that is a lot of incidents that are being reported.
So lots of good reporting. But with those numbers, one of
the things that I have high confidence in because of the things
that the team has put in place is that we are able to report
them, and we are able to report them because we are seeing
them, because we are containing them, and because we are
eradicating them.
The Chairman. What are we going to do about the numbers,
the incidents?
Mr. Warren. Sir, the numbers will continue to go up. The
threat environment, not just to the VA, but other departments,
keeps increasing. No department can stop the threat coming from
the outside. So what we have to do is make sure we have defense
in depth, to make sure we have teamed with Homeland Security
and they are using the signatures from the classified world to
help protect us.
The Chairman. If there are no further questions--do you
have anything to add, Ms. Brown?
Ms. Brown. No, I just want him----
The Chairman. Please, thank you.
Ms. Brown. He mentioned the Homeland Security program that
you have in place, can you go through that again quickly?
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am. There is a program called Einstein
3, it is actually--it has been over multiple years as they have
brought new protections on. And what it does, it is a two-part
process. The first piece is departments move all of your
traffic into control points. We have four control points. And
at the control points, they use very technical and specialized
equipment to look at all the traffic coming over the boundary.
So we count on them, if you will, to have our back, because
they have got our outer perimeter, and they are able to use
stuff out of the defense world and the classified world that we
would never see to help protect us. It is an area where they
are able to add all of their knowledge in to make sure that we
don't have to deal with that. That is where the strength in
numbers is really working for us and we really appreciate their
support.
Ms. Brown. And so you stop over 80 percent of the--before
it gets to the VA?
Mr. Warren. Yes, ma'am. Over 80 percent of our emails never
make it to an employee's desktop. And if I just do the numbers,
is we stopped last month 82 million emails, we stopped them at
the perimeter, because there was something suspicious about
them. We stopped 206 million pieces of malware, 206 million
pieces of malware in the month of October, before it even got
to our employees' desktop.
The Chairman. Okay. I would like to recognize the ranking--
actually, the majority counsel for a question.
Mr. Hannel. One last question, Ms. McCauley. Einstein only
identifies known profiles; is that correct?
Ms. McCauley. I cannot address that question, I would like
to state that for the record.
Mr. Hannel. Mr. Wilshusen, do you know?
Mr. Wilshusen. That would be correct. We are actually
conducting an audit of Einstein at this point, our work is
still ongoing. But just for Einstein itself, it needs to know,
it identifies specific information that is known. If there is
malicious software that is not yet known, such as zero days, it
is likely that Einstein may not include it.
Mr. Hannel. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, thank you very much.
If there are no further questions. Again, I thank the
witnesses and the audience for your patience, and thanks for
this conversation today. And what I will do is I will adjourn
the hearing. Thank you.
(Whereupon, at 3:45 p.m., the committee was adjourned.)

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of Chairman Jeff Miller

The Committee will come to order.
Good afternoon everybody. I want to welcome you to today's Full
Committee hearing.
As our hearings this summer revealed, data manipulation had become
an accepted practice at many facilities within VA. Moving forward with
our investigation, it has become clear that a common thread in these
scandals continues to be weaknesses within VA's Office of Information &
Technology (OIT) and the systems for which they are responsible.
For example, Committee investigators discovered VA briefing
documents that reveal VA's medical information system, VISTA, allows
for data manipulation. This internal briefing, given in April 2013 to
senior VA officials, including VA's Chief Information Officer,
described threats posed by anonymous user access to VISTA-- the
automated system that supports the day-to-day functions of VA's network
of hospitals.
We continue to receive evidence from credible whistleblowers that
at some sites there are no restrictions imposed on users and because
their audit controls are not turned `on', VA cannot determine who or
when someone had access to patients' data within VISTA. Further, we
have found that most VA facilities do not have audit policy settings
configured and no one is assigned to monitor the audit logs necessary
for determining individual accountability, reconstructing security
events, and detecting intruders. To date, these issues remain
unresolved in VA's network and according to GAO, VA's Network Security
Operations Center, who provide continuous, around-the-clock monitoring
of VA's network, did not have access to the system logs at VA's data
centers which inhibited its visibility across VA networks and ability
to confirm whether a security incident was fully contained and
eradicated.
Because these audit controls are oftentimes inactive, employees and
leadership are accessing veteran patient records against regulations
and current law, including medical privacy rights under HIPAA. In
addition, VA whistleblowers have confirmed that unauthorized access to
employees' files is a common occurrence, but the office of information
and technology has yet to prevent unauthorized access to employee
files. Furthermore, these deficiencies could allow for the creation of
bogus claims that authorize fraudulent payments to non-existing
veterans as we showed VA during a member's brief last year.
In addition, during the phoenix wait time scandal, veterans who had
been identified as ``deceased'' on the electronic wait list were
resurrected to appear as though they were ``alive''. When this practice
was revealed by us to the OIG, we were told that it was common because
a death certificate had not been filed; therefore, the veteran had to
be listed as ``alive'' until proven deceased. However, as
whistleblowers described, the death certificate requirement was a newer
policy that began December 17th, 2013, only after this matter was
reported to VA's inspector general.
Other whistleblowers have reported that VA's system provides
unauthorized access and modification of patient data because of the
lack of a date and time stamp that would indicate when a record was
modified and by whom.
VA's inspector general has already substantiated that VA employees
were manipulating data by ``zeroing out'' the number of days for
awaiting appointments. In truth, according to our evidence, the current
it system is easy to manipulate and anyone can make a patient's wait
time zero at any given moment to hide scheduling and patient backlog
issues. The ability for such manipulation in the system requires
immediate attention, but the Office of Information and Technology has
yet to address it.
I should add that VA's Technology Office has greatly contributed to
the problems of data manipulation by not addressing the long standing
issues we have repeatedly brought to their attention, and these
problems--and more--according to the Inspector General, have remained a
material weakness for the 16th consecutive year.
These failures are not because of a lack of resources, as some VA
senior officials want us to believe. Within the past decade, congress
has provided over 28 billion dollars to VA's Office of Information and
Technology to ensure its goals and actions are aligned with and driving
the strategic goals of the agency. Given the availability of resources,
it is apparent that this office's lack of success and repeated
underperformance is a leadership failure.
Let me be clear, the failures aren't just a VA problem--they are a
veterans problem. If a veteran cannot get access to healthcare because
his or her eligibility claim is stuck--or because his or her claim is
altered--or because the appointment has been altered, the veteran is
prevented from obtaining healthcare and their hard earned benefits.
Regrettably, I am concerned that VA lacks the technological foundation
necessary to prevent these actions from reoccurring.
I thank you all once again for being here this afternoon.
With that, I now yield to Ranking Member Michaud for any opening
remarks he may have.

Prepared Statement of Mr. Stephen Warren

Introduction

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Information Security.

Scheduling

Before discussing how VA's information security posture has
improved over the past year, it is important to make a distinction
between access to care and VA's information technology (IT) security
efforts.
To my knowledge, there have been no indications that unauthorized
individuals accessed the software; rather, some authorized users
allegedly made inappropriate changes. Thus, there is no causal
relationship between alleged internal data manipulation by certain VA
employees and findings in VA's Office of Inspector General (OIG)
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) audit. As recently
pointed out in OIG's recent report the limitations of the software
underlying the scheduling system is secondary to the need for
additional resources to actually schedule--doctors, nurses, and other
health professionals; physical space; and appropriately trained
administrative support personnel.
The limitations of the scheduling system and associated practices
are being addressed. Resourcing recommendations for IT investments are
made by each of the Administrations (Veterans Health Administration
(VHA), Veterans Benefits Administration, and the National Cemetery
Administration) based on business priorities. VHA and the Office of
Information and Technology (OIT) are working together to overhaul the
outdated scheduling system and to bring an innovative scheduling
program into VA's current electronic health record system--VistA.
Empowering employees with the most useful and effective technology is
key to transforming VHA. In the coming weeks, VA will release a Request
For Proposal for acquiring new scheduling software, since the existing
software was outdated and difficult to use. VA expects an interim
milestone towards this acquisition in spring 2015. Through this
process, VA held an Industry Day and engaged with VSOs for their input
on what kind of a system would be best for Veterans.
The technology underlying the current scheduling system used by VA
medical facilities is cumbersome and outdated. In addition, there is no
audit capability in the scheduling application that will indicate
whether users are manipulating data to meet wait time expectations
versus making legitimate changes to appointment information. On May 12,
2014, as part of its investigation, the Office of the Inspector General
(OIG) asked VA to enable audit controls on four Veterans Health
Information Systems and Technology Architecture (VistA) files related
to waiting lists. Once this request was received, VA immediately turned
the auditing on for the requested items.
VA's current electronic health record, VistA, already has access
and audit capabilities. VA is evolving its existing VistA system to
meet or exceed all Federal information assurance requirements including
the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA), the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Security
Rule, applicable National Institute of Standards and Technology special
publications, and Federal Identity, Access and Credential Management
policies.

Progress Made in Information Security

VA employs an extensive, layered, defense-in-depth strategy to
protect the security and confidentiality of VA information and
information systems and we continue to make great strides to keep up
with ever-evolving threats. We have established appropriate technical,
physical, and administrative safeguards to help ensure the security and
confidentiality of Veteran records. Since the June 4, 2013, hearing
before the House Veterans Affairs Committee's subcommittee for
Oversight and Investigations, we have acquired new monitoring
capabilities, increased desktop security, and enhanced our speed in
detecting and combating challenges.
Before we activate systems within our network, and before any
Veteran's information is put into those systems, we take steps that
ensure the information is protected to the best of our ability. The
process for issuing formal approval to operate systems on VA's
network--known as ``Authorities to Operate (ATO)''--has greatly
improved in the last year. We have migrated from a manual, point-in-
time, paper process to an electronic, automated, continuous monitoring
capability with the help of the newly implemented Governance, Risk, and
Compliance (GRC) tool, which went live in August 2013. We are the first
(and the largest) cabinet level government agency to have moved to
continuous monitoring. This new capability allows VA to detect
vulnerabilities early and respond to threats rapidly.
The GRC tool is not the only new addition to VA's security
infrastructure. VA has brought another more refined and powerful
security tool into its enterprise. Working with our Federal partners,
such as the Department of Homeland Security, we were the first cabinet
level agency to implement Einstein 3, as well as the Office of
Management and Budget's Trusted Internet Connection initiative.
Numerous industry-standard scanning tools, firewalls, network and host
intrusion prevention systems, and non-medical desktop and laptop
encryption and anti-virus services protect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of our data.
As an organization of more than 300,000 employees, however, our
biggest vulnerability is not technical. Physical exposure of VA data is
the most significant risk facing our information security posture. Over
98 percent of the sensitive data exposure at VA is due to paper or
human error-based incidents. Network and system safeguards are not
technical absolutes--we must constantly remain vigilant in preventing
human error-such as an employee clicking a phishing link, mis-mailing a
sensitive record, or losing an electronic device.
VA is addressing its ongoing challenge of protecting Veteran
information on paper by focusing on our employees. Because VA employees
are the first line of defense when it comes to information protection,
VA is working to improve employee awareness of information protection
through training and other measures. VA promotes an environment where
all employee's and contractor's actions reflect the importance of
information security accountability.
In addition, every VA employee, contractor, and volunteer is
required to sign a ``Rules of Behavior'' statement that sets
expectations and makes clear that users are accountable for the
protection of sensitive information. Every employee, contractor, and
volunteer is also required to take an annual Information Security and
Privacy Training. System access is terminated if individuals are
delinquent. If a security or privacy incident occurs involving an
employee or group of employees, VA employs recovery activities that
include re-training of those involved. In addition, VA runs an annual
Information Security and Privacy Awareness Week and sends out monthly
messages reminding employees about security and privacy best practices.
Educating our workforce is an ongoing process that VA takes very
seriously.
The Department has established a rigorous data breach notification
process. Once a reported incident is evaluated by the Incident
Resolution Team, it is forwarded to the Data Breach Core Team (DBCT).
The DBCT performs a risk analysis on all reported data breach incidents
and when they determine a potential breach may have occurred and may
pose a reasonable risk of harm to the affected individuals, they
recommend that those individuals be notified and, if appropriate,
offered free enrollment in a credit monitoring service to mitigate any
risk of identity theft or improper use of their information. This
robust review process is complemented by the monthly posting on VA's
Web site of notifications of any data breaches, and this material is
also provided to Congress through VA's quarterly data breach reports.

FISMA

FISMA provides a comprehensive framework for ensuring the
effectiveness of information security controls over information
resources that support Federal operations and assets. OIG conducts
annual FISMA audits of the agency's information security program. VA
appreciates OIG's time and effort conducting its annual FISMA report,
and appreciates that OIG finds VA's comments and corrective action
plans as responsive to its recommendations. Although much work remains,
VA has made significant improvements in the last few years and strives
to meet the highest standards in protecting sensitive information. We
are constantly and continuously improving our information security
posture so that we may be the best possible stewards of Veteran
information.

Federal Information System Controls Audit Manual (FISCAM)

The Government Accountability Office FISCAM is designated to be
used during financial and performance audits and may result in the
identification of material weaknesses. The most recent FISCAM audit
review reflects that we have closed out many of the observations from
prior years, and are making considerable improvements each year. In a
constantly changing threat landscape, we continue to evolve.
The number of FISCAM findings has decreased 29 percent since fiscal
year 2011. Highlights of VA's accomplishments in this area include:

VA has resolved its findings on contingency planning,
as well as segregation of duties.

VA reduced the amount of time needed to complete a
scan of the entire enterprise from approximately 1 year to
approximately 1 month.

VA completed two-factor authentication for system
administrators.

VA strengthened passwords critical to accessing
systems.

OIG noted our compliance in the above areas, and now looks to us to
maintain consistency across the enterprise. VA leadership remains
engaged in order to remediate the recommendations made by OIG.

Conclusion

Over the past year, VA has made demonstrable progress improving
upon its defense-in-depth strategy to protect Veteran information and
VA systems. VA has made progress in FISMA audits, in the tools we use
to combat evolving cybersecurity threats, and in securing the systems
our clinicians and employees use to serve Veterans. We continue to work
to address the challenges we face, including continued work to close
FISMA recommendations and better educating employees on handling
sensitive information on paper. We will continue to ensure our IT
systems, which are crucial to supporting our Veterans, are secure and
our employees are responsible as we protect the information of the
Veterans we serve.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
