- THE VALUE OF EDUCATION FOR VETERANS AT PUBLIC, PRIVATE AND FOR-PROFIT COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE VALUE OF EDUCATION FOR VETERANS AT PUBLIC, PRIVATE AND FOR-PROFIT
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY (EO)

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JUNE 20, 2013

__________

Serial No. 113-24

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

82-240                    WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            Minority Member
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              CORRINE BROWN, Florida
BILL FLORES, Texas                   MARK TAKANO, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               DINA TITUS, Nevada
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada               GLORIA NEGRETE MCLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana

Helen W. Tolar, Staff Director and Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY (EO)

BILL FLORES, Texas, Chairman

JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               Minority Member
PAUL COOK, California                JULIA BROWNLEY, California
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANN M. KIRKPATRICK, Arizona

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________

June 20, 2013

Page

The Value Of Education For Veterans At Public, Private And For-
Profit Colleges And Universities...............................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Bill Flores, Chairman, Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity
(EO)...........................................................     1
Prepared Statement of Hon. Flores............................    25
Hon. Mark Takano, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on
Economic Opportunity (EO)......................................     5
Prepared Statement of Hon. Takano............................    26

WITNESSES

Dr. Cynthia Azari, Ed.D., President, Riverside City College......     3
Prepared Statement of Dr. Azari..............................    26
Executive Summary of Dr. Azari...............................    29
Dr. Michael R. Smith, J.D., Ph.D., Vice Provost for Strategic
Academic Initiatives, University of Texas at El Paso...........     6
Prepared Statement of Dr. Smith..............................    29
Executive Summary of Dr. Smith...............................    32
Michael Dakduk, Executive Director, Student Veterans America
(SVA)..........................................................     8
Prepared Statement of Mr. Dakduk.............................    33
Executive Summary of Mr. Dakduk..............................    37
Hon. Steve Gunderson, President and CEO, The Association of
Private Sector Colleges and Universities (APSCU)...............    16
Prepared Statement of Mr. Gunderson..........................    38
Summary of Mr. Gunderson.....................................    43
Dr. Daniel J. Carey, Ph.D., President, Edgewood College, On
Behalf of: National Association of Independent Colleges and
Universities...................................................    17
Prepared Statement of Dr. Carey..............................    51
Executive Summary of Dr. Carey...............................    57
David Baime, Senior Vice President for Government Relations and
Policy Analysis, American Association of Community Colleges....    19
Prepared Statement of Mr. Baime..............................    57
Executive Summary of Mr. Baime...............................    60
MG Robert M. Worley, II, USAF (Ret.), Director, Education
Service, Veterans Benefit Administration, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, Prepared Statement 0nly......................    61

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD

The College Board................................................    64
The Reserve Officers Association.................................    71
The National Association of Veterans Program Administrators......    76
The Wounded Warrior Project......................................    76

THE VALUE OF EDUCATION FOR VETERANS AT PUBLIC, PRIVATE AND FOR-PROFIT
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

Thursday, June 20, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:30 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Bill Flores
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Flores, Takano, and Kirkpatrick.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN BILL FLORES

Mr. Flores. Good morning, and welcome to our oversight
hearing on, ``The Value of Education for Veterans in Public,
Private and For-Profit Colleges and Universities.''
We got a little bit of a disrupted schedule this morning. I
apologize. As you know, we had votes that started about 9:40
this morning. We just wrapped up a few minutes ago. Some people
are still making their way over from the floor to the hearing
room. I want to take a point of personal privilege for a moment
and introduce my wife Gina.
Gina, would you stand up.
She and I were going to celebrate our 35th anniversary on
Monday, and she was either going to have spend it apart or with
me, so she came up here with me.
Whenever Ranking Member Takano arrives, we will give him a
chance to make his comments, but in the interest of everybody's
time and patience, we are going to go ahead and move forward.
Also, we are going to have another round of votes called about
12:20. My suspicion is we won't have many people coming back
after that, but we will do our best. So let me begin.
There are many ways to define the word ``value.'' Merriam-
Webster's dictionary offers several ways, including, one, a
fair return or equivalent value in goods, services; two, money
for something exchanged; three, the monetary worth of
something; or four, the relative worth, utility, or importance.
All of those seem to fit the hearings that we are going to have
today, but to me, the relative worth, utility and importance
concept seems to best fit today's topic. That is because the
benefits we offer through the GI Bill expand career
opportunities relative to what is available without that
education or training.
In classic economic theory, the marginal utility of a good
or service, in this case, education, is the gain or loss from
an increase, or decrease, in the consumption of that good or
service, and as you can see from this first slide, there is
little doubt that increased levels of education generally
result in lower unemployment rates and higher wages.
Obviously, if the marginal utility of education is
generally positive, its importance to the beneficiary rises.
And beginning with the original WWII GI Bill, the relative
worth, utility and importance of the investment in veterans
education has historically translated into a positive outcome
for the participants and for society in general.
So, today, the question for us is whether the post-9/11 GI
Bill is meeting the goals of relative worth, utility and
importance as provided through the various sectors of the post-
secondary education industry. With that in mind, let's begin
with the costs that are shown in the next slide.
As you can see, there is a wide variation in the cost of
tuition and fees cross the various sectors of the education
industry, and those costs continue to escalate as shown on the
next slide. These show the value of education or the cost of
education as indexed to their relative cost, in the 1982-1983
time period, and as you can see, 4-year public education has
risen by a factor of about 3 and a half; public 2-year colleges
about 2.8; and private non-profit 4-year institutions about 267
percent.
So, the facts establish that there is a significant
financial utility to increased education, but the trends in
costs beg the question at what point, if any, will the average
American family no longer be able to take advantage of college
education opportunities?
Clearly, the data shows that public colleges and
universities have experienced the largest percentage increases
in cost, but they still remain highly cost-competitive with
other sectors. The private sector, both not-for-profit and for-
profit, they must offer values other than cost to compete for
the tuition dollar. I will leave it to them to present those
values during your testimony today.
I find the significant increase in enrollments in the for-
profit sector interesting. While roughly double the public
State resident tuition cost, non-profit tuition and fees are
about half the average published cost of the non-profit public
institutions. I realize the for-profit sector has come in for
criticism recently, but there is clearly a place for them in
the industry as exemplified by the rest of the industry's
adoption of many of the for-profit institution models like
satellite campuses, rolling enrollments, and online courses and
degree programs.
Regarding the potential criticism of the for-profit
institutions, I would note that there is plenty of oversight
and regulation of the education industry. For example, the VA,
the Consumer Federal Protection Bureau, the Federal Trade
Commission, the U.S. Department of Education, State attorneys
general, State licensing agencies, State departments of
education, State approving agencies and accrediting
associations all have the responsibility to police all sectors
of higher education. In fact, section 3696 of Title 38 requires
the VA and the FTC to enter into an agreement on investigating
allegations of unethical practices by any school, regardless of
the sector. I believe that requirement has been in place for
decades, and it is my understanding that interagency agreement
is not yet in place today.
The only conclusion I can draw is that multiple government
agencies at all levels have failed to monitor the education
industry and enforce the statutes and regulations now in place.
In closing, I hope that this will be a positive and
informative hearing that will explore the value of each sector
of our education industry, brings to--to the table.
Mr. Flores. Before I--well, we are not going to be able to
recognize the distinguished Member till he gets in, but before
we proceed, I would ask unanimous consent to enter testimony
from the College Board, the National Association of Veterans
Program Administrators, the Reserve Officers Association and
the Wounded Warrior Project in the hearing record.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Mr. Flores. I also understand that Mr. O'Rourke would like
to join us, and so I would ask unanimous consent for him to
join us at the dais.
Hearing no objection, that is so ordered.
With us today on the first panel is Dr. Michael Smith, from
the University of Texas, El Paso; Dr. Cynthia Azari, from
Riverside Community College; and Mr. Michael Dakduk, from the
Student Veterans of America.
I would like for you to join us at the table.
Mr. Flores. Dr. Azari was going to be introduced by Ranking
Member Takano, so we may have a little bit of a disruption when
we come back and introduce you.
That said, we are going to recognize you for 5 minutes at
this point.

[The prepared statement of Hon. Flores appears in the
Appendix]

STATEMENTS OF CYNTHIA AZARI, ED.D., PRESIDENT, RIVERSIDE CITY
COLLEGE; MICHAEL R. SMITH, J.D., PH.D., VICE PROVOST FOR
STRATEGIC ACADEMIC INITIATIVES, UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT EL PASO;
MICHAEL DAKDUK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, STUDENT VETERANS AMERICA,
SVA

STATEMENT OF CYNTHIA AZARI, ED.D.

Ms. Azari. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me today to testify today
regarding veteran services and programs at public colleges.
My name is Cynthia Azari. I am president of Riverside City
College, which is located in the Inland Empire of Southern
California, a region that includes March Air Reserve Base, home
to the Air Force Reserve Command's largest utility wing and
units from the Army Reserve, Navy Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve
and Air National Guard.
Riverside City College and its sister institutions, Moreno
Valley College and Norco College, are each fully accredited by
the Western Association of Schools and Colleges and part of the
Riverside Community College District.
Historically, one of California's fastest-growing regions,
the Inland Empire was hit hard during the national recession,
which resulted in significant loss of jobs. This followed an
earlier sustained period of blue and white collar unemployment
due to the BRAC realignments in Southern California. Today, we
still have the highest level of unemployment in the Nation, and
nearly 150,000 veterans reside in Riverside County. The
region's college going rate is about 24 to 26 percent, well
below the State and national average.
In 2012, our enrollments exceeded 33,000 students per
semester. California community colleges have no local authority
to set tuition rates, with the exception of nonresident
tuition, which is set at the lowest rate allowed. Tuition
levels are mandated by the State of California. Currently, that
tuition is $46 per credit, which is lower than most if not all
49 states. Still, college access and affordability is a problem
for the majority of our students. More than 60 percent qualify
for need-based financial aid.
Having given you the brief overview of our district, I
would like to turn to the subject at hand, our veterans.
Some 1,200 veterans attend our three colleges each
semester, roughly 3.5 percent of our district's total
enrollment. It doesn't seem like a lot of students, but at a
community college, every student is important. For many, we are
the first, the last and the best chance for success. Being open
to all, we are expected to serve all, and we take that
responsibility seriously.
Veterans come to us with all the challenges faced by other
students, academic unpreparedness, a lack of a family tradition
of college, financial and other difficulties; therefore,
community colleges must serve veterans differently. That means
new programs and services and even rethinking the basics, such
as how do veterans effectively transition into civilian and
college life.
I am proud to say that at Riverside City College and the
District, we are advancing strongly on this front. Our colleges
have developed several programs and services to better serve
our students. For example, all three of our colleges are
authorized to certify veterans to receive benefits. Each
college has veterans' resources--a resource center to assist
our students with VA education benefits and guidelines.
Orientations are specifically designed for veterans. We have a
veteran-friendly college guidance course, and we are developing
a boots-to-book guidance class. Every student veteran receives
a student veteran education plan, priority registration,
priority transcript assessment and processing. The District
maintains a disabled veterans service program, we have a full-
time veteran services coordinator and counselors as well as a
financial aid liaison. Each college has a veterans club, and we
are developing a veteran-serving-veterans mentor program. We
hold an annual 5K veterans run and other activities for our
veteran students.
One of the ways we help our student veterans is through
scholarship and seeking external resources beyond State
funding. Last year, our foundation received a $1.5 million
endowed state gift from a U.S. Navy veteran and his wife
specifically to provide scholarships for student veterans for
books, equipment, and other expenses.
Over the last 3 years, our colleges have secured 43
competitive Federal grants totaling $34.6 million. Among those
is a million dollar grant that directly helps our disabled
veterans.
Having comprehensive support services and programs for
students, student veterans, provides a strong foundation, but
they are--if they are unaware of these programs and services,
few concrete results rise from that foundation. We applaud the
efforts of Congress and the White House to ensure that veteran
students have access to the best and most comprehensive
information available so they can make informed decisions.
We believe a couple of additional steps could help improve
the flow of information and the experience of student veterans.
For one, refine the VA benefits portal to allow colleges and
universities to directly input veteran-specific information,
adapt the VMET, Verification of Military Experience and
Training program, change the VRAP, the Veterans Retraining
Assistance Program by extending benefits from 1 year to 2
years, increase the Federal grant opportunities. What is
desperately needed is funding mechanisms similar to Title V
grants and pass H.R. 331 authored by Subcommittee Ranking
Member Mark Takano and Congressman Ken Calvert.
That concludes my testimony. On behalf of Riverside City
College and Riverside Community College District, I would like
to thank the Members of the Subcommittee for giving me the
opportunity to speak today. It has been a great honor. Thank
you.

[The prepared statement of Cynthia Azari appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you, Dr. Azari.
And now that Ranking Member Takano is here, I would like to
recognize him for his opening comments, and also, again, as I
said earlier, we are going to do this in a little bit of an odd
order, and we are going to have him introduce you as well.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARK TAKANO

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
courtesy you have extended to me. We had 14 votes on amendments
which disrupted our schedule.
So, thank you for the opportunity to introduce Cynthia
Azari, who has already given her testimony. She is the
president at Riverside City College and the Chancellor Designee
of the Riverside Community College District. Dr. Azari's 30-
year career has brought success in the form of meaningful
employment and self-fulfillment to the lives of tens of
thousands of veterans from diverse backgrounds.
I requested that Dr. Azari come to testify at our hearing
so she could provide her unique insight, based on her great
experience and leadership of community colleges in four States.
Dr. Azari has shown a great commitment to all her students
and their children, which includes students from the March Air
Reserve Base in my district. She leads the strategic planning
and institutional effectiveness initiatives focusing on the
needs of student veterans in the Riverside Community College
District. Her experience can also help us understand the impact
of H.R. 4057, the improving transparency of education
opportunities for Veteran Act of 2012, now called Public Law
1,000--112-249 and Executive Order 13607 issued by the
President.
I am familiar with the very good work being done by RCCD
because I have been a community college trustee for that
district for 23 years and have served as president of the board
five times. I am delighted that Dr. Azari could join us today.
I am happy to extend a warm welcome to her, and I also just
want to add that the wonderful part of her narrative is her
beginnings as a daughter of farm workers and her elevation to
such heights as an educator through her education--the great
American equalizer. So I'm pleased to welcome her here to the
halls of Congress.

[The prepared statement of Hon. Takano appears in the
Appendix]

Ms. Azari. Thank you very much.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Takano. And now I would like to
recognize my friend and colleague from Texas, Mr. O'Rourke, for
an introduction of our fellow Texan, Dr. Smith.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Chairman Flores and Ranking Member
Takano, for the opportunity to sit on this Committee today with
you and for the opportunity also to introduce Dr. Smith and to
talk about the good work that he is doing along with the--with
his colleagues and President Natalicio at the University of
Texas at El Paso. It is an institution that I am very proud and
honored to represent in Congress. It is a place that is
transforming lives in our community, giving people who
otherwise would not have an opportunity, the chance to succeed,
to become more productive, and to not only better their lives
but to better the community that we serve.
In fact, UT El Paso, or UTEP, was ranked No. 1 in the
Nation in social mobility recently; 64 percent of our students
at UTEP received pell grants. It is one of the largest
minority-serving institutions in the country, and Dr. Smith, as
the vice provost for Strategic Academic Initiatives at UTEP,
has been a big part of that success. He also oversees UTEP's
military students success center and handles issues related to
military and veterans' educational benefits and outreach to
Fort Bliss. And Fort Bliss now has 33,000 active duty soldiers,
compliments the almost 80,000 veterans who already live in El
Paso, so you can understand what an important issue this is for
us in El Paso and how transformative UTEP is and can
potentially be going forward for our active duty and veterans
population.
Dr. Smith was recently named the Director of the National
Center for Border Security and Immigration, and I am looking
forward to hearing his testimony today and want to welcome him
to Washington, D.C.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke.
Dr. Smith, you are recognized for 5 minutes, and in my
review of your testimony, I was very impressed with what you
have done at UTEP, and I look forward to you telling the rest
of the hearing today.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL R. SMITH, J.D., PH.D.

Mr. Smith. Chairman Flores, Congressman O'Rourke and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on Economic
Opportunity of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs. My
name is Mike Smith, and I serve as vice provost for Strategic
Academic Initiatives at the University of Texas at El Paso. It
is my great honor to appear before this House Subcommittee to
testify on the value of education for veterans at public,
private and for-profit colleges and universities. On behalf of
UTEP, I would like to thank you for this opportunity to be with
you today.
University of Texas at El Paso is deeply committed to the
success of our military affiliated students and to providing
them with outstanding value in pursuit of their post-secondary
educational goals. UTEP has a deep and longstanding connection
with the United States military. Indeed, UTEP was founded on
the grounds of the Fort Bliss Military Institute in 1914 and
has shared the City of El Paso with Fort Bliss ever since.
University of Texas at El Paso honors the service and
sacrifice of our more than 1,500 military affiliated students,
who include approximately 175 active duty servicemembers, 650
veterans, and 500 military children and spouses. The University
of Texas at El Paso is a comprehensive research university of
more than 23,000 students. Mirroring the population of the El
Paso region from which 83 percent of its students come, 77
percent of UTEP students are Hispanic and nearly 50 percent of
its undergraduates report a family income of $20,000 or less.
Despite the socioeconomic challenges of the region, UTEP
has found ways to provide both access and excellence for its
students. Over the past decade, for example, degree completions
have grown dramatically at UTEP, with an 85 percent increase in
undergraduate degrees awarded over the last decade. As a
result, UTEP now consistently ranks among the top three
universities nationally in the number of Hispanic graduates per
year in nearly every disciplinary area.
UTEP's success in serving as a catalyst for human and
economic development and quality of life in the region also has
earned it a place in the national spotlight as a model 21st
Century research university with a firm commitment to access
and excellence. As the Congressman noted, in last year's
Washington Monthly Magazine rankings, UTEP was ranked No. 1
among all U.S. universities for our success in enabling
students from all backgrounds and cultures to achieve the
American dream.
Providing U.S. military personnel and veterans with the
ability to achieve academic, professional and career success is
likewise integral to the mission of UTEP. UTEP's military
affiliated student population has grown by more than 120
percent in the last 5 years, from 713 students in the fall of
2008 to more than 1,500 students today.
UTEP is providing national leadership in military education
by facilitating the transferability of credits by
servicemembers. The university recently received a $1 million
planning grant from the Kresge foundation to create a network
of public universities across the country that will ease the
transferability of college students. Members of the AIMS
network will eventually enter into articulation agreements that
will recognize credits earned at partner institutions and
seamlessly transfer them to a university in the network that is
close by a servicemember's duty station.
UTEP is honored to served its military affiliated students
as they and their families have served the Nation. Today, I
have been asked to review progress in implementing the
provisions of House Bill 4057, now Public Law 112-249, as well
as the provisions of Executive Order 13607. One challenge for
universities in complying with Executive Order 13607 is to
create automated processes for integrating various electronic
data systems in order to produce individual student level
estimates of cost and debt as required by the principles of
excellence. Every military affiliated student comes to a
university with a unique set of variables that affects how much
the student would expect to pay for a degree and what the
student's financial aid profile may look like.
I am pleased to report that UTEP will formally adopt the
principles of excellence in the very near future. We are in the
final stages of integrating our student records and financial
aid systems with the Department of Education Student Shopping
Sheet in order to provide our military affiliated students with
a customized, clear and easily understood estimate of their
tuition, fees, Title IV financial aid and VA benefits for
military tuition assistance.
Regarding Public Law 112-249, the Veteran Benefits
Administration recently released its report to Congress, in
which it makes several policy recommendations for implementing
this new statute. Although the statute is new and its
implementation is still evolving, I would like to comment on
the provision--its provision for reporting student and State
approving agency feedback on quality of instruction, recruiting
practices, and post-graduation employment placement.
Student feedback is certainly helpful and may aid students
in making comparisons among institutions. I respectfully
recommend that the Veterans Benefits Administration develop a
standardized set of metrics for reporting student feedback in
all areas identified in the statute.
Across the Nation, State-supported universities have
responded to the pressures of increasing costs and higher
education by reducing student services, increasing class sizes
and teaching loads and the like. UTEP is proud to work
diligently to keep its tuition and fees affordable while
maintaining its commitment to high quality instruction and
cutting-edge research.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate the opportunity.

[The prepared statement of Michael Smith appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Dr. Smith, thank you for your testimony. We
look forward to questions in a minute.
Mr. Dakduk, welcome back to the Economic Opportunity
Subcommittee, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL DAKDUK

Mr. Dakduk. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Takano, Members of the Subcommittee, for inviting
Student Veterans of America to address the Subcommittee on this
specific topic.
Immediately following the implementation of the post-9/11
GI Bill in 2009, Student Veterans of America began working on
changing the landscape of higher education to be more
supportive of veterans, servicemembers and their families. Our
organization, which began on only 20 campuses a short 5 years
ago, now spans over 850 college campuses and universities in
all 50 states. I have personally traveled to over half the
country visiting university and college leaders on over 150
campuses to witness firsthand the support or lack thereof being
provided to student veterans. I wasn't able to travel to
these--to the folks to my right, to their campuses, but I look
forward to doing that in the near future.
One of my more recent trips includes a visit to the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, where I accompanied
Secretary Shinseki on a visit with President Tom Ross, who
presides on the UNC system, which is a coalition of 16 campuses
throughout the State of North Carolina. The purpose of this
visit was to learn more about how UNC was serving veterans,
servicemembers and their families.
In my travels to places like UNC in 27 other States, I have
come to find many common themes on best practices for serving
the student veteran population. Best practices range from
creating a veterans center on campus to providing residency
waivers so veterans can maximize their GI Bill at the in-State
tuition rate. Many of these best practices are captured in
three separate publications. First is the American Council on
Education's toolkit for veteran friendly institutions, which is
a compilation of veteran support and best practices from
college and universities nationwide.
Any college or university leader can upload their program
or initiative onto the Web site for public viewing at
vetfriendlytoolkit.org. Second is the Association of Private
Sector Colleges and Universities, which you will hear from Mr.
Steve Gunderson on the second panel; they commissioned a
taskforce to identify military and veteran best practices for
supporting student veterans and servicemembers. That report was
published earlier this year.
Finally, Operation College Promise, a program created by
the New Jersey Association of State Colleges and Universities
developed a field guide on how to best support veterans on
campus. It was published last year.
All of these initiatives are absolutely critical for
supporting the successful transition of our veterans to and
through American's higher education system.
However, little quantifiable evidence exists, at least
nationally, as to how successful veterans are academically and
what specific programs or initiatives lead to higher success
rates. A key component of Executive Order 13607 is the call to
track student veteran academic success rates, utilizing
existing administration data. However, current weaknesses in
Federal databases and national surveys to track and define
student veteran academic outcomes have resulted in several
conflicting reports.
Some media reports have claimed that the student veteran
dropout rate may be as high as 88 percent. That was a poorly
cited statistic that SVA quickly dispelled. In contrast,
national surveys conducted by the government suggest completion
rates may be as high as 68 percent for military veterans. The
wide range of reported completion and dropout rates has led to
confusion regarding student veterans' post-secondary academic
success. To gain a better understanding of student veteran
post-secondary completion rates, Student Veterans of America
brokered a partnership between the Department of Veterans'
Affairs and the National Student Clearinghouse, a non-profit
organization with enrollment data on over 95 percent of
America's student population, to create and develop a student
veteran attainment database. SVA expects to initially report on
the completion rate of approximately 1 million veterans that
have used various forms of the GI Bill between 2002 and 2010.
We expect to see some results at the end of this year.
The attainment database is a vital first step to accurately
identifying, tracking and measuring student veteran post-
secondary completion rates. In addition, it will provide the
foundation for future research, such as student veterans'
persistence in identifying critical times where student
veterans are more likely to withdraw from college. We can also
identify programs and policies that promote student veteran
persistence and completion and help colleges and universities
struggling to support student veterans.
Mr. Chairman, it is absolutely critical that we define the
success of veterans in higher education so we can make data
driven decisions on programs and initiatives that lead to
greater student veteran success. Thank you, and I welcome your
questions.

[The prepared statement of Michael Dakduk appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Dakduk.
I thank all of you for your testimony.
I will start with the questions. The first question is for
Mr. Dakduk of Student Veterans of America. You referenced a
problem that we have seen as policymakers that you have
different databases out there and different reports that give
us different answers, and so while I applaud you for your
decision to work--to have a partnership with the National
Student Clearinghouse to develop a better database and to track
veterans' student outcomes, I am still worried about the
conflicting data that we are going to have out there.
And so my question for you would be, what should
policymakers do to try to avoid relying on disparate data from
different databases. What is the--what do you think the
solution is to that issue?
Mr. Dakduk. One of the solutions is going to take place
outside of this Committee, and it is going to be the
reauthorization of the Higher Education Act, which is going to
be discussed hopefully very soon.
And here's a great example. Mr. Chairman, I stand before
you with a bachelor's degree, and the way that the Department
of Education currently tracks graduation rates, I would be
considered a college dropout or not reflected in the graduation
rate. Why is that? Because IPEDS, which is currently under the
Department of Ed, tracks first-time, full-time students that
enroll in the fall term. I enrolled in the summer term in a
community college, later transferred to a 4-year public
university. Before that, I was going to school when I was on
active duty, so I have transferred between three separate
institutions. I am not tracked as a graduation rate.
The issue I am finding is because of all the things we are
talking about that affect military veterans, like post-
traumatic stress, traumatic brain injury, military sexual
trauma, all real issues, but now there are media claims that
these issues are the reasons that veterans are not succeeding
in higher education. We need to make sure that we prove that
veterans may be succeeding, and if they are not succeeding,
let's find out the reasons why they are not succeeding, as
opposed to just making general claims that it could be linked
or correlated to issues, and we are not even sure that that is
really the reason.
So there is anecdotal evidence, and there are things,
research that has been done on nontraditional students, but
there needs to be work done on veterans, because what is unique
about veterans is that they are highly resilient and a lot of
them have higher education experience; they have credit from
military experience, and these things have been accredited by
the American Council on Education. So to find out whether they
are succeeding or whether they are failing is absolutely
critical to defining programs that will help them succeed as we
move forward.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Dakduk.
Dr. Smith, the next question is for you. First of all,
congratulations on your Washington Monthly rankings. That is
very impressive. You spent a little time talking about your
suggestions for the implementation of this student complain
form that is required by Public Law 112-249. Can you go into a
little bit more detail about what you would recommend?
Mr. Smith. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, as you--as you noted, the new statute requires the
education service to build a system or modify a system to
publish positive and negative feedback about institutes of
higher education on the GI Bill Web site. I respectfully--as I
said, I respectfully recommend that the VA develop a
standardized set of metrics, perhaps using a Web-based portal
that military students, affiliated students could report their
experiences on. The results from the--from the Web-based survey
could be aggregated and reported for categories of institutions
along with student response rates, for example.
Simply, you know, reporting a number of complaints or
cataloging qualitative comments about an instructor or course
are not valid mechanisms for comparing quality of across types
of institutions, so there really needs to be a standardized set
of metrics and an ability for students to report probably using
a Web-based survey, and then the ability, as the statute
requires, for institutions to be able to respond to that in
writing probably on an annual basis.
Mr. Flores. Okay. Thank you. In the interest of time, I am
going to go ahead and turn the questioning over to the Ranking
Member, Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Azari, what are some of the most popular programs at
RCCD for veterans?
Ms. Azari. The most popular programs that we have are some
of our vocational programs. We have a nursing program and
automotive technology. We also have computer information
systems, and those are generally the most popular, as well as
the transfer programs.
Mr. Takano. How much do these programs cost?
Ms. Azari. The tuition that the State sets is $46 per unit.
You multiply that by 12 or 15, which would give you a full-time
student rate.
Mr. Takano. Okay. And can you just do the math out loud for
me?
Ms. Azari. Well, that would be 460 plus--about $600.
Mr. Takano. $600.
Ms. Azari. Per semester for tuition.
Mr. Takano. So, $1,200 per year, excluding the books.
Ms. Azari. Right. And another $500 for books.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Do these programs lead to licenses,
certifications or other requirements for employment in a
specific occupation?
Ms. Azari. Yes. Our certified nursing assistant program
does; our nursing program, of course; our licensed vocational
nursing program; automotive technology leads to the ASE
certification; and Computer Information Systems has many
certifications, industry certifications.
Mr. Takano. And you may not know this off the top of your
head, but I just want to ask, what percentage of your budget do
you spend on education versus marketing and recruiting?
Ms. Azari. Because of the budget reductions that we have
had in the past few years, we have spent very little on
marketing and recruiting. I would say less than 1 percent.
Mr. Takano. And in the prior years?
Ms. Azari. In the prior years, we probably spent, oh, 3 to
5 percent.
Mr. Takano. Three to 5 percent over your total budget?
Ms. Azari. When you factor in all of the marketing, all of
the brochures; there are many catalogs that we are not mailing.
We are producing them only online, so we are saving some money.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Can you tell us more about the RCC
Veterans Resource Center and the services it provides to your
students?
Ms. Azari. We took a classroom and converted it into a
resource center. There is a portion of it where we have the
coordinator and the counselor, and they provide assistance with
VA benefits and counseling and guidance into the academic
program, because each student has an educational plan. But
there is a portion of the room that is kind of a lounge
setting. So, there are sofas there. We have a large screen
television donated, so students can congregate, and they can
meet with other veterans. Then we have a study area as well
with computers and tables so students can have study groups.
Mr. Takano. Does this come from any special funding, or is
this something you had to carve out from your budget as a
commitment to them?
Ms. Azari. We really had to raise the funds. We carved out
a little bit. We certainly have the funding for the staff, but
in order to fund the furniture and equipment, we had to raise
the funds and got donations from local businesses.
Mr. Takano. What are the challenges you face serving your
veteran students and what suggestions do you have to improve
services for student veterans?
Ms. Azari. Well, some of them I suggested have to do with
increasing the Federal grant opportunities, like Title V, and
also the portal, the VA's e-benefit portal that would allow
colleges to directly input veteran specific or relevant
information. What we would like to see is an opportunity for
veterans to have a comprehensive overview of different
colleges, so more or less a template, and each college and
university would provide the same information. That way
students would be able to compare and make informed decisions.
Mr. Takano. Dr. Smith, do you have any idea of how much
your institution spends on education versus recruiting and
marketing?
Mr. Smith. I don't have those figures for you. We spend
approximately two-thirds of the budget, of the university's
budget goes to the academic mission, but I don't know the exact
percentage in terms of marketing or recruitment.
Mr. Takano. Ballpark number?
Mr. Smith. It would be small. In alignment with--
Mr. Takano. Less than--10 percent or less, you think?
Mr. Smith. Certainly, yes.
Mr. Takano. Maybe even closer to 5 percent?
Mr. Smith. Probably.
Mr. Takano. Okay. And what are some of your most popular
programs for veterans?
Mr. Smith. Probably numerically, criminal justice is
probably our most popular major among our military-affiliated
student population. Business is also very popular and nursing,
probably our top three.
Mr. Takano. And do your programs lead to licenses,
certifications or other requirements for employment in specific
occupation areas?
Mr. Smith. The nursing program certainly does among those
three.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Takano.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Takano. My first question is for each one of the witnesses. In
your opinion, what are the top three reasons that veterans do
not complete their degrees? And we will start with Dr. Azari.
Ms. Azari. I would say family obligations and personal
problems, not fitting into the college environment, and that is
why the resource center was so important.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Dr. Smith. We will come back with follow-
up question.
Mr. Smith. Yeah, I think there is a distinction between the
type of--so, for active duty students, many times it is because
they are transferred to a different duty station, and they find
it difficult to transfer credits or simply to attend school,
given their workload.
For veteran students, it is probably not a whole lot
different than the general student population, so sure. In
our--among our student population, it would be financial
reasons, financial concerns, family matters, the need to go and
find employment and the like.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Dr. Dakduk.
Mr. Dakduk. Thank you so much, Congresswoman Kirkpatrick,
for asking that because we actually conducted research on this
and regarding nontraditional students when we received a grant
from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and there are three
critical areas.
Administration: Military veterans have to navigate two
bureaucracies, the campus bureaucracy that all students have to
navigate; second, the Department of Veterans Affairs in getting
their GI Bill benefits. That can deter some folks from actually
continuing to succeed. If they can't appropriately navigate
financial aid registrar's office, then on top of that, finding
central part of contact to navigate the GI Bill and getting
your benefits.
Two, integration: All of our military servicemembers are
reintegrating to civilian society. Many are integrating for the
very first time onto a college campus. That is a challenge.
Three, academics: Remedial training is an issue for a lot
of nontraditional students, but consider this, military
veterans that are away from the academic environment for 2, 3,
4-plus years, one or more combat deployments. That is a
challenge. Remedial training is absolutely critical.
So those are the three. I don't know if you saw some
research, but there are three areas that are absolutely
critical to the success of veterans if we can address them.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you. No, I haven't seen that
research, but I would like to. Maybe we can get that after the
hearing.
Dr. Azari and Dr. Smith, what are your universities doing
to address this problem?
Ms. Azari. Well, in terms of bureaucracy, we have a
coordinator, we have counselors, we have financial aid people
who work specifically with the veterans to help them navigate
that entire bureaucracy, both at the Federal level and at the
college level.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. And what if they are having family
problems.
Ms. Azari. We do have counseling available for our
veterans. We have a counselor specifically designated for
veterans.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Is that free of charge?
Ms. Azari. Yes.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Okay. Dr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. We have a military student success center on
UTEP's campus that is dedicated to our military student
population, staffed with well-trained counselors who can help
our students navigate both university bureaucracy as well as
the military student and VA benefit bureaucracy. It is a one-
stop shop. Our students all know to go there. They are
essentially located in our library. We can either provide them
the services there or connect them with the appropriate
services.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Mr. Dakduk, what do you see that we can
do as policymakers to address the problems of veterans not
completing their degree?
Mr. Dakduk. I think the issue is definitely finding out
whether--how prevalent dropout rates are, and we don't know.
And I respect what the Chairman said, there is competing
information out there, and there is always going to be that,
but I found that that has been an excuse for not tracking
anything, and that is the issue I have in higher education. So
we need to begin looking at this.
The unique thing about our research or the project that we
are working on with the Department of Veterans Affairs and
National Student Clearinghouse is we are going to track data on
1 million veterans. We are also going to show what degree
fields they are majoring in. So now we can start to figure out,
you know, what are folks gravitating toward? What degrees and
post-secondary credentials are they actually trying to receive?
Are those the degrees that lead to valuable post-graduation
employment? Do we need to start communicating what is really
important; what are the degrees that will lead to long-term
success? We can figure those things out, and we can also start
to figure out what schools are doing great work that lead to
higher graduation rates.
I met with Florida State University's president, Eric
Baron, and they have persistence rates as high as 88 percent
for military veterans and servicemembers, but he has also made
a multi-million dollar investment in his school to support
servicemembers and veterans and their family members.
What I have seen in my travels across the country is that
higher education universities play a critical role in the
transition of military servicemembers and veterans. The
community college over here that Dr. Azari leads is an anomaly
and a unique example. There are a lot of community colleges
that are resource constrained and don't have the financial
ability to help them or provide resources and support. We have
to make sure that we scale these programs across the spectrum
of higher ed.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you all for your testimony today.
I yield back.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Ms. Kirkpatrick, and I would like to
thank each of the participants in panel one. You are now
excused, and I would like to invite panel two to the table.
Mr. Flores. First, we have had Former Congressman Steve
Gunderson, who is testifying on behalf of the Association of
Private Sector Colleges and Universities. Following Congressman
Gunderson, we will have Dr. Daniel Carey, who is the President
of Edgewood College and is testifying on behalf of the National
Association of Independent Colleges and Universities. And
finally, we have Mr. David Baime, who will testify on behalf of
the American Association of Community Colleges.
Welcome to each of you. Thank you for your testimony, and
we look forward to starting.
Congressman Gunderson, you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF HONORABLE STEVE GUNDERSON, PRESIDENT AND CEO, THE
ASSOCIATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES, APSCU;
DANIEL J. CAREY, PH.D., PRESIDENT, EDGEWOOD COLLEGE, ON BEHALF
OF NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INDEPENDENT COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES; DAVID BAIME, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR GOVERNMENT
RELATIONS AND POLICY ANALYSIS, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
COMMUNITY COLLEGES

STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE GUNDERSON

Mr. Gunderson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, Members of the Committee. I have actually edited my
oral statement to even be more concise, so we will make it part
of the record. We take seriously--the charge to work with
veteran and military student populations and prepare America's
students to succeed in the workforce. As we all strive to
provide better information to all of our students, we look
forward to continuing to work with the Department of Veterans
Affairs and Education to implement both H.R. 4057 and Executive
Order 13607 to ensure that our Nation's veterans are receiving
all the information needed to make superior education
decisions, including improved outreach, transparency and
counseling.
Of particular note are the provisions in the Executive
Order that call for additional transparency for veterans. We
have long believed that full, accurate and accessible
information enables the veteran to make the appropriate choices
for their career future. According to the Veterans
Administration, more than 325,000 veterans or their families
have been served by our institutions, representing 28 percent
of all veterans using the post-9/11 GI benefit. Although
veterans make up less than 10 percent of our students, we are
proud to serve those who choose our institutions.
You might ask, why do we serve 13 percent of all post-
secondary students but 28 percent of all veterans? The answer
lies in our customer service to veterans. Returning from duty,
most veterans do not want to live in a dorm and take five
different three-credit courses at a time. We try to meet them
where they are. They want to focus on accelerated delivery of
academic programs that can support their transition from the
front lines to full-time employment as soon as possible.
Because of our longer school days and year-round academic
programming, our students can often complete an associate's
degree in 18 months or a bachelor's degree in just over 3
years.
Executive Order 13607 requires the use of the Department of
Education IPEDS' data to collect enrollment graduation and
outcome information. It is a good first step, but as you heard
in the first panel, because IPEDS currently counts first-time
full-time students, no veteran returning to school is counted.
We need to change that.
Last year, we adopted five tenets of veterans education
that included the creation of a Blue Ribbon task force for
military and veterans education. The task force was comprised
of a broad group of individuals who shared common commitment
toward the education of servicemembers and veterans, including
non-APSCU members as well as representatives of the nationally
recognized veterans service organizations. The task force
created a best set of best practice recommendations that are
attached to my written testimony.
It is important to note that H.R. 4057 and the Executive
Order create a central complaint process to track student
issues with institutions of higher education. APSCU supports a
managed process for enforcement.
Now, before I close my remarks, I would like to share with
you some findings of a recent survey of several of our member
institutions. We looked at 16,500 veteran graduates and found
that 75 percent earned certificates and associate degrees,
while 25 percent earned BA or graduate degrees. As the
questions were just asked in the previous panel, 41 percent of
the veterans earned credentials in the health care field; 20
percent earned credentials in the skilled trade programs; 10
percent earned credentials in computer and information
programming.
Our partnership with veterans is preparing America's
skilled workers for the future. This is a partnership we want
to continue and we are very proud of. We thank you for the
opportunity for the testimony and happy to answer questions.

[The prepared statement of Steve Gunderson appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you, Congressman Gunderson.
Dr. Carey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL J. CAREY, PH.D.

Mr. Carey. Thank you, Chairman Flores, Ranking Member
Takano and other Members of the Committee. I appreciate having
the time to appear before you today to discuss the value of
higher ed for our Nation's veterans. Edgewood College is a
liberal arts Catholic college in the Dominican tradition with
just over 3,000 students, undergrad and graduate. Today, I
represent both my college and the members of the National
Association of Independent Colleges and Universities.
At the outset, I wanted to commend the Committee for
highlighting the importance of veterans receiving value for the
time and money they put into obtaining a higher education. As
an independent college president and former chair of NAICU, I
welcome that chance to discuss that value with you. I am also
proud of my service as an infantry officer in Vietnam, and I
retired as a full Colonel in the Reserves. The GI Bill changed
my life and the lives of countless others, and it continues to
do that today.
I am personally committed to seeing that veterans have a
positive educational experience, both at my institution and at
other high quality colleges. The post-9/11 GI Bill has opened
the doors to higher education across the country. I believe the
key question before this Committee today is how to ensure that
veterans get the most out of that GI Bill. The answer lies in
the success veteran students are having at schools like
Edgewood.
What makes us different, and how or why are our students
successful? Three key factors. First, we dedicate the financial
and personnel resources to students. Like most non-profit
colleges, Edgewood spends the vast majority of our revenue
directly on student education and student services.
Second, we focus on teaching with a topnotch faculty of
Ph.D.s, and most of our students are in small seminars of fewer
than 20 students. Like most non-profit colleges, we push our
students to learn, think critically, write effectively, and
work in teams. Our students graduate with strong skills to
tackle professional careers, and we offer intensive job
placement assistance to every student before and after their
graduation.
Third, Edgewood offers significant student support
services. Some veterans need a little extra guidance through
their college experience. We have a full-time veteran services
coordinator who served in the Army Reserve and the Marine
Corps. In response to the requests of our veteran students, we
are providing a dedicated space for them to meet. We make
psychological counseling easy to access and free. We offer
personalized academic advising to assist veterans and
dependants in determining their course of study.
Because of these factors, our enrollment of veterans and
dependants at Edgewood has grown dramatically in the past
several years. Now, our programs are a lot smaller, but our
numbers have tripled and quadrupled, from 43 to 145 in the fall
and to more than that in the spring. Our graduates are
appreciative of the quality education at Edgewood, and they
find success on the job market. Employers hire our graduates.
Colleges can solve the dropout problems and veterans can
thrive if colleges make the spending choices to offer an
excellent education, dedicate resources needed by students, and
build a strong sense of community. There are lots of costs
involved, and at Edgewood, we have restrained our costs,
holding increases below 3.9 percent in the each of the last 3
years, and we participate fully in the Yellow Ribbon program.
Now, I submitted some stories, personal stories of
veterans. I will share just one.
Jason Diaz was a student who I got to know quite well. He
is an Iraqi war veteran, inspired to go into nursing while in
the military. He was not a medic but was able to help keep a
wounded comrade alive. While he was a student with us, his wife
was expecting twins and his father was struck with terminal
cancer. Our campus rallied around. He is now working in the
emergency room at the University of Wisconsin Hospital and
Clinics. There is lots of stories like Jason's being repeated
across the country where schools are dedicating revenue to
giving students personal attention, counseling and smaller
class sizes.
At Edgewood, we are proud of the fact that our cohort
default rate stands at 2.5 percent, well below the national
average of 13.4 percent, and the latest proprietary school rate
of 22.7 percent. And this figure is not due to our having a
wealthy student body. In fact, 35 percent of our current
undergraduate students are eligible for Pell grants.
As a veteran, it concerns me that not all of higher
education demonstrates a commitment to the success of today's
veterans.
I am confident that veterans at our campus and at many
other private non-profit institutions that offer a high quality
education, supportive veteran services, and a strong sense of
community will be successful. Thank you for the opportunity to
share some of these stories with you today.

[The prepared statement of Daniel J. Carey appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Dr. Carey, thank you.
Mr. Baime.

STATEMENT OF DAVID BAIME

Mr. Baime. Good morning, Chairman Flores, Ranking Member
Takano and Members of the Subcommittee. I am pleased to be here
with you today to speak on behalf of the Nation's almost 1,200
community colleges on some of the ways that we support veteran
students.
Our colleges have a long and proud history of serving
veteran and active duty students. A survey from 2012 found that
nearly four out of five community colleges already had or were
in the process of implementing programs and services
specifically designed for servicemembers and veterans. These
include professional development for faculty and staff to help
them better serve veterans, increasing number of services
directly targeted to these individuals and establishing Web
pages specifically tailored to veterans.
Many institutions, particularly those with larger veteran
populations, are also creating dedicated centers on campuses
where students can congregate and receive tutoring and other
services.
Many, perhaps most community colleges, award academic
credit for prior learning experience gained in the military and
are refining these efforts to help military and veteran
students complete certificates and degrees more rapidly. In
addition to these new ways of measuring learning, many colleges
have dedicated programs for veteran students to ease the
transition from military to civilian student life.
Today, many people are asking, is college really worth it?
And the unequivocal answer now more than ever is, absolutely,
yes. The evidence is overwhelming that the surest path to a
family supporting job is through obtaining a post-secondary
degree. However, the choice of a particular college and a
particular program at that institution matters greatly. And
while policymakers and campus officials are striving to ensure
that students have the resources that they need to enable them
to choose wisely, further improvement is needed both in the
data that are available and the way that data is consumed.
The first principle for community colleges is to remain
accessible through low tuitions. Last fall, the average
community college tuition and fees for a full-time, full-year
student was just $3,131, and this came on the heels of cuts in
State funding that drove tuition increases by 24 percent when
adjusted for inflation over the last 5 years.
Our tuitions are set by a variety of entities. In most
places, they are decided by the individual institution in
concert with their board. In other places, the State board sets
the tuition, such as in Virginia. And so other States, as you
just heard by Dr. Azari in California, the legislature
determines the tuition. In all cases, these decisions are made
before the public.
Mr. Baime. Community colleges do frequently charge higher
tuitions for out-of-district or out-of-State residents. Out of
district students pay about 16 percent more on average than in-
district students, and out of State students pay about 136
percent more. The principle is driven by one of equity, and
that is that the heavily subsidized tuitions should be provided
first and foremost to those who bear the burden of the taxes
that support those low tuitions.
Nevertheless, no community college student actually pays
the full cost of their education. On average, our students--
spend about $12,400 per year, per student on education.
Unfortunately, funding cuts over the past few years have
reduced this amount. The accountability movement, with its
emphasis on completion, which this Subcommittee is
appropriately concerned about, has taken root on community
colleges across the country. Our own association has taken a
tough look at the progress we have made and the progress that
we still need to make with a recent report called ``Reclaiming
the American Dream.'' We also are launching a voluntary
framework for accountability that will help institutions and
the public more clearly understand how our institutions are
performing, with the institutions themselves looking towards
further improvement.
The Federal Government does have a role here. It can help
by ensuring that our colleges receive better quality data.
There is no national system, no one system that tracks students
throughout post-secondary education, and information on
workforce outcomes is spotty, primarily provided through States
rather than the Federal Government. Change in this area is
inhibited by political, legal, and bureaucratic obstacles. But
there is concerted pressure to provide better information to
institutions and students, and we are optimistic that this
information will become available in the coming months and
years.
Thank you for having me here before you this afternoon, and
I will be pleased to answer any questions you might have.

[The prepared statement of David Baime appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Baime.
I will begin with the questions. The first question is for
Congressman Gunderson, and it is this: What steps is the APSCU
taking to ensure that your member institutions are implementing
the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Task Force for Military
and Veteran Educations? And if they are not, what steps would
you like them to take?
Mr. Gunderson. That is a great question, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, we are engaged in a very active education and
promotion program to all of our members, and frankly to all of
higher education, because we take great pride in that set of
recommendations as being one of the better sets of best
practice recommendations that are out there. Many of our
schools are individually saying that they are going to commit
to it and indicate so on their Web sites and their materials,
et cetera.
The second thing that becomes important here is, as you
heard from actually the earlier panel in your opening remarks,
we get asked if we have automatic enforcement. We are not a
regulator; we are an association. But I will tell you we are a
strong supporter of the complaint system that is being
developed at the Veterans Affairs, so that if there are
complaints and if those complaints are disproportionately for
our sector, we will know that we have not succeeded and that we
are going to have to take additional steps. So our combination
of proactive advocacy and education, combined with what you all
are doing through the Bilirakis legislation and now the
Executive Order and the implementation of that complaint
process, will combined give us the information to know what
those outcomes are.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Congressman Gunderson.
Dr. Carey, you had mentioned that one of the reasons for
increases in tuition rates is that colleges are now providing
more what are called additional services than they were before.
Can you give us a couple of examples of additional services?
And secondly, would you agree that in addition to those
additional services that competition among schools to attract
students through nicer dormitories and expanded sports programs
has also contributed to the rising cost?
Mr. Carey. In answer to the first question specifically
with veterans, I mentioned that we have about 145 veterans
right now. And we have a full-time veterans coordinator. And we
have a dedicated space for them to meet. And we have a person
in the registrar's office that we trained to work specifically
with veterans, because their financial aid, as you heard
earlier, can be a challenge.
But we found with that extra attention, and somewhat of an
extra investment, that our retention rate for our veterans has
been equal to or above that of our overall student body. We
feel like we are investing extra dollars, but we feel like
there has been a payback on that with the success.
Mr. Chairman, if you could repeat the second part of the
question.
Mr. Flores. Oh, sure. Would you agree that in addition to
the additional services that you just talked about, for
instance the costs that you are spending to try to help
veterans, that competition to attract students through nicer
dormitories and expanded sports programs are also contributing
to the rising costs of post-secondary education?
Mr. Carey. I think there are examples of that. And I think
some of that is driven by demand from students today, which is
different from when many of us were in college. So I think
there is some validity to that.
But I believe that colleges are getting smart about that,
and they are not building a lot more climbing walls and palaces
for residence halls. We do not do that on our campus. And in
fact, as I pointed out, we have controlled costs, with 3.9
percent being our maximum increase over the last 4 years. So I
think all of higher ed must do the same thing: control costs,
become more efficient.
So I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, about that.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Dr. Carey.
Mr. Takano, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Carey, I know that, just like RCC, Edgewood has a
successful nursing program. Could you briefly tell me about the
success of that program?
Mr. Carey. I say we have the top program in the State of
Wisconsin. We have a first-time passage rate of our nursing
graduates over the last several years of 94 percent or higher.
And employers are lined up to hire them. As for the students,
that is one program where we have a waiting list. It is also
very popular for our veterans to get into the nursing program.
Mr. Takano. Can you tell me, does your institution have
programmatic accreditation as well as regional accreditation?
Mr. Carey. We do indeed. And that is just so important.
Those students who graduate with an accredited degree can get
the jobs. And if you don't have that accredited degree, you
have a challenge.
Mr. Takano. So you also have regional accreditation. Does
that mean that your students can take their credits and
transfer?
Mr. Carey. Absolutely. We are accredited through the Higher
Learning Commission. Different programs are also accredited.
Our teacher ed is accredited through NCATE. There are
individual accreditations for quite a number of the other
programs, such as our nursing and music programs. But the
umbrella is the Higher Learning Commission--what used to be
called the North Central accrediting body.
Mr. Takano. And what percentage of your budget is devoted
to say education versus marketing or recruiting?
Mr. Carey. Well, the direct costs of academics that we
invest per student is just over $12,000 a year. Our tuition is
about $24,000 a year. Now, that does not include any
administrative costs. That is just everything related to the
classroom and academic support. So that is not quite 50 percent
going into the direct academic services.
As for our recruiting costs, I don't have that broken out,
but it is minimal. We don't have a special recruiter for
veterans, for example. We just have our regular admissions
office that works with all students.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Gunderson, could you tell me how many of
your association's schools do or do not have programmatic
accreditation, and do or do not have regional accreditation?
Mr. Gunderson. Obviously, I can't give you that exact
number today, but we will provide that for the record to the
best of our ability. We have the bulk of our schools--are
nationally accredited. Many of those within those individual
programs would be programmatically accredited. Some of our
schools, as we move more into the BA and master's and post-
graduate programs, are obviously pursuing the regional
accreditation, but I don't have those exact numbers.
Mr. Takano. But for undergraduate education that you offer,
are your schools typically regionally accredited?
Mr. Gunderson. No. Because the bulk of our veterans, 75
percent of our veterans, as we showed you in that survey, and I
think 68 percent of all of our students are either in
certificate and/or associate degrees, they are more likely to
be accredited by national accreditors than they are regional
accreditors.
Mr. Takano. So what I am getting at, though, is that for
those students who are undergraduates in your undergraduate
programs, those credits are often not transferable to the
regionally accredited institutions. Is that correct?
Mr. Gunderson. Unfortunately, that is correct. And we would
like to solve that as much as you would.
Mr. Takano. My question is, on average, how much does your
association's schools spend on education versus marketing and
recruiting?
Mr. Gunderson. Again, the best I can give you on that would
probably be some data from the National Association for College
Admissions Counseling. In 2011, their data showed that the main
costs for an enrolled student of all colleges of higher
education was $2,400. For public schools, it was $987. For the
private non-profits, it was $3,042. For us it is about $3,800.
It is a little higher because we obviously don't have the
ability to use the high school guidance counselor as an
opportunity to access to our students. The vast majority of our
students are adult nontraditionals. We have to reach them on
the streets, in their workplace. And we have a rough business
equivalent, Mr. Takano, of the fact that one out of every
hundred students who expresses an inquiry actually becomes a
student. So it is a very different business model.
Mr. Takano. My own experience as a high school teacher is
that for profits are very effective at reaching the high school
students, often deploying recruiters that community colleges
could not afford. That is just my own observation. Would you
support legislation to limit the legal amount spent on
recruiting at some reasonable limit?
Mr. Gunderson. Not the legislation I have seen thus far,
because I think that legislation totally ignores the business
model and the realities by which we operate. I mean, the
reality is that if you are going to tell us that we can't reach
the individuals in their place of work, their place of life, et
cetera, we are not going to reach those students.
And you know, we can redesign, Congressman, our programs in
a way that fits traditional higher ed. We are nimble. We are
quick. The problem with that is that the students we serve
today, many of the students who, in all due respect, would
never be accepted at Edgewood College, who loses? It is those
students who otherwise have no opportunity for post-secondary
education and career skills, which is so critical. Ninety-two
percent of our students fit the nontraditional role, with
multiple barriers to academic success. The question in America
is, are we going to give those students an opportunity for real
skills to get real jobs with real incomes?
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I am sorry, my time is up.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Takano.
Votes have been called. We have about 9 minutes left in
order to wrap this panel up--or actually, I am going to propose
we wrap the hearing up and get over to the House floor.
So, Ms. Kirkpatrick, would you mind if I limited you to
about 2 minutes?
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Not at all. Not at all. In fact, I was
going to self-limit. My question is for Dr. Carey. And thank
you for your service. You talked about Pell grants in the Post-
9/11 GI bill. Do most of your students, can that cover their
costs or do they also have to take out student loans?
Mr. Carey. Well, for the veterans, they have to take out
almost no student loan whatsoever. But our typical 18-year old
undergrad who is Pell eligible would take out a loan; they
would also get a college work study award. So it would be a
combination of financial aid for them.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Okay. And Mr. Baime, do you agree with
that, that most of the veterans can manage just with Pell
grants and the GI bill?
Mr. Baime. Absolutely, that is the case. Yes, they are not
taking out loans. The figure nationally is about one-third of
our full-time students take out loans. But very few veterans
need to do that.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. And Mr. Baime, what do you find is the
most requested information when a veteran is deciding whether
to go to one of your institutions?
Mr. Baime. Well, frankly, because of the nature of our
institutions as being, you know, community colleges, and this
is not something that is readily appreciated by many people,
students don't undergo a comprehensive scanning of the
environment of all the institutions, you know, even within
their State. I mean, they tend to enroll in their local
community college. So what we find most important, and I
mentioned this in my testimony, is to make sure that we match
that individual, who is returning from their service and wants
to stay at home and be with their family, and perhaps even hold
down a job at the same time, making sure that they get into the
program that suits their abilities and their aptitudes and
their future goals best for them. So it is not necessarily,
again, between two community colleges or community college and
a 4-year college, but it is which is program at that local
institution are they going to choose?
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Ms. Kirkpatrick.
The second panel is excused with our thanks. We are going
to try something a little different, if we can.
General Worley, we will call you to the table for just a
moment. What we are going to do is to enter your written
testimony into the record and to ask you, we are going to
submit written questions to you and ask the VA to follow up.
Since you are our neighbor more or less here in Washington,
I think that may make some sense. So we will submit those
questions to you a little bit later.

[The prepared statement of Robert Worley appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. So, with that said, I ask unanimous consent
that all Members have 5 legislative days in which to revise and
extend their remarks and include any extraneous material
related to today's hearing. And hearing no objection, so
ordered.
Finally, I want to announce that next week, this
Subcommittee will be back in action, on June 26th, at 2 p.m.,
for a legislative hearing on several bills pending before the
Subcommittee.
I look forward to seeing many of you then.
And without objection, this hearing is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:40 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Prepared Statement of Hon. Bill Flores
Good morning and welcome to our oversight hearing on The Value of
Education for Veterans in Public, Private and For-Profit Colleges and
Universities.
There are many ways to define the word value. Merriam Webster's
online dictionary offers several ways including:

a fair return or equivalent in goods, services; or

money for something exchanged; or

the monetary worth of something; or

the relative worth, utility, or importance

All of those seem to fit; but to me, the relative worth, utility
and importance concept seems the best fit for today's topic. That is
because the benefits we offer through the GI Bill expand career
opportunities relative to what is available without that education or
training.
In classical economic theory, the marginal utility of a good or
service - in this case education - is the gain (or loss) from an
increase (or decrease) in the consumption of that good or service. As
you can see by the first slide, there is little doubt that increased
levels of education generally result in lower unemployment rates and
higher wages.
Obviously, if the marginal utility of education is generally
positive, its importance to the beneficiary rises. And beginning with
the original WWII GI Bill, the relative worth, utility and importance
has historically translated to a positive outcome for the participants
and for society in general.
So today, the question before us is whether the Post-9/11 GI Bill
is meeting the goals of relative worth, utility and importance as
provided through the various sectors of the post-secondary education
industry. With that in mind, let's begin with the cost as shown on the
next slide.
As you can see, there is a wide variation in the cost of tuition
and fees across the various sectors of the education industry. And
those costs continue to escalate as shown by the next slide.
So, the facts establish that there is significant financial utility
to increased education but the trends in costs beg the question at what
point - if any - will the average American family no longer be able to
take advantage of college education opportunities.
Clearly, the data shows that public colleges and universities have
experienced the largest percentage increase but still remain highly
cost-competitive with the other sectors. For private institutions, both
non and for-profit must offer values other than cost to compete for the
tuition dollar. I will leave it to them to present those values.
I find the significant increase in enrollments in the for-profit
sector interesting. While roughly double the public state resident
tuition cost, for-profit tuition and fees are about half the average
published cost of non-profit institutions. I realize the for-profit
sector has come in for criticism recently, but there is clearly a place
for them in the industry as exemplified by the rest of the industry's
adoption of many of the for-profit models like satellite campuses,
rolling enrollments, and on-line courses and degree programs.
Regarding the potential criticism of for-profit institutions, I
would note that there is no lack of oversight and regulation on the
education industry. The VA, the Consumer Federal Protection Bureau, the
Federal Trade Commission, the US Department of Education, state
Attorneys General, state licensing agencies, state departments of
education, State Approving Agencies, and Accrediting Associations all
have the responsibility to police all sectors of higher education. In
fact, Section 3696 of Title 38 requires VA and FTC to enter into an
agreement on investigating allegations of unethical practices by any
school regardless of the sector. I believe that requirement has been in
place for decades and it is my understanding that interagency agreement
is not yet in place.
The only conclusion I can draw is that multiple government agencies
- at all levels - have failed to monitor the education industry and
enforce the statutes and regulations now in place.
In closing, I hope this will be a positive and informative hearing
that will explore the value each sector of our post-secondary education
and training industry brings to the table.
Before I recognize the distinguished Ranking Member, I ask
unanimous consent to enter testimony from the College Board, the
National Association of Veterans Program Administrators, the Reserve
Officers Association, and the Wounded Warrior Project in the hearing
record . . . .Hearing no objection, so ordered.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his opening remarks.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Mark Takano
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, I would like to thank everyone for joining us, and I
would like to thank our witnesses for taking time to testify and answer
our questions.
Today, we are gathered to keep a promise to our veterans. It is the
same promise we first made with the passage in l944 of the Servicemen's
Readjustment Act, the first GI Bill. For veterans who want to pursue
educational opportunity, our duty is to provide every encouragement
because they have earned those benefits in honorable service to their
country.
Since May 1, 2009, the Post 9/11 GI Bill has afforded an education
to 961,000 total beneficiaries. The government has spent over $28.7
billion of which $12.9 billion went directly to educational
institutions. The 112th Congress passed ``The Improving Transparency of
Education Opportunities for Veterans Act of 2012,'' to develop a
comprehensive plan to inform veterans and ensure that these funds are
properly spent.
Executive Order13607 holds scholastic institutions to a higher
standard of ethics by establishing ``Principles of Excellence'' for
data collection and student feedback. I look forward to hearing your
testimony to determine if institutions are not only operating under
these principles, but also how they are contributing to the lives of
veterans and their educations.
You are all here because you represent a resource in the higher
education of our Nation's veterans. Suggestions have been made that
additional protections are needed to improve oversight of the GI Bill.
Your experience and institutional knowledge will help us in this work.
I look forward to hearing from all the witnesses on what is working
and what needs improvement.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing. I look
forward to the testimony and discussion we will have today.

Prepared Statement of Cynthia Azari, Ed.D.
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today regarding Veterans' services and programs at public
colleges and the opportunities for veterans to be successful in higher
education and preparing for the civilian workforce. My name is Dr.
Cynthia Azari and I am President of Riverside City College, which is
located in the Inland Empire of Southern California--a region that
includes March Air Reserve Base (MARB), home to the Air Force Reserve
Command's largest air mobility wing and units from the Army Reserve,
Navy Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, and Air National Guard.
Riverside City College and its sister institutions, Moreno Valley
College and Norco College, are each fully accredited by the Western
Association of Schools and Colleges and part of the Riverside Community
College District. The District encompasses a 450 sq. mile in
southwestern Riverside County (adjacent to Los Angeles and Orange
counties) and serves 1.4 million people. In addition to March Air
Reserve Base, our service area includes the high-tech Naval Surface
Warfare Center in Corona, and the expanding Riverside National
Cemetery.
It was important that I put the District and Colleges in context
for the subcommittee because as of July 1, I will take office as
interim chancellor. That upcoming responsibility informs my testimony
today.
Historically one of California's fastest growing regions, the
Inland Empire was hit hard during the national recession, which
resulted in significant loss of jobs, particularly in the real estate,
construction and manufacturing areas. This followed an earlier
sustained period of blue- and white-collar unemployment due to the BRAC
realignments of March Air Force Base, Norton Air Force Base, and other
Southern California military installations. Region-wide unemployment
affects veterans as well as civilians, putting pressure on public
community colleges to offer more educational advancement, career
technical, and job retraining opportunities. We still have the highest
level of unemployment in the nation. Today, nearly 150,000 veterans
reside in Riverside County--the majority within RCCD's service area.
As a public community college district, RCCD is an open access
institution that serves a dynamic and diverse student population and
communities: approximately 47% Hispanic, 27% White, 10% African
American, 8% Asian/Pacific Islander, and 8% other or multiple
ethnicities. The area's college-going rate hovers between 24-26%, well
below state and national averages.
In 2012, RCCD colleges' enrollments exceeded 33,000 students a
semester. Like other California community college districts, we have no
local authority to set tuition rates. The exception is with non-
resident tuition, which RCCD chose to set at the lowest rate afforded
by the State Education Code. Otherwise, tuition levels are mandated by
the State of California. Currently, that tuition is $46 per credit,
which is lower than most, if not all the other 49 states. Still,
college access and affordability is a problem for a majority of our
students. More than 60% qualify for need-based financial aid such as a
Board of Governor's Waiver or Pell Grant. This is not unexpected given
that the average household income in Riverside County is $68,500 and
the average annual wage $36,924--12% and 23%, respectively, below state
averages.
Having given you a brief overview of our District, the populations
we serve, and some of the socio-economic factors affecting students, I
would like to turn to the subject at hand: veterans.
Some 1,200 veterans attend our three colleges each semester,
roughly 3.5% of the District's total enrollment. That doesn't seem like
a lot of students. But at a community college, every student is
important. Why? Because, quite frankly, we are the first, last and best
chance for most students. Being open to all, we are expected to serve
all. We take that responsibility seriously.
Veterans come to us with all the challenges faced by other
students: academic unpreparedness, lack of a family tradition of
college, financial and other difficulties. But they also are dealing
with issues as a result of military service. And these issues differ
greatly from those experienced by a traditional college student or even
a civilian re-entry student. Post Traumatic Stress Disorder is a
recognized issue; the VA estimates that 90% of combat veterans suffer
its effects at some point. But veterans may also have other serious
conditions such as elevated feelings of shame, anxiety and depression.
As a result, colleges must serve veterans differently. That means new
programs and services and even rethinking the basics such as ``How do
veterans effectively transition into a civilian life from military
duty?'' and ``How can we best introduce veterans to college life?''
I am proud to say that Riverside City College and the District are
advancing strongly on this front.
Over the past two years, our colleges have developed several
programs and services to better serve student veterans. These include:

Each of RCCD's three colleges is authorized to certify
veterans to receive benefits.

Each college has Veterans' Resources Centers, either in
place or in development, to assist with GI Bill and other VA education
benefits and guidelines.

Orientation sessions are specifically designed for
veterans.

``Veteran friendly'' college guidance courses are offered
now and, in the future, a Boots to Books Guidance 48 class.

Every student veteran receives a Student Veteran
Education Plan.

Every veteran receives priority registration and priority
transcript assessment and processing.

The District maintains a disabled veterans' services
program.

Comprehensive Veterans' Services brochures, websites, and
other VA and local agency information/fact sheets and consumer
information are distributed to student veterans.

A full-time Veterans' Services Coordinator (RCC) and
designated Veterans' Services Counselors (all colleges) are available.

Student Financial Services has an assigned liaison to the
Veterans' Office to assist student veterans.

Veterans' Services Committees coordinate student services
support to better address student veterans' needs.

Each college has a Veterans' Club. In the future, we will
offer Veterans Serving Veterans mentor programs.

RCC hosts an annual 5k Veterans' Run and other activities
in support of veterans in STEM scholarships, and all of our colleges
provide veteran-oriented activities.

As mentioned above, one of the ways we help our student veterans is
through scholarships and seeking external resources beyond state
funding. In 2011, the RCCD Foundation received a $1.5 million endowed
estate gift from a U.S. Navy veteran and his wife specifically to
provide scholarships for student veterans. These funds are used
primarily for books, equipment and other academic expenses. Over the
last three years RCCD colleges also have secured 43 competitive federal
grants, totaling $34.6 million. Among those is a million dollar grant
that directly helps disabled veterans. Sixteen of the grants are
designed to educate and prepare students for in-demand job fields, and
the rest seek to improve access, retention and success rates for all
students. Equally important, in 2011 RCC was one of 14 community
colleges statewide to receive a Chancellor's Office grant to open a
Veterans' Resources Center.
One of the things we never forget is that a one-size education does
not fit all of our students. While I can speak to several transfer
success stories such as U.S. Marine Corps veteran Justin Scott who
received a full scholarship as a ``Cyber Corps'' applicant at a
California State University campus to former serviceman Antonio Silva
who received two scholarships to study biochemistry at a four-year
university to veteran Louise Daniels who received a full scholarship to
a University of California campus to study physics, I also want to
assure members of the subcommittee that we have a growing number of
student veterans earning associate degrees and career certificates
before heading directly into the workplace.
Currently, RCC offers 73 different programs leading to certificates
with 80% of those in core career technical areas. District-wide, more
than 110 programs lead to two-year degrees or certificates. This past
year, over 170 student veterans earned either a two-year degree or
certificate at an RCCD college, with roughly 10 percent earning
multiple degrees or certificates.
Having comprehensive support services and programs in place for
student veterans, as well as a wide variety of academic paths
available, provides a strong foundation for success. But if student
veterans are unaware these services and programs exist, few concrete
results rise from those foundations.
We applaud the efforts of Congress and the White House to ensure
that veteran students have access to the best, and most comprehensive,
information available so they can make informed education decisions. HR
4057 and Executive Order 13607 clearly outline directions and
requirements intended to secure, establish and maintain standards and
consistency regarding access and educational services provided for
student veterans.
We believe that a couple of additional steps could help improve the
flow of information and the experiences of student veterans.

1. Refine the VA's eBenefits portal to allow colleges and
universities to directly input veteran-specific or relevant
information. This would provide wider and more seamless access to
student veteran-relevant information versus relying solely on a higher
education institution's ability to outreach directly to veterans. It
would also permit veterans to readily access a comprehensive database
of educational options available to fit their specific interests and
needs. One major benefit is that the information presentation would be
standardized, permitting veterans to directly compare academic services
and programs offered within their geographical area. In addition, this
system would permit a more accessible and comprehensive review by VA
administrators and others to assess compliance with HR 4057 and
Executive Order 13607.

2. Adapt VMET, Verification of Military Experience and Training
Program, to provide guidelines to help accredited colleges evaluate
standards for granting equivalency for credit courses. Right now, VMET
is oriented toward generating transcripts and providing job search
support. By eliminating course evaluation obstacles, we are confident
that colleges can improve education-to-career pathways for student
veterans.

3. Change VRAP, Veterans Retraining Assistance Program, by
extending the benefits from a one-year period to two years. The
majority of our student veterans attend college part-time making it
difficult, if not impossible, to complete a certificate program in 12
months.

4. Increase federal grant opportunities specifically designed to
address ways in which higher educational institutions provide services
to veterans. While the GI Bill provides the veteran with a way to pay
for his or her education, these competitive grants would provide a
means for colleges and universities to expand veteran-specific services
and programs, develop new veteran-oriented initiatives, and establish
best practices and models that could be replicated across the nation.
What is desperately needed is funding mechanisms--similar to Title V
grants--that would assist colleges in developing and advancing student
veteran learning communities.

5. Pass H.R. 331. Authored by Subcommittee Ranking Member Mark
Takano and Congressman Ken Calvert, H.R. 331 would permit the
centralized reporting of veteran enrollment by accredited educational
institutions within the same district. We understand the bill is
scheduled for consideration on June 26th.

Mr. Chairman, that concludes my testimony. On behalf of Riverside
City College and Riverside Community College District, I would like to
thank the members of the subcommittee for giving me the opportunity to
speak today. It has been a great honor. I would be happy to take any
questions.
Executive Summary
Riverside City College president and interim chancellor designee of
Riverside Community College District in Southern California is
scheduled to present testimony before the subcommittee on June 20,
2013. Dr. Azari's testimony focuses on how one public community college
district provides services and programs to student veterans, as well as
the affect of H.R. 4057 and Executive Order 13607 on the institution's
ability to provide such services.
As one of California's largest community college districts
responsible for a service area of 450 sq. miles and 1.4 million people,
RCCD operates three fully accredited colleges with combined enrollments
of 33,000 a semester--approximately 1,200 of whom are veterans. Two
major military facilities are located in that service area--March Air
Reserve Base and a Naval Surface Warfare Center--along with the
Riverside National Cemetery. The District serves a diverse student
population--many of whom are first-time college students--that mirrors
the larger community. The region's college-going rate and socio-
economic levels are lower than the state averages, while the
unemployment rate exceeds state and national averages.
RCCD's three colleges have put several programs in place to better
serve veterans and have attracted six-figure private donations and
federal grants to directly serve veterans. This external funding is
used to fund and expanded veterans' programs, services, and
scholarships. As a result, RCCD student veterans benefit from veteran-
specific orientation, counseling, education planning, offices and
centers, and other support activities.
In 2012, more than 170 student veterans graduated with degrees and/
or certificates. Over 10% of these veterans earned multiple degrees or
certificates--most oriented toward high-demand jobs in the workplace.
Based, in part, upon its experiences in serving student veterans, the
District proposes five primary suggestions for improving the efficacy
of H.R. 4057 and Executive Order 13607, which it believes will lead to
greater access, retention and success for student veterans. These
include the passage of H.R. 331, authored by the Subcommittee Ranking
Member Mark Takano and Congressman Ken Calvert.
Riverside City College, Moreno Valley College, Norco College and
the District look forward to continuing to work with elected officials
and government agencies to improve and implement services and programs
for veterans.

Prepared Statement of Dr. Michael R. Smith
Chairman Flores and distinguished members of the Subcommittee on
Economic Opportunity of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs, my
name is Mike Smith, and I serve as Vice Provost for Strategic Academic
Initiatives at the University of Texas at El Paso. It is my great honor
to appear before this House subcommittee to testify on ``The Value of
Education for Veterans at Public, Private and For-Profit Colleges and
Universities.'' On behalf of UTEP, I would like to thank you for this
opportunity to be with you today.
The University of Texas at El Paso is deeply committed to the
success of our military-affiliated students and to providing them with
outstanding value in pursuit of their post-secondary educational goals.
UTEP has a deep and long-standing connection with the United States
military. Indeed, UTEP was founded on the grounds of the Fort Bliss
Military Institute in 1914 and has shared the City of El Paso with Fort
Bliss ever since. The University of Texas at El Paso honors the service
and sacrifice of our more than 1,500 military-affiliated students, who
include approximately 175 active duty service members, 650 veterans,
and 500 military children and spouses.
The University of Texas at El Paso is a comprehensive, research
university of more than 23,000 students. Mirroring the population of
the El Paso region from which 83% of its students come, 77% of UTEP's
students are Hispanic, and nearly 50% of its undergraduates report a
family income of $20,000 or less. Despite the socioeconomic challenges
of the region, UTEP has found ways to provide both access and
excellence for its students. Over the past decade, for example, degree
completions have grown dramatically at UTEP, with an 85% increase in
undergraduate degrees awarded over the past decade. As a result, UTEP
now consistently ranks among the top three universities nationally in
the number of Hispanic graduates per year in nearly every disciplinary
area.
Even while maintaining its access mission, however, UTEP's research
expenditures have increased steadily to more than $76 million last
year, which places UTEP fourth among all Texas public universities in
federal grant funding. UTEP's success in serving as a catalyst for
human and economic development and quality of life in the region also
has earned it a place in the national spotlight as model 21st century
research university with a firm commitment to access and excellence. In
last year's Washington Monthly magazine rankings, which seek to assess
an institution's impact on the social mobility of the students it
serves, its research and doctoral degree productivity, and its
commitment to serving the region in which it is located, its state and
the nation, UTEP was ranked #12 overall among all U.S. universities and
colleges --between #11 Harvard and #13 Michigan--, and in the social
mobility ranking, UTEP ranked #1 among all U.S. universities for our
success in enabling students from all backgrounds and cultures to
achieve the American Dream.
Providing U.S. military personnel and veterans with the ability to
achieve academic, professional, and career success is likewise integral
to the mission of UTEP. UTEP's military-affiliated student population
has grown by more than 120% in the last five years - from 713 students
in the fall of 2008 to more than 1,500 students today, and over the
last decade, UTEP has graduated almost 2,250 of these students. At the
same time, UTEP has invested in and strengthened the services that it
provides to our military students. UTEP is a member of the Service
Members Opportunity College Consortium, a network of more than 1,900
accredited colleges and universities that follow the principles of good
practice outlined in the Joint Statement on the Transfer and Award of
Credit and which have adopted flexible academic residency requirements
and processes to ensure that service members and veterans receive
appropriate transfer credits for specialized military training and
occupational experiences. UTEP is also a member of the Department of
Veterans Affairs Yellow Ribbon Program and provides matching tuition
assistance with the VA to help out-of-state veterans obtain an
affordable college education at UTEP.
In April of this year, UTEP renamed and re-dedicated what is now
known as its Military Student Success Center. The Military Student
Success Center serves as a central point of coordination for support
services, with a goal of easing veterans' transition to campus life,
increasing retention, enhancing achievement of educational and career
goals, and improving quality of life by augmenting pre-existing
services and support with newly-created programming specifically
developed to meet the needs of military-affiliated students. Staffed
with knowledgeable and well-training counselors, the Military Student
Success Center serves as a single point of contact for UTEP's military
student population and provides or facilitates the provision of
services ranging from admissions to financial aid and from academic and
career counseling to assistance with filing for VA benefits or Tuition
Assistance.
UTEP is providing national leadership in military education by
facilitating the transferability of credits by service members. The
University recently received a $1 million planning grant from the
Kresge foundation to create a network of public universities across the
country that will ease the transferability of college credits. Members
of the AIMS network will eventually enter into articulation agreements
that will recognize credits earned at partner institutions and
seamlessly transfer them to a university in the network that is close
by a soldier's assigned duty station. Closer to campus, five of our
military students were recently selected to participate in the
University's award-winning 21st Century Scholars Program where they
participated in an interactive leadership workshop, networking luncheon
with key El Paso-area employers, and ongoing engagement as University
ambassadors during high profile events on campus.
UTEP is honored to serve its military-affiliated students as they
and their families have served the nation. We appreciate the character,
work ethic, maturity, and perspective that these students bring to our
campus, and we are committed to ensuring their success at UTEP as we
are committed to ensuring the success of all of our students.
Today, I have been asked to review progress in implementing the
provisions of House Bill 4057, now Public Law 112-249, as well as the
provision of Executive Order 13607. I'll begin by discussing the
Executive Order establishing Principles of Excellence for educational
institutions that serve military students, veterans, and their family
members.
One challenge for universities in complying with the Executive
Order 13607 is to create automated processes for integrating various
electronic data systems in order to produce individual student-level
estimates of costs and debt as required by the Principles of
Excellence. For example, every military-affiliated student comes to
UTEP with a unique set of variables that affects how much the student
can expect to pay for a degree and what the student's financial aid
profile may look like. Currently, generating a reasonably accurate
estimate of net costs for an individual student is a manual process
that is labor intensive and therefore expensive. As UTEP's military
student population has grown over the last five years, the need to
create automated processes to produce reliable net cost estimates at
the student level has become a necessity.
I am pleased to report that UTEP will formally adopt the Principles
of Excellence in the very near future. The University is in the final
stages of integrating its student records and financial aid systems
with the Department of Education's Student Shopping Sheet to provide
our military-affiliated students with a customized, clear, and easily
understood estimate of their tuition and fees, Title IV financial aid,
and VA benefits or military Tuition Assistance. These data, along with
University metrics such as the six year graduation rate, loan default
rate, and median borrowing level of UTEP students, will be soon be
available to our military-affiliated students on a single page
accessible through a convenient web portal.
With respect to the other major provisions of Executive Order
13607, compliance by universities, including UTEP, is more easily
accomplished. For example, UTEP has policies in place for the
readmission of service members due to deployment or other military
duties, it has institutional refund policies that are aligned with the
Department of Education's Title IV rules, and all students can access
the University's CAPP system to view their degree programs and progress
toward their degrees. UTEP does not now nor has it ever engaged in
fraudulent or unduly aggressive recruiting practices for any student,
including our military-affiliated students, and the University follows
all requirements of its regional accreditor, the Southern Association
of Colleges and Schools, for approval of new courses and programs. In
sum, implementation of the Principles of Excellence by universities is,
in most cases, fairly straightforward. Providing individualized net
cost estimates for service members and veterans is more complex, and
for universities with significant military student populations, long-
term implementation of Executive Order 13607 may require integrating
student records, financial aid, and military education benefits systems
to generate accurate net cost estimates for students, which may change
during the course of a student's journey towards a degree. UTEP is
committed to full implementation of the Principles of Excellence,
supports the goals embodied in Executive Order 13607, and intends to
formally certify its compliance with the Principles of Excellence in
the near future.
With respect to Public Law 112-249, passed by the 112th Congress
and signed into law by the President on January 10, 2013, the Veterans
Benefits Administration recently released its report to Congress in
which it makes several policy recommendations for implementing this new
statute. These recommendations include:

1) The Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E) Service will
conduct an outreach campaign to raise awareness about Chapter 36
Educational vocational counseling and make the application available
online.

2) The Education Service will modify an existing system or build a
new system to publish positive and negative feedback about IHLs on
gibill.va.gov.

3) The Education Service will coordinate information sharing
between the state approving agencies and National/Regional accrediting
agencies.

4) The Education Service will initially utilize College Navigator
to provide information regarding post-secondary education and training
opportunities. A long-term approach will be a permanent centralized web
application that will provide resources for beneficiaries to compare
the cost of attending different schools.

5) The Education Service will collaborate with the Vocational
Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E) Service to utilize CareerScope as
an academic readiness tool.

Although this statute is new and its implementation is still
evolving, I would like to comment on its provision for reporting
student and state approving agency feedback on quality of instruction,
recruiting practices, and post-graduation employment placement by
institutions of higher learning. Student feedback is certainly helpful
and may aid future students in making useful comparisons among
institutions. I respectfully recommend that the Veterans Benefits
Administration develop a standardized set of metrics for reporting
student feedback on all areas identified in the statute. These
standardized metrics are particularly important for gauging quality of
instruction because student perceptions of instructional quality are
idiosyncratic and can be influenced by the grade received in a course.
Perhaps utilizing a web-based portal, military-affiliated students at
institutions that accept VA benefit dollars or DOD tuition assistance
could be asked a series of questions about recruiting contacts, career
placement services offered or utilized, and perceptions of instruction.
The results from this web-based survey could then be aggregated and
reported for categories of institution along with student response
rates. In contrast, simply reporting the number of complaints or
cataloging qualitative comments about an instructor or a course are not
valid mechanisms for comparing quality across types of institutions.
Once aggregate responses to standardized questions are compiled,
Public Law 112-249 allows institutions of higher learning to ``address
issues regarding feedback before the feedback is published.'' In
practice, colleges and universities should be permitted to respond
annually in writing to the survey findings, and those responses should
be made publicly available alongside the survey findings themselves.
With a process such as this in place, military-affiliated students can
make meaningful comparisons among institutions with similar missions.
Beginning in the mid-1980s, the costs of higher education have
steadily shifted from the public at large to the individual student and
his or her family. The National Center on Public Policy and Higher
Education reports that the price of college tuition and fees grew by
almost 450% between 1982 and 2006, far outstripping other major indices
and expenditure categories including the Consumer Price Index and the
cost of food, housing, transportation, and health care. At the same
time, state and local expenditures on higher education have been
steadily declining to an average of $5,896 per student last year, the
lowest level of expenditure in 25 years. The combination of increasing
costs, decreasing state support, and rising tuition and fees is
unsustainable.
Across the nation, state-supported universities have responded to
these pressures by reducing student services, increasing class sizes
and teaching loads, capping or reducing enrollments, and relying more
heavily on less expensive part-time and adjunct faculty. Like many
other institutions, the University of Texas at El Paso has felt the
effects of state budget reductions but remains deeply committed to its
mission of access and excellence. UTEP remains an outstanding value for
all of its students, including its service members, veterans, and their
families. According to the U.S. Department of Education, the national
average net price for a public four year institution was $10,471 in AY
2009-10. UTEP's net price of only $2,066 placed it as the 12th most
affordable public four year university in the nation. And among the
eight emerging research institutions in Texas, UTEP has the lowest
average tuition fees. Military-affiliated students at UTEP have access
to outstanding engineering and STEM programs and nationally-recognized
faculty while attending one of the most affordable public universities
in the nation. While not immune to the pressures of rising costs and
diminishing public investment, UTEP has worked diligently to keep its
tuition and fees affordable while maintaining its commitment to high
quality instruction and cutting-edge research.
On behalf of President Diana Natalicio and the University of Texas
at El Paso, I would like to thank the Subcommittee for this opportunity
to discuss the value of higher education for our service members and
veterans. We honor their service and sacrifice and are committed to
ensuring their success at UTEP.
Executive Summary
The University of Texas at El Paso is deeply committed to the
success of our military-affiliated students and to providing them with
outstanding value in pursuit of their post-secondary educational goals.
UTEP is one of the most affordable public universities in the nation
and was ranked first in the nation by Washington Monthly Magazine for
increasing the social mobility of its graduates.
UTEP's military-affiliated student population has grown by more
than 120% in five years. At the same time, UTEP has invested in and
strengthened the services that it provides to its military students and
their family members. Its Military Student Success Center serves as a
central point of coordination for support services on campus, with a
goal of easing veterans' transition to campus life, increasing
retention, enhancing achievement of educational and career goals, and
improving quality of life by augmenting pre-existing services and
support with newly-created programming specifically developed to meet
the needs of military-affiliated students.
In the near future, UTEP will formally ratify the Principles of
Excellence embodied in Executive Order 13607. The University is in the
final stages of integrating its student records and financial aid
systems with the Department of Education's Student Shopping Sheet to
provide our military-affiliated students with a customized, clear, and
easily understood estimate of their tuition and fees, Title IV
financial aid, and VA benefits or military Tuition Assistance. These
data, along with University metrics such as the six year graduation
rate, loan default rate, and median borrowing level of UTEP students,
will be soon be available to our military-affiliated students on a
single page accessible through a convenient web portal.
As required by Public Law 112-249, obtaining and publishing student
feedback on quality of instruction, recruiting practices, and post-
graduation employment placement by institutions of higher learning is
an important goal. The Veterans Benefits Administration should develop
a standardized set of metrics for reporting student feedback in these
areas and permit institutions of higher learning to respond annually in
writing to student survey findings. A process that standardizes student
feedback and publishes responses by colleges and universities will
allow military-affiliated students to make meaningful comparisons among
institutions with similar missions.
While higher education costs have outstripped median income and
Consumer Price Index growth for more than 20 years, UTEP's net price
makes it the nation's 12th most affordable public four year university.
Military-affiliated students at UTEP have access to outstanding
engineering and STEM programs and nationally-recognized faculty while
attending one of the most affordable public universities in the nation.

Prepared Statement of Michael Dakduk
Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano and members of the
subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting Student Veterans of America (SVA) to
participate in this hearing to discuss the President's Executive Order
13607, otherwise known as the Principles of Excellence and Public Law
112-249. We are particularly grateful for this opportunity to provide
the subcommittee with new developments on tracking student veteran
outcomes to better define student veteran success.
Student Veterans of America (SVA) is the largest and only national
association of military veterans in higher education. Our mission is to
provide military veterans with the resources, support, and advocacy
needed to succeed in higher education and after graduation. We
currently have over 800 chapters, or student veteran organizations, at
colleges and universities in all 50 states that assist veterans in
their transition to and through higher education. SVA chapters are
organized at four-year and two-year public, private, nonprofit, and
for-profit institutions of higher learning providing us with a distinct
perspective on veterans earning post-secondary credentials.
SVA has been involved in the efforts to improve consumer
information and consumer protections for student veterans since late
2011 and more formally in early 2012. In January of last year, SVA was
a key contributor and signatory of a coalition letter, authored by the
VFW, calling for executive and congressional action to inform and
protect veterans in higher education \2\. The letter culminated with
the issuance of Executive Order 13607 and the passage of H.R. 4057, a
bill introduced by Rep. Gus Bilirakis and now Public Law 112-249.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ VFW Hill Blog. ``VFW Builds Coalition to Support Student-
Veteran Success,'' February 12, 2012. http://thevfw.blogspot.com/2012/
02/vfw-builds-coalition-to-support-student.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key component of 13607 is the call to track student veteran
academic success rates. According to Executive Order 13607 Section 3c,
the Secretaries of Defense, Veterans Affairs, and Education are to
track student outcomes, to the extent practicable, utilizing existing
administration data \3\. The tracking of student veteran outcomes is
critical to identifying the academic success of veterans and those
programs and services that lead to higher success rates. This allows
Congress to better allocate resources to programs and services of
value.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Barack Obama. ``Establishing Principles of Excellence for
Educational Institutions Serving Service Members, Veterans, Spouses,
and Other Family Members,'' Executive Order 13607, 27 April 2012,
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2012-05-02/pdf/2012-10715.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, both the executive and congressional action do not go far
enough with regard to tracking veteran and servicemember outcomes.
Given that data on veteran and servicemember outcomes has never been
tracked, we remain concerned that existing administrative data remains
flawed, or minimal, at best.
National level data on student veterans has been difficult to find,
analyze, and interpret due to poor collection methods, narrow inclusion
criteria, and mistakes in correctly identifying student veterans. Most
traditional federally maintained post-secondary databases exclude a
portion of the student veteran population while including other
military populations in their databases, making accurate tracking of
student veteran academic outcomes difficult.
Through the National Center of Education Statistics (NCES), the
Department of Education has established the traditional method of
tracking post-secondary student outcomes. The NCES maintains several
databases that contain information on post-secondary students collected
from institutes of higher education and financial aid records. However,
many of the NCES databases have serious flaws in tracking student
veteran outcomes, mostly due to issues with properly identifying
student veterans.
The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) is the
database most frequently used to track post-secondary student outcomes.
IPEDS is a collection of interrelated annual surveys sent to every
college, university, and technical and vocational institution that
participates in the federal student financial aid programs. These
schools are required to report data on enrollments, program
completions, graduation rates, and institutional data. However, IPEDS
only collects data on first-time, full-time students entering in the
fall term. IPEDS excludes all students who transfer schools, start at
community colleges then transfer to a 4-year university, temporarily
withdraw from school for personal or military-related reasons, attend
part-time at some point in their academic career, and students whose
degree goals are Associate level degrees, job training, or vocational
certificates.
A second NCES database that contains information on student
veterans, the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS), is also
problematic. The NPSAS is a comprehensive research dataset on post-
secondary student demographics, financial aid, and enrollment. The
primary weakness with the NPSAS lies in its method of identifying
student veteran populations. NPSAS primarily uses the Federal
Application for Financial Student Aid (FAFSA) in classifying samples as
active duty servicemembers or veterans, with student interviews and
institutional records to supplement data. The FAFSA contains two
questions about military service. The first asks if the applicant is
currently serving on Active Duty in the U.S. Armed Forces. The second
question asks if the applicant is a veteran of the U.S. Armed Forces.
These questions are too narrow, excluding or misidentifying a
portion of military servicemembers or veterans who served. For example,
a deactivated reservist can be activated and deployed for duty, return
home, deactivated and still remain a reservist while attending school.
They are eligible for some Department of Veteran Affairs education
benefits but would not be classified as ``currently serving on Active
Duty'' or as a veteran and therefore would be excluded from NPSAS based
on their responses on the FAFSA. A second example is a servicemember in
the Individual Ready Reserve who enrolls in college while in the
process of separating from the military after serving on Active Duty.
This group would be misidentified and excluded using the questions on
the FAFSA; they may not identify as veterans, nor are they serving on
Active Duty. In addition, because GI Bill benefits are administered by
the Department of Veterans Affairs and are not included in Title IV
funding under the Higher Education Act (HEA) student veterans are not
required to complete and submit a FAFSA to receive GI Bill benefits. As
a result, student veterans who do not complete and submit a FAFSA are
excluded from the NPSAS database.
Finally, the Department of Education databases to track student
veterans are further complicated by their use of a broad definition of
veterans' education benefits. Under Title IV of the Higher Education
Act, veterans' education benefits include Reserve Officer Training
Corps (ROTC) scholarships, Department of Defense Tuition Assistance
Program funds, and Survivors' and Dependents' Educational Assistance
Program benefits, as well as GI Bill benefits, making it difficult to
separate student veterans from other groups using funding under this
section \4\.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Higher Education Technical Corrections. Pub. L. No. 111-39,
111th Cong., 1st Sess. (July 1, 2009) http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/
PLAW-111publ39/pdf/PLAW-111publ39.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In contrast to the Department of Education, the Department of
Veterans Affairs is able to identify nearly every student veteran, but
has only recently been instructed, through Executive Order 13607, to
track and collect information on student veteran outcomes. The
Department of Veterans Affairs has a responsibility to disburse student
veterans' tuition payments to schools after enrollment has been
verified. In order to meet this responsibility, the Department of
Veterans Affairs only collects information on what institutions the
student attends, and how much remaining benefits the student has left
to use. It is difficult to accurately translate this data into student
veteran academic outcomes. Examples of shortfalls may include student
veterans who have used all of their education benefits but have not
completed their post-secondary education or vocational program, while
student veterans who have not used all of their education benefits may
have completed or reached their post-secondary education and vocational
goal. However, as previously stated, Executive Order 13607 directs the
Department of Veterans Affairs, in concert with other government
agencies, to begin collecting data on student veterans' academic
outcomes to the greatest extent possible under current law.
Aside from Federal databases, results and datasets from national
surveys, specifically the 2010 National Survey of Veterans (NSV) and
the American Community Survey (ACS), have been used to track student
veteran outcomes. Both surveys contain information of the participants'
veteran status and education; however, both also have flaws that make
their results difficult for policymakers and stakeholders to use for
discussion and decision-making.
The 2010 NSV is a survey conducted by Westat for the Department of
Veterans Affairs to collect information on beneficiaries' knowledge and
use of benefit programs. Among several other topics the survey includes
completion of education goals, reasons for not using available
education benefits, veterans' knowledge of education benefits available
to them, and the frequency of usage of education benefits among
beneficiary groups. Westat used the Department of Veterans Affairs
database, the Department of Defense database, and a randomized
residential address list from the U.S. Postal Office to obtain a
nationwide representative sample. A flaw of the 2010 NSV is the lack of
detailed survey questions regarding education or vocation completion. A
single question on the survey asks respondents if they have completed
the program for which they have used VA Education benefits. This is a
broad question that can be interpreted in various ways and may have a
high risk of misinterpretation, such as participants replying no if
they finished their program after having used all of their benefits.
The 2010 NSV potentially offers a better estimate of post-secondary
completion rates for all student veterans than the Department of
Education and the Department of Veterans Affairs databases; however,
the results become weaker when conducting detailed analyses, such as
investigating completion rates of student veterans who separated from
the military after 2001. The sample size for this group is quite
smaller, resulting in weaker conclusions. A second weakness is the
survey's reliance on self-reported data that can result in participants
misrepresenting their achievements, both intentionally and
unintentionally. Another flaw is that the NSV is typically conducted
every ten years, making the results less relevant and difficult to
interpret over time.
A second national survey is the American Community Survey (ACS)
from the United States Census Department. The ACS collects information
on a wide range of demographics, including age, sex, income and
benefits, education, and veteran status using mail, telephone, and
personal interview for data collection. A strongpoint of the ACS is its
use of a large, national sample size making the results representative
and generalizable.
However, the ACS also has several flaws in tracking student veteran
outcomes. First, when asking participants to describe the highest level
of education they have attained, the ACS combines ``some college'' and
``Associate degree'' into one category, making results difficult to
interpret. Without follow-up questions regarding current enrollment, it
is difficult to account for the number of student veterans still
enrolled in post-secondary educational programs versus those that
withdrew. Additionally, ACS does not include a survey question
regarding vocational or on-the-job training programs that veterans may
use their educational benefits towards. It is unclear if student
veterans would equate these programs as ``some college'' or choose
``high school diploma only.'' The lack of data on veterans' military
service in the ACS is another weakness. Without this data it is not
possible to ascertain when a student veteran separated from the
military and started their post-secondary studies, thus making it
difficult to conduct detailed analysis on student veteran outcomes.
Compared with the Department of Education alone, the Department of
Veterans Affairs database, the 2010 NSV, and the ACS offer a better
identification of the student veteran population leading to a better
estimate of student veterans' academic outcomes. However, the
Department of Veterans Affairs database, the 2010 NSV and the ACS were
not primarily designed to measure or track post-secondary academic
outcomes like the Department of Education databases. All of these
databases and surveys have flaws making it difficult to accurately
track and measure student veteran post-secondary outcomes at the
national level.
The flaws summarized in this testimony contribute to confusing
results and misleading perceptions of student veteran success. The 2010
NSV reports student veteran post-secondary completion rate at 68% \5\;
the ACS reports 56% of veterans' have completed at least some college
or higher; \6\ the NCES reports the six-year completion rate for
student veterans starting in 2003 was 36% with a margin of error of
11.5% \7\. It is evident that the current systems for tracking student
veteran post-secondary outcomes are inefficient and inadequate. It
fosters confusion, contradiction, and lacks clarity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Westat. National Survey of Veterans, Active Duty Service
Members, Demobilized National Guard and Reserve Members, Family
Members, and Surviving Spouses. Final Report, Rockville, MD: Westat,
2010. Retrieved from http://http://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/
SurveysAndStudies/NVSSurveyFinalWeightedReport.pdf.
\6\ U.S. Census Bureau. ``Table B21003: Veteran status by
educational attainment for the civilian population 25 years and over.
2007-2011 American community survey 5-year estimate,'' Accessed June
13, 2013. http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/
productview.xhtml?pid=ACS--11--5YR--B21003&prodType=table.
\7\ U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, ``Six-year attainment rate at any institution among all
first-time beginning students,'' 2003-04 Beginning Postsecondary
Students Longitudinal Study, Second Follow-up, April, 2009. Accessed
June 13, 2013. http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/npsas/xls/F09--VETERAN--
PROUT6B.xlsx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To accurately measure and track student veteran academic outcomes,
a database would have to be constructed that addresses the flaws found
in the current databases and surveys. The database would first have to
be able to accurately identify current student veterans, excluding
veteran dependents and Active Duty service members enrolled in post-
secondary programs. Second, it would need to be able to track student
veterans' enrollment at the individual level, so that student veterans
are not excluded due to transferring schools or taking a break from
college. Third, it would need to be routinely updated so that the data
remains relevant and informative to policymakers and stakeholders.
These criteria form the foundation for the Student Veteran
Attainment database, a database created out of a partnership between
the Student Veterans of America, Department of Veterans Affairs, and
the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) that aims to, for the first
time in history, accurately track and measure student veteran academic
outcomes at the national level.
The initial design of the Student Veteran Attainment database
utilizes the veteran education beneficiary information from the
Department of Veterans Affairs to identify student veterans. The NSC
collects individual student enrollment data from institutions of higher
education, providing accurate enrollment and completion data at the
individual student level even if a student transfers schools or stops-
out. By cross referencing veteran education benefit eligibility with
individual post-secondary education enrollment history housed in the
NCS, the Student Veteran Attainment database will liberate existing
data on student veteran completion rates.
This preliminary database is focused on developing an accurate
method to capture student veteran degree attainment and completion
rates. In addition, the partnership and database has the potential to
expand to include research into student veteran persistence rates. The
analysis of student veteran persistence creates new areas of
investigation, such as time of withdrawals and duration of stop-outs,
which could lead to focused programs and services aimed at increasing
student veteran post-secondary persistence.
Last year an MSNBC online news article reported 88% of student
veterans do not complete their post-secondary education goals \8\, a
``statistic'' that was later repeated in a Huffington Post article \9\.
This rate has not been substantiated or replicated in other research,
and the report's source has never been found despite the best efforts
of SVA and other researchers. Currently, policymakers and stakeholders
are making decisions affecting student veterans with flawed data that
does not give a clear picture of student veterans' post-secondary
success. This harms institutions of higher education that are dedicated
to serving student veterans, it harms the Veteran Service Organizations
that work to support student veterans, and most unfairly, it harms the
student veterans themselves.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Briggs, Bill, ``Thousands of veterans failing in latest
battlefield: college,'' MSNBC, July 2, 2012. Accessed June 13, 2013.
http://usnews.nbcnews.com/--news/2012/07/02/12509343-thousands-of-
veterans-failing-in-latest-battlefield-college?lite.
\9\ Wood, David. ``Veterans' college drop-out rate soars.''
Huffington Post, Oct 25, 2012. Accessed June 13, 2013. http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/25/veterans-college-drop-out--n--
2016926.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Establishing an accurate database to track student veteran academic
outcomes is the first step we need to take, not the last. Accurate data
will allow student veterans to use their limited resources in more
effective ways, increasing completion rates and making the return on
investment of the GI Bill rise in parallel. Once we have an accurate
national rate of post-secondary completion established, then we can
explore programs and services that increase those rates, we can help
colleges and universities better serve those veterans, and we can
better support student veterans as they work to earn their degrees.
Thank you Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee for allowing Student Veterans of America to
present our views on efforts focused on supporting veterans, military
servicemembers, and their families.
References
Barack Obama. ``Establishing Principles of Excellence for
Educational Institutions Serving Service Members, Veterans, Spouses,
and Other Family Members,'' Executive Order 13607, 27 April 2012,
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2012-05-02/pdf/2012-10715.pdf

Briggs, Bill, ``Thousands of veterans failing in latest
battlefield: college,'' MSNBC, July 2, 2012. Accessed June 13, 2013.
http://usnews.nbcnews.com/--news/2012/07/02/12509343-thousands-of-
veterans-failing-in-latest-battlefield-college?lite

Higher Education Technical Corrections. Pub. L. No. 111-39, 111th
Cong., 1st Sess. (July 1, 2009) http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-
111publ39/pdf/PLAW-111publ39.pdf

National Student Clearing House. ``Clearinghouse Facts,'' Accessed
June 14, 2013. http://www.studentclearinghouse.org/about/
clearinghouse--facts.php

U.S. Census Bureau. ``Table B21003: Veteran status by educational
attainment for the civilian population 25 years and over. 2007-2011
American community survey 5-year estimate,'' Accessed June 13, 2013.
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/
productview.xhtml?pid=ACS--11--5YR--B21003&prodType=table

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, ``Six-year attainment rate at any institution among all
first-time beginning students,'' 2003-04 Beginning Postsecondary
Students Longitudinal Study, Second Follow-up, April, 2009. Accessed
June 13, 2013. http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/npsas/xls/F09--VETERAN--
PROUT6B.xlsx

VFW Hill Blog. ``VFW Builds Coalition to Support Student-Veteran
Success,'' February 12, 2012. http://thevfw.blogspot.com/2012/02/vfw-
builds-coalition-to-support-student.html.

Westat. National Survey of Veterans, Active Duty Service Members,
Demobilized National Guard and Reserve Members, Family Members, and
Surviving Spouses. Final Report, Rockville, MD: Westat, 2010. Retrieved
from http://http://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/SurveysAndStudies/
NVSSurveyFinalWeightedReport.pdf.

Wood, David. ``Veterans' college drop-out rate soars.'' Huffington
Post, Oct 25, 2012. Accessed June 13, 2013. http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/25/veterans-college-drop-out--n--
2016926.html
Executive Summary
As the largest and only national association of military veterans
in higher education, Student Veterans of America's (SVA) mission is to
provide military veterans with the resources, support, and advocacy
needed to succeed in higher education and after graduation. SVA was a
key contributor in the effort to provide veterans and servicemembers
with greater consumer protections and consumer education. SVA has also
been a strong proponent of tracking student veteran outcomes to better
define the success of veterans in higher education and to dispel, or
substantiate, notions of low veteran graduation rates.
A key component of Executive Order 13607 is the call to track
student veteran academic success rates utilizing existing
administration data. However, current weaknesses in Federal databases
and national surveys to track and define student veteran academic
outcomes have resulted in several conflicting reports regarding student
veteran post-secondary completion rates. Some media reports have
claimed that the student veteran drop-out rate may be as high as 88%;
in contrast, national surveys conducted by the government suggest
completion rates may be as high as 68%. The wide range of completion
and drop-out rates has led to confusion regarding student veterans'
post-secondary academic success. This does not aid policymakers and
stakeholders who make decisions that have a direct effect on student
veterans.
To gain a better understanding of student veteran post-secondary
completion rates, SVA brokered a partnership between the Department of
Veterans Affairs and The National Student Clearinghouse, a nonprofit
organization with enrollment data on over 95% of America's student
population \1\, to create and develop a Student Veteran Attainment
Database. SVA expects to initially report on the completion rate of
approximately one million veterans that have used various forms of the
GI Bill between 2002 and 2010 by the end of 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Student Clearinghouse. ``Clearinghouse Facts,''
Accessed June 14, 2013. http://www.studentclearinghouse.org/about/
clearinghouse--facts.php.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The attainment database is a vital first step to accurately
identify, track, and measure student veteran post-secondary completion
rates. In addition, it will provide a path to future research such as
student veteran persistence and identifying critical times where
student veterans are more likely to withdraw from college; identify
programs and policies that promote student veteran persistence and
completion; and help colleges and universities struggling to support
student veterans.

Prepared Statement of Steve Gunderson
Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano, and Members of the
Committee, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to appear
before this Committee and for holding this important hearing on the
Value of Education for Veterans at Public, Private and For Profit
Colleges and Universities.
I am here to represent the member institutions of The Association
of Private Sector Colleges and Universities, their faculty and the
millions of students who attend our institutions. Our institutions
provide a full range of higher education programs to students seeking
career-focused education. We provide short-term certificate and diploma
programs, two- and four-year associate and baccalaureate degree
programs, as well as a small number of master's and doctorate programs.
We educate students for careers in over 200 occupational fields
including information technology; allied health; automotive repair;
business administration; commercial art; and culinary and hospitality
management.
Sixty-four percent of our students are low-income. Sixty-seven
percent have delayed post-secondary education making them older than
the 18-22 traditional college demographic. Single parents make up 31
percent of our students and 46 percent are from a minority population.
It goes without saying that our students are considered ``non-
traditional,'' but more and more they are the face of higher education
in this country, so we should think of them as the new traditional.
Most of our students juggle work, family and school. Most cannot attend
a traditional institution of higher education because of scheduling,
location or admissions criteria. Yet, these are the students who need
the opportunity to pursue higher education if we are going to succeed
in filling jobs that require skilled workers. Our institutions offer
that opportunity and have and will continue to play a vital role in
providing skills-based education.
During the recent economic downturn when states and local
communities reduced education budgets, many of our colleagues at public
institutions had to endure budget cuts resulting in limited access and
service for students. But our institutions continued to invest in their
schools to offer students industry-leading innovation while expanding
capacity and meeting the evolving demands of employers. Because we are
not dependent on brick-and-mortar facilities to expand access, we are
able to meet the growing demand for post-secondary education through
vastly expanding online technology offerings, and perhaps our most
successful academic delivery - a blend of online and on-site programs.
Even while investing in education programs, our schools have been
successful in reducing the cost of attendance for our students.
Recently, the U.S. Department of Education released an analysis that
compares the average costs at institutions between 2010-2011 and 2012-
2013. Only our institutions experienced a reduction in the average
costs - 2.2 percent; other sectors experienced an increase in costs,
with public in-state cost increasing 6.7 percent, public out-of-state
increasing 4.1 percent and private non-profit rising 3.1 percent. For
two-year institutions, our schools were able to reduce costs to
students by 0.2 percent, while public in-state cost increased 6.4
percent, public out-of-state increased 3.9 percent and private non-
profit rose 1.8 percent. Unlike our public colleagues, we don't have
differing rates of tuition for in-state versus out-of-state students.
We've expanded educational opportunities for many people, as
evidenced by the increasing number of degrees our institutions have
awarded. Yes, much of this is the simple result that our sector of
post-secondary education is probably the newest with new campuses and
new forms of academic delivery. But in an era when we expect 65 percent
of all jobs and 85 percent of all new jobs to require some level of
post-secondary education this growth in access is important. From 2000
to 2011, degrees awarded by our institutions have soared. Associate's
degrees increased by 116,903 degrees (152.5 percent) (compared with
just 52.6 percent at public and 13.7 percent at private nonprofit
institutions), bachelor's degrees increased by 91,478 degrees (397
percent) (compared with just 34 percent at public and 25.5 percent at
private nonprofit institutions), master's degrees increased by 66,522
degrees (572.1 percent) (compared to 37.9 percent at public and 45.1
percent at private nonprofit institutions), and doctorate degrees
increased by 4,176 degrees (400.4 percent) (compared to 34.7 percent at
public and 34.7 percent at private nonprofit institutions). We
conferred 1.5 million degrees and 1.85 million certificates. Between
2008 and 2012, while the country was deep in recession, our
institutions prepared 3.5 million adults with the education and skills
essential for real jobs, real incomes and a real chance at America's
middle class.
Finally, our institutions experienced a higher growth in degrees
than all others between 2010/2011 and 2011/2012. Degrees conferred by
our institutions increased 8.6 percent compared to 5.2 percent by
public and 3.2 percent by private nonprofits. According to Bureau of
Labor Statistics data, the degrees and certificates awarded by our
institutions are in some of the fastest-growing occupations nationwide.
For example, in 2010/2011, we awarded 52 percent of all Dental
Assistant Certificates, 50 percent of all Veterinary Technologists and
Technicians Associate Degrees and 40 percent of all Diagnostic Medical
Sonographers Associates Degrees. Without our students, employers in
these fields would be unable to find the well-trained staff they need
to deliver services to patients and customers.
We share your commitment to ensuring that every post-secondary
institution provides the highest level of service to each and every
student, especially active duty military, veterans and their families.
We take great pride that our schools - with the support services,
flexible schedules, and focused delivery of academics - are designing
and delivering education in ways that meet the needs of today's
military and veteran student. We strive to ensure that all students
receive the education they deserve.
APSCU and our member institutions want to ensure that our students
are well-prepared to enter the workforce and that every institution of
higher education lives up to the high standards expected by our
students. Private sector colleges and universities have a long and
important relationship with our nation's military and veteran students.
We celebrate who they are and what they do. Our actions, as educators
of hundreds of thousands of military and veteran students, honor this
partnership by providing our military and veteran students with the
best possible education experience at our institutions.
According to the latest data obtained by APSCU from the Department
of Defense, 762 private sector colleges and universities (PSCUs) are
participating in the Tuition Assistance (TA) program and have been
approved to offer courses to active duty military.
Earlier this year, when the various services announced that they
would eliminate TA as a result of the Sequester, Senators Hagan and
Inhofe noted in their letter to Secretary of Defense Hagel that tuition
assistance is an important recruitment and retention tool that
significantly contributes to our military's morale. As an all-volunteer
force, during a period of prolonged conflict, effective recruitment,
retention and morale initiatives are essential to attracting and
retaining professional personnel. Over 60 percent of our service
members stated that the increased ability to pursue higher education
was an important factor in deciding to join the military. More
importantly, service members have taken their ambitions and turned them
into reality by taking classes and earning degrees, diplomas and
certificates. These are truly extraordinary accomplishments achieved in
stressful situations with time and our institutions are proud to be a
part of the TA program and serve these dedicated men and women of the
military.
The need for TA is confirmed in the words of Sgt. 1st Class James
Wallace who is stationed at Ft. Knox Kentucky and using TA to attend
Sullivan University. In a recent letter to me, Sgt. Wallace said, ``I
believe that the Tuition Assistance program for soldiers is a great
tool to help those people serving their country prepare for the future.
It doesn't matter if that person is going to make a whole 20 year
career or just complete one enlistment, there is life past the
military.''
Sgt. Wallace went on to describe the value of TA for himself and
his family saying, ``Like many other soldiers I used the whole $4,500
TA benefit every year. For the last two years, I have had to pay out of
my own pocket so that I could take three classes per semester. Thanks
to TA, I only have one quarter remaining before I receive my
Associate's degree. My Associate's degree has helped me in applying to
become a Warrant Officer. The TA program is about $1000 short depending
on the college or university that you are attending. Even though I do
come up short every year, it beats having to come out-of-pocket for the
whole amount. Soldiers and their families already sacrifice enough to
serve their country. Anything that the government can do to help assist
the quality of life for soldiers and families is greatly appreciated by
them.''
Another student, Staff Sgt. Thomas M. Windley wrote that he began
attending ECPI University in the summer of 2004 as a veteran recently
discharged from service in the U.S. Navy.
``Several months after enrolling with ECPI, I enlisted in the U.S.
Army. During my attendance at ECPI, I was appointed System
Administrator for my unit because of my knowledge of computer systems.
I utilized my Tuition Assistance and I was able to complete my degree
program and obtain an associate's degree in Network Security within 18
months. In 2007, I earned another Associate's degree in electrical
engineering. It was at this point in my military career that my
civilian education assisted me in being promoted over my peers. In
2010, I worked on a network installation team and within three months I
earned my CompTIA A+, Network+, and Security + certifications due
largely to my education, experience, and opportunity that ECPI provided
me.
``In 2010, my military assignment took me overseas to Afghanistan.
While deployed, I earned my Bachelor's degree in Computer Information
Science with a concentration in Network Security. Earning my degree led
to another promotion, which was due to the tools and benefits ECPI
provided in the areas of leadership, professionalism, and core
curriculum content. I have been tasked, since my promotion, with
training others in my unit both below and above me in rank, to sit for
certifications, thus far those I have trained have a 100 percent pass
record. I would highly recommend this program to fellow service
members, I believe ECPI to have the best customer service of any online
school and I have attended several. Furthermore, the curriculum is very
precise and concentrated in the areas most needed to perform the job at
maximum proficiency.''
Whether we are talking about Sergeant First Class James Wallace,
Staff Sergeant Thomas M. Windley or an Army Major working on her
Master's degree for career advancement, these men and women know what
they want and are committed to getting it. Their service coupled with
their commitment to getting an education is truly extraordinary.
Educating our active duty military is as important as fulfilling
our commitment to veterans. According to the Veterans Administration
data, more than 325,000 veterans and their families have been served by
our institutions or 28 percent of all veterans using their post 9/11-GI
benefits. Although veterans make up less than 10 percent of our
students, we are proud to serve those who choose our institutions. More
than 1,200 of our institutions participate in the Yellow Ribbon Program
and a majority of those impose no limits on the number of eligible
students while providing the maximum institutional contribution.
You might ask why we serve 13 percent of all post-secondary
students but 28 percent of all veterans on the Post 9/11 GI Bill? Quite
simply, the answer lies in our customer service to the veterans.
Returning from duty in Afghanistan or Iraq, most veterans do not want
to live in a dorm and take five different three-credit courses at a
time. Instead they want a focused and accelerated academic delivery
that can transition them from the front lines to full-time employment
as soon as possible. Because of our longer school days and year-round
academic programming, our students can often complete an associate's
degree in 18 months or a bachelor's degree in just over three years.
We understand the challenges that arise when our military men and
women transition back to civilian life and enter into post-secondary
education. Often, traditional institutions of higher education are not
the best fit. Our military and veteran students are not the fresh-out-
of-high school, first-time, full-time student living on campus and
attending college thanks to the generosity of family. Our military and
veteran students are like many of our new traditional students -
working, with a spouse and children and paying for education with money
they have saved. Service members and veterans attend our institutions
because of many of the institutional qualities that are inherently
ingrained into the framework of our institutions, such as geographic
proximity to home or work, institutional emphasis on the adult learner,
and flexible class schedules. This is why for over 65 years our schools
have been providing education and training services to members of the
armed services and their families.
We know that military students want career-focused education that
is delivered in a flexible academic setting that best meets their
unique needs. Our courses are designed to be relevant, concentrated,
and suited to the personal goals of our students. This education
foundation is of a particular benefit to military and veterans seeking
a promotion, advance in rank or supplementing skills attained during
their service. This type of purposeful, tailored education ensures that
veteran and military students nimbly move from the classroom onto their
next academic or professional goal. The ability to offer courses on-
base, online, and on the student's schedule is of tremendous value.
In recognition of the growing numbers of military and veteran
students enrolling at our institutions, APSCU adopted Five Tenets of
Veteran Education that included the creation of a Blue Ribbon Taskforce
for Military and Veteran Education. The Taskforce was comprised of a
broad group of individuals who share a common commitment towards the
education of service members and veterans representing a diverse range
of institutions, including non-APSCU members, as well as
representatives of nationally-recognized leadership organizations in
the area of military and veteran post-secondary education. The
Taskforce was specifically charged with identifying, collecting, and
documenting practices and programs that meet the unique needs of
military and veteran students, foster persistence, and enable them to
meet their academic and professional goals.
I have attached a copy of the Best Practices to this testimony, so
I won't discuss them in detail, but I would just highlight the four
major topic areas addressed by the Taskforce. (1) Consumer information,
enrollment and recruitment makes clear that information should be
provided in clear and understandable language and that no student
should be subjected to aggressive or misleading recruiting practices.
(2) Institutional commitment to provide military and veteran student
support identifies initiatives related to personnel and faculty
designed to help employees understand the special needs of military and
veteran students. It also identifies institutional policies aimed at
assisting military and veteran students such as participating in the
Yellow Ribbon program, offering a reduced military tuition rate,
maximizing the use of military training credit recommended by ACE, or
exceeding the standards of the Uniformed Services Employment and Re-
Employment Act for deployed employees. (3) Promising practices for
ensuring military and veteran student success through student services
discusses the need for student centers and partnerships, such as
establishing a Student Veterans of America chapter or having a military
and veterans lounge where students can meet and find peer to peer
support. (4) Establish institutional research guidelines for tracking
military and veteran student success encourages the collection and use
of data to improve programs and evaluate program effectiveness. We are
encouraging all our institutions and our colleagues at other
institutions of higher education to look at these Best Practices and
find opportunities to implement them where appropriate in order to best
serve our military and veteran students.
A 2010 study by the Rand Corporation and ACE entitled ``Military
Veterans' Experiences Using the Post 9/11 GI Bill and Pursuing
Postsecondary Education reported findings which support the view that
our institutions are working to support these students. The report
noted the following:

Rate of satisfaction with the credit transfer experience
was 60 percent among survey respondents who had attempted to transfer
military credits to our institutions, versus only 27 percent among
those from community colleges and 40 percent among respondents from
public four-year colleges. Only participants from private nonprofit
colleges reported higher credit transfer satisfaction rates, at 82
percent;

Respondents from our institutions reported fewer
challenges to accessing required courses than all other institutions
except for four-year public institutions (33percent of respondents at
public two-year colleges, 26 percent at private nonprofits, 22 percent
at our institutions and 18 percent at public colleges).

Survey respondents in private sector colleges and
universities reported higher than average satisfaction rates with
academic advising, at 67 percent, versus about 50 percent satisfaction
among respondents at other institution types.

Reasons for choosing our institutions included: career
oriented programs with flexible schedules, like-minded adult students,
flexible credit transfer rules and same institution in multiple
locations.

Many PSCUs offer a reduced military tuition rate for active duty,
National Guard, and reserve service members and their spouses to
minimize out-of-pocket student expenses and offer scholarships to
wounded service members and their spouses as they recover from their
injuries and prepare for new career opportunities. Some also maintain a
military-friendly deployment policy, which allows military students to
withdraw and return to school at any time if they are deployed and
provide specialized military student advisors to evaluate past military
training and experience and assess eligible academic transfer of credit
based on American Council of Education (ACE) recommendations. The
generous awarding of credit for military skills and experience and fair
transfer of credit policies exemplify how PSCUs strive to be
responsible stewards of this educational benefit, as exiting service
members are not forced to take duplicative or extraneous classes.
Recent Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data suggest that the
unemployment situation of our nation's veterans is improving, this
population, particularly in the age 18-24 category, has historically
experienced higher unemployment than civilians. The Administration,
veteran advocates, and veteran service organizations (VSOs) have
responded by developing and implementing initiatives to put veterans in
jobs.
The American Legion has partnered with DoD to educate state
legislators and governors on the actual value of military skills and
experience and how they translate into a civilian employment
environment. Additionally, the American Legion is serving as an
advocate for changing current state laws to enable credentialing and/or
licensing boards to consider military skills and experience when
evaluating a candidate for a license or certification. The American
Legion has also partnered with the Administration and the Departments
of Defense, Energy, Labor, and Veterans Affairs to evaluate the current
job-task analysis (JTA), identify any gaps in the JTA, and work with
the private sector and post-secondary education to the best address how
to fill the gaps through higher education, on-the-job-training, or
apprenticeships. This initiative relies on the symbiotic relationship
between credentialing, higher education, public and private entities to
proactively work together to reduce veteran unemployment.
When members of the armed forces leave, they enter a pivotal
transition period that is often wrought with challenges, and as a
result, the potential for failure is high. As we have discussed, our
institutions are fully committed to helping veterans achieve success in
higher education. This commitment and focus on educating members of the
military, as well as veterans and their families is critical because
according to the Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support
(DANTES) over 80 percent of members only have a high school diploma.
Our nation currently faces twin crises - stubbornly high
unemployment and a skills gap where employers all across the country
cannot find trained and job-ready workers. The key to narrowing the
skills gap and reducing civilian and veteran unemployment is an ``all-
hands-on-deck'' approach to post-secondary education. All sectors of
higher education must be part of the solution and accountable for the
educational experience and outcomes of all students, especially
military and veteran-students.
In a survey of a several member institutions, we looked at 16,500
veteran graduates and found that 75 percent earned certificates and
associates degrees, while 25 percent earned bachelor's and graduate
degrees. Forty-one percent of all the veteran graduates earned
credentials in healthcare fields, one of the fastest growing industries
in the country. The occupations range from medical, dental and
veterinary assistants to nurses and technologists of various types with
weighted average annual salaries of $33,226 for certificate and
associate degree holders to $56,335 for bachelor and graduate degree
holders. Another 20 percent of veteran graduates earned credentials in
skilled trade programs, such as construction, maintenance and repair,
and engineering technologies. According to BLS, the United States will
need more than 1 million additional workers to fill these jobs by 2020.
The weighted average annual salary for our veteran graduates earning
their certificates and associate degrees in these fields was $44,500.
Ten percent were earned in computer and information programs like
computer programming, computer graphics, computer systems networking,
and information technology. The weighted average annual salary is
$57,574 for certificate and associate degree holders and $89,064 for
bachelor and graduate degree holders. The US will need nearly three
million additional computer and IT workers by 2020.
We want to work with you to provide our service members and
veterans, particularly young combat veterans, with the tools and
resources to make an informed, thoughtful decision about which
educational opportunity will best prepare them for the workforce.
The facts are simple: Career-oriented schools are educating
America's next generation and helping secure our nation's economic
vitality. We all agree that a higher education degree greatly improves
employment opportunities and income. At a time of extended, high
unemployment and economic hardship, we should be supporting anyone
seeking access to skills and training that will allow them to better
their own future.
President Obama has challenged all Americans to commit to at least
one year or more of higher education or career training, under the
belief that if we are to succeed economically as a nation, every
American will need to get more than a high school diploma. To meet
President Obama's challenge we will have to ensure that people who
historically have not pursued higher education or succeeded in
completing their post-secondary education must attend and complete
their education. From both a jobs and a global competitiveness
standpoint, our institutions can help fill the existing education and
skills gap and meet capacity demands that cannot be satisfied by public
and private non-profit colleges alone. Increasing the number of
educated people is essential. Research shows that raising the college
graduate rate just a single point will unleash $124 billion per year in
economic impact on the 51 largest metropolitan areas in the U.S.
Private sector colleges and universities have demonstrated a unique
capability to confront the challenges of educating America's middle
class. We have been at the forefront of the effort to close the skills
gap by offering career-focused training aiding business owners seeking
workers with specific training and expertise. We have made it our
mission to close this gap and are working every day to achieve that
end.
Private sector colleges and universities are able to accommodate
the needs of non-traditional students in ways that traditional four-
year universities cannot. Whether its veterans transitioning from war
zones to the workplace or single parents with family responsibilities
seeking a way to earn more for the future, career-oriented schools
understand the rigorous demands that these individuals face and tailor
course schedules, offer focused curriculum and provide academic
delivery mechanisms that fit their needs. We are also investing in our
students and expanding facilities to meet the growing demand for higher
education, which includes returning veterans, their spouses and
families.
We share President Obama's commitment and passion for education,
and look forward to working with him and the Congress to ensure that
all Americans can attain the skills they need to access meaningful
opportunities.
We take seriously the charge to work with veteran and military
student populations and prepare America's students to succeed in the
workforce. As we all strive to provide better information to all our
students, we look forward to continuing to work with the Department of
Veterans Affairs and the Department of Education to implement HR 4057
and ensure that our nation's veterans are receiving all the information
needed to make superior education decisions. Private sector colleges
and universities look forward to helping these students achieve their
dreams, maintain military readiness and prepare them for life after the
military.
Thank you for your time. I look forward to answering your questions
and discussing these important issues with you today.
Summary
On behalf of the Association of Private Sector Colleges and
Universities, thank you for the opportunity to appear before this
committee. We represent nearly 4 million students enrolled in our
schools annually. Our schools provide the full range of higher
education programs to students looking for post-secondary education
with a career focus.
This nation must fulfill its higher education commitment to
veterans. According to the Veterans Administration, more than 325,000
veterans and/or their families have been served by our institutions
representing 28 percent of all veterans using their post 9/11-GI
benefits. Although veterans make up less than 10 percent of our
students, we are proud to serve those who choose our institutions. More
than 1,200 of our institutions participate in the Yellow Ribbon
Program.
In recognition of the growing numbers of military and veteran
students enrolling at our institutions, APSCU adopted Five Tenets of
Veteran Education that included the creation of a Blue Ribbon Taskforce
for Military and Veteran Education. The Taskforce created a set of Best
Practices recommendations that are attached to my testimony. The Best
Practices cover the topics of (1) Consumer information, enrollment and
recruitment; (2) Institutional commitment to provide military and
veteran student support; (3) Promising practices for ensuring military
and veteran student success through student services; and (4) Establish
institutional research guidelines for tracking military and veteran
student success. We are encouraging all our institutions and our
colleagues at other institutions of higher education to look at these
Best Practices and find opportunities to implement them where
appropriate in order to best serve our military and veteran students.
A November 2010 Rand Corporation and ACE study entitled ``Military
Veterans' Experiences Using the Post 9/11 GI Bill and Pursuing
Postsecondary Education'' reported findings which support the view that
our institutions are working to support these students. The report
noted that students attending our institutions had a high rate of
satisfaction with the credit transfer experience, fewer challenges to
accessing required courses, and higher than average satisfaction rates
with academic advising.
Finally, we have included preliminary outcome data in our testimony
to give the Committee a sense of how our veterans are doing after
enrolling. In a survey of several member institutions, we looked at
16,500 veteran graduates and found that 75 percent earned certificates
and associates degrees, while 25 percent earned bachelor's and graduate
degrees. Forty-one percent of all the veteran graduates earned
credentials in healthcare fields, one of the fastest growing industries
in the country. Twenty percent of veteran graduates earned credentials
in skilled trade programs, such as construction, maintenance and
repair, and engineering technologies. Ten percent were earned in
computer and information programs like computer programming, computer
graphics, computer systems networking, and information technology.
As we all strive to provide better information to all our students,
we look forward to continuing to work with the Department of Veterans
Affairs and the Department of Education to implement HR 4057 and ensure
that our nation's veterans are receiving all the information needed to
make superior education decisions.

June 16, 2013

TO:Committee on Veterans' Affairs

I am Steve Gunderson, President and CEO of the Association of
Private Sector Colleges and Universities (APSCU). I have not and APSCU
has not received any Federal grants or contracts during this fiscal
year or the previous two fiscal years relevant to the subject matter of
my testimony.

Steve Gunderson
President and CEO

BEST PRACTICES FOR MILITARY AND VETERAN STUDENTS
FEBRUARY 2013
MISSION STATEMENT
The Association of Private Sector Colleges and Universities (APSCU)
has established this ``Blue Ribbon'' Taskforce to ensure that every
service member, veteran, and family member utilizing their earned,
post-secondary education benefits are provided with the quality
education to which they are entitled at every institution of higher
education. The Taskforce is comprised of a broad group of individuals
who share a common commitment towards the education of service members
and veterans representing a diverse range of institutions, including
non- APSCU members, as well as representatives of nationally-recognized
leadership organizations in the area of military and veteran post-
secondary education.
The Taskforce has been specifically charged with identifying,
discussing, and documenting the very best post-secondary education
practices and support services that meet the specific needs of military
and veteran students. The primary objective of the Taskforce is to
publish a set of recommended institutional standards and associated
operational practices that foster persistence, program completion, and
other factors that will enable the military and veteran student
population to achieve its academic and professional goals. The final
product will represent a condensed, practical set of suggested actions
and policies for all institutions of higher education.
To view a full copy of the report of the APSCU Blue Ribbon
Taskforce for Military and Veteran Education visit www.apscu.org/
blueribbon.
MEMBERS OF THE APSCU BLUE RIBBON TASKFORCE FOR MILITARY AND VETERAN
EDUCATION
The Taskforce has been led by Jeff Cropsey, Vice President for
Strategic Initiatives at Grantham University and Chair, Public Affairs,
Council of College and Military Educators and James Hendrickson, Vice
President of Military Relations at Colorado Technical University and
Executive Director of the CTU Wounded Warrior and Spouse Scholarship
Program.

Other Members of the Taskforce include:

u  Jeff Arthur - CIO and Vice President of Financial Assistance,
ECPI University
u  Mike Betz - General Manager, Military Student Initiatives,
Education Corporation of America
u  Scott A. Kilgore - Senior Vice President of Military of Affairs,
Kaplan University
u  Russell Kitchner, Ph.D. - Vice President for Regulatory and
Governmental Relations, American Public University System
u  Scott D. Palumbo, LCDR. USNR - formerly National Director of
Military Affairs, DeVry University
u  James Shane, Jr., BG. USA (Ret.) - Director of Military and
Veterans Affairs, Sullivan University
u  Kathy Snead - Servicemembers Opportunity Colleges Consortium
President and Vice President for Military and Veteran Partnerships,
American Association of State Colleges and Universities
u  Dennis Trinkle, Ph.D. - Provost and Chief Academic Officer,
Harrison College
u  Joseph W. Wescott, Ph.D. - Executive Director, Veterans and
Military Education Programs, North Carolina State Approving Agency and
Vice President, National Association of State Approving Agencies
u  Garland H. Williams, Ph.D., Col. USA (Ret.) - Associate Regional
Vice President, Military Division, University of Phoenix
Special Advisors:
u  Michael Dakduk - Executive Director, Student Veterans of America
u  Ryan M. Gallucci - Deputy Director, National Legislative
Service, Veterans of Foreign Wars of the U.S.
u  Steve Gonzalez - Assistant Director, National Economic Division,
American Legion
BEST PRACTICES FOR MILITARY AND VETERAN STUDENTS
PREAMBLE
These Best Practices represent the collective efforts of the work
of the Blue Ribbon Taskforce. The institutions represented on the
Taskforce are incredibly diverse in size, ownership structures and
academic programming and provide career-centered education ranging from
skilled trades to post graduate degrees. However diverse, these Best
Practices were created to encourage all institutions of higher
education to aspire to high levels of service for this special group of
students.
The Best Practices are organized under four subject areas:

u  Full transparency and accuracy of information in the recruitment
and enrollment process.
u  Institutional commitment supporting the military and veteran
students' academic needs.
u  Appropriate student services reflecting the numbers and needs of
their military and veteran student population.
u  Pursuit of outcomes data related to retention, degree completion
and other metrics for an institution's military and veteran students,
enabling us to learn and improve our services in the future.

The Taskforce is mindful that the diversity of institutions - in
size, number of veterans and/or military students, types of academic
programming, and other factors - will result in implementation of many,
but not necessarily all the Best Practices, in ways appropriate to the
needs of each institution and its military and veteran students. We
recognize and celebrate this diversity of service while being unified
in our commitment to excellence in military and veteran education.
BEST PRACTICES FOR MILITARY AND VETERAN STUDENTS
I, Consumer Information, Enrollment and Recruitment...page 4

II. Institutional Commitment to Provide Military and Veteran
Student Support...page 7

III. Promising Practices for Ensuring Military and Veteran Student
Success Through Student Services...page 9

IV. Establish Institutional Research Guidelines for Tracking
Military and Veteran Student Success...page 11
CONSUMER INFORMATION, ENROLLMENT AND RECRUITMENT:
Prospective military and veteran students should receive
appropriate, relevant information in order to make a sound, informed
decision about their post-secondary education. Information should be
provided in clear and understandable language. Prospective students
looking to utilize their U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) or U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) education benefits should not be
the subject of aggressive or misleading recruiting practices.
Institutions should follow all federal and state laws and regulations
to ensure that the recruitment of military and veteran students is
appropriate.

A. Consumer Information
i. Provide accurate and complete information to prospective
students on:

u  Institutional and programmatic accreditation status for each
offered program;
u  Whether program meets minimum requirements to qualify student
for state licensure in relevant occupation(s);
u  Potential earnings and employment pathways of program
completers;
u  Financial obligations and cost of educational program;
u  Institution participation in various military and veteran
programs and partnerships; and
u  Institution transfer of credit policies.

ii. Require prospective students to affirm receipt and
understanding of the required disclosures.

iii. In an effort to achieve complete transparency, include
information in catalogs, websites, and other media outlets that adheres
to the following minimums:
u  Clearly articulated and defined mission statement;
u  Clearly defined academic and financial information about program
requirements; and
u  Total cost of admission, tuition, instructional materials, and
all mandatory fees.

iv. Provide in-depth financial counseling, so that prospective
students fully understand their financial obligations upon enrolling in
an educational program.

u  Explain the extent to which DoD Tuition Assistance and VA
education benefits will pay for the cost of the education;
u  Explain the ramifications of student loan debt, in terms of
monthly repayment obligations when feasible;
u  Explain long term financial obligations related to use of
educational benefits as compared to borrowing under federal or private
loan programs; and
u  Always encourage responsible borrowing if a student needs or
chooses to borrow to pay for education costs or other personal expenses
which may be covered by federal loan funds.
B. Recruitment
i. Develop and/or maintain enrollment and recruitment policies
appropriate to higher education institutions and compliant with federal
and accrediting agency regulations.

ii. Use only promotional and recruitment materials and practices
that do not have the capacity to mislead or coerce students into
enrolling and are consistent with policies of the VA, Federal Trade
Commission (FTC), Department of Education (ED), and all applicable
federal and state regulations.

iii. Create reasonable internal policies for contacting potential
students that do not exert high pressure to enroll through unsolicited
follow-up calls or other forms of personal contact.

For example:

u  Marketing and outreach systems, including third-party vendors,
must have an opt-out feature for individuals who do not wish continued
recruiting contact; and
u  Establish and enforce internal call limits on unsolicited
recruiting calls, such as a ``Three Calls then Stop'' policy.

iv. Employ appropriate sanctions, including termination of
employment, on recruiters and managers found to have engaged in
predatory recruitment practices.

C. Enrollment
i. Ensure students are appropriately placed and prepared for the
programs in which they enroll. Consider employing any of the following
practices: (a) assess academic readiness prior to enrollment; (b) offer
appropriate remediation if necessary; (c) offer limited course loads;
(d) offer a reasonable ``Trial Period'' for enrollment; (e) offer
penalty-free drop/add periods upon enrollment.

ii. Offer military and veteran students a tailored orientation
program, which would provide an overview of specific information
regarding VA certification requirements, satisfactory academic
progress, and additional tutorial assistance, as appropriate.
INSTITUTIONAL COMMITMENT TO PROVIDE MILITARY AND VETERAN STUDENT
SUPPORT
Institutions should actively support and promote programs and
services for military and veteran students. Institutions should employ
an engaged faculty that understands the needs of military and veteran
students and provides mentoring and advising to ensure the success of
these students. Institutions should consider instituting the following,
as applicable:

A. Personnel/Faculty
i. Appoint a senior-level administrator to lead the institution's
military and veteran support programs (or Office of Military and
Veteran Affairs).

ii. Designate an employee, or team of employees (as student
enrollment numbers dictate), to provide support/services tailored to
the needs of the military and veteran students.

iii. Appoint a Military and/or Veteran Student Ombudsman to
escalate and resolve issues related, but not limited, to DoD or VA
educational benefits, academic enrollment issues, and institutional
policies and procedures.

iv. Conduct regular roundtable discussions, focus groups, and/or
interviews with service-member military and student veteran
organizations, either on- campus or virtually, to establish a continual
understanding about the needs of the military and veteran student
population enrolled at the institution and how to meet those needs.

v. Appoint an interdepartmental military and veteran education
taskforce to evaluate the institution's policies, practices and
procedures relating to the military and veteran students.

vi. Institute faculty development training to ensure that faculty
members:

u  Receive the necessary tools and information regarding the unique
qualities of the military and veteran learner;
u  Learn effective classroom instructional practices to better meet
the needs of this non-traditional student population; and
u  Understand the various support services available to military
and veteran students and the associated referral processes for
accessing those services.

vii. Institute campus wide training on the specific needs and
resources available for military and veteran students and their
families.
B. Administrative Policies and Practices
i. If applicable, become a Yellow Ribbon Program participating
institution, offsetting the unmet cost of an education for eligible VA
education beneficiaries and consider the following:

u  Allow ``all'' or an unlimited number of eligible veteran
students to enroll; and
u  Offer the maximum institution contribution allowed under the
program.

ii. Offer alternative grants to veterans and their spouses who may
not be eligible for the Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits to cover any funding
gaps not covered by other financial aid benefits, such as the
Montgomery GI Bill.

iii. Offer a reduced military tuition rate for active duty,
National Guard, and reserve service members and their spouses to
minimize out-of-pocket student expenses beyond what DoD Tuition
Assistance (TA) benefits cover.

iv. Adopt a policy for evaluating and awarding credit for military
training and experiences, maximizing the use of military training
credit recommended by the American Council on Education (ACE).

v. Comply with existing federal requirements related to the post-
secondary education of military or veteran students, including:

u  Enter into the DoD Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for
participation in TA; and
u  Formally agree to accept the Principles of Excellence outlined
in Executive Order 13607 - Establishing Principles of Excellence for
Educational Institutions Serving Service Members, Veterans, Spouses,
and Other Family Members.

vi. Become a member of the Servicemembers Opportunity Colleges
(SOC) Consortium.

vii. Establish Human Resources policies that exceed the standards
set by the Uniformed Services Employment and Re-Employment Rights Act
(USERRA). Institutions of higher education with employees currently
serving in the military should exceed USERRA guidelines for employees
during military training activities and deployment status.

viii. Offer multiple learning formats for military and veteran
students to access and interact with program curriculum and course
materials, which allow students the freedom to pick the format that
best suits their learning style. These formats may include videos,
text, a library of archived audio content of classroom instruction,
problem-solving activities, and practice tests.
PROMISING PRACTICES FOR ENSURING MILITARY AND VETERAN STUDENT SUCCESS
THROUGH STUDENT SERVICES
Recent studies and anecdotal information related to military and
veteran student success reveal a growing trend toward centralized
student services at institutions with significant populations of
military and veteran students. Building on the success of existing
programs, institutions of higher education should strive to provide the
following services and programs tailored to the specific needs of their
military and veteran students:

A. Centers
i. When the number of students necessitates its creation,
institutions should establish an Office of Military and Veterans
Affairs with clearly articulated goals and expectations, which
complement the mission of the institution, accompanied by the full
support and resources from the institution's leadership. The Office of
Military and Veterans Affairs would typically administer and manage the
following:

u  Military and veteran-specific Student Advisors in the areas of
admissions, academics, and benefits;
u  Specific academic counselors for the military and veteran
student population trained to address transfer credit and awards for
prior academic or military credit (College Level Examination Program
(CLEP), portfolio, military training);
u  Trained VA certification specialists to assist with the timely
processing of educational benefits documentation to avoid benefit
funding delays; and
u  A tailored orientation program for military and veteran
students, developed to enable active-duty, Guard, or Reservist students
or transitioning veterans to optimize the available institution
resources and support programs.

ii. Another approach is to establish a Military Student Center
(MSC), which acts as a hub to guide military and veteran students
throughout their post-secondary experience, beginning with recruitment
and ending with job placement. The MSC functions as a clearinghouse of
information for all military and veteran benefit programs and assists
potential and current students with navigating the intricacies of the
federal programs for which they may be eligible. More specifically, the
MSC may function as follows:

u  Counsel prospective students who self-identify themselves as
military- or veteran-affiliated on the best way to access and maximize
the benefits for which they are eligible;
u  Staff the MSC with specialists who are either a military veteran
or spouse who received specific training in DoD and VA benefits
eligibility and processes; and
u  Provide transfer of credit assistance, help with military and
prior- college transcript requests upon application and acceptance to a
program of study, training to Program Directors and Deans regarding ACE
guidelines for the award of military credit, and recommendations for
credit acceptance based on review of military transcripts and Military
Occupational Specialty (MOS).
B. Partnerships
i. Support student veterans interested in organizing a campus-
based, or online, student organization with necessary resources and use
the Student Veterans of America (SVA) as a resource and guide.
Institutional support for student veterans to create a student veteran
organization or club is critical to fostering successful veteran
student transition, peer support, and camaraderie, and providing needed
opportunities for student veterans to network and make social
connections with other student veterans who possess similar interests
or experiences.

ii. Establish a Campus Military and Veterans Lounge or Virtual
Student Gathering Place, which allow military and veteran students to
interact, access program-related resources and services, and provide
peer-to-peer support.

iii. Establish and maintain student chapters of professional
organizations and academic honor societies to expose students to
potential professional networks. Encourage student membership and
participation in relevant local, regional or national professional
societies while completing coursework.

iv. Introduce and partner with established veteran service
organizations, such as the American Legion or Veterans for Foreign Wars
of the U.S. (VFW), within the geographical area of the campus to
further connect veteran students to community resources and peers.

v. Institutions with a sufficiently large military and veteran
population should develop a specific career services strategy,
including:

u  Establishing partnerships with employers who will work with
students while enrolled and offer quality job opportunities upon
graduation;
u  Establishing formal alumni networks for military and veteran
graduates, allowing students who have completed programs of study to
interact with one another, building geographically based or industry-
based professional networks; and
u  Engaging with local Employer Support for Guard and Reserves
(ESGR), professional associations such as Society for Human Resources
Management (SHRM), or the National Association of Colleges and
Employers (NACE).
ESTABLISH INSTITUTIONAL RESEARCH GUIDELINES FOR TRACKING MILITARY AND
VETERAN STUDENT SUCCESS
Tracking data related to credit completion, degree completion, and
student satisfaction is vital to understanding successful student
outcomes. Accurate data collection is essential to understanding and
addressing the needs of military and veteran students and their
families. To the extent practicable, institutions should:

A. Collect/Use Data
i. Identify and track military and veteran student populations with
regard to retention, degree completion, persistence, and other valuable
metrics.

ii. Analyze and use data to identify areas in need of improvement
and ways to better serve military and veteran students.

iii. Use data to develop measures to evaluate program
effectiveness.
B. National Student Clearinghouse
i. Participate in the National Student Clearinghouse to help to
provide meaningful data for military and veteran students across higher
education (transfer, degree completion, and persistence).

ii. Provide meaningful data to the VA and DoD for use in developing
programs to better serve military and veteran students.
APPENDIX
APPENDIX I: INSTITUTION RESOURCES
i. Supportive Education for the Returning Veteran (SERV)
ii. Veteran-Civilian Dialogue
iii. Veterans in Transition Course
iv. Military to Civilian Transition Manual
v. Mobile National Test Center (NTC) for CLEP and DSST exams
vi. Transfer credit evaluation at no cost - awards transfer credit
for ACE approved military training
vii. Webinar series for veterans and employers of veterans
viii. Institution Skills Translator
ix. ACE Toolkit for Veteran Friendly Institutions, March 2012
APPENDIX II: COMMUNITY INITIATIVES AND PARTNERSHIPS
i. Veteran Stand Down (KCMO) - volunteer annually
ii. Toys for Tots - collect toys annually
iii. Partners with Veterans Today Network to hire veteran employees
iv. Teamed up with CCME Cares to send care packages to deployed
troops over Valentine's Day
v. Fundraising for Wounded Warrior Project over Veterans Day
vi. Annual sponsor of KC Association of the United States Army's
Army Birthday Ball
APPENDIX III: MEMBERSHIPS AND AFFILIATIONS
i. SOC
ii. CCME
iii. Yellow Ribbon Program
iv. DoD MOU
v. Principles of Excellence
APPENDIX IV: PUBLICATIONS
i. From Boots to Books: Applying Scholssberg's Transition Model to
the Transition of Today's American Veterans to Higher Education
ii. From Combat to Campus: Voices of Student-Veterans
iii. A New Generation of Student Veterans: A Pilot Study
iv. The Difficult Transition from Military to Civilian Life
v. Veterans' Post-Secondary Education: Keeping the Promise to Those
Who Serve
vi. Servicemembers Opportunity Colleges (SOC) Consortium
Publications/ Forms/Resources (Principles and Criteria, Standards of
Good Practice for Servicemembers Opportunity Colleges, Pocket Guide for
College Outreach to Military Students, Veteran and Military Family
Programs and Services, and Military Student Bill of Rights)
vii. Educational Attainment: Tracking the Academic Success of
Servicemembers and Veterans, July 2012, Education Working Group
convened by SOC
viii. From Soldier to Student II Assessing Campus Programs for
Veterans and Service Members, July 2012, prepared by American Council
on Education (ACE), American Association of State Colleges and
Universities (AASCU), NASPA: Student Affairs Administrators in Higher
Education, and National Association of Veteran's Program Administrators
(NAPVA)
ix. Time is the enemy, September 2011, Complete College America
x. Service Members in School: Military Veterans' Experiences Using
the Post-9/11 GI Bill and Pursuing Postsecondary Education, November
2010, prepared by the RAND Corporation, with support from Lumina
Foundation for Education for the American Council on Education (ACE)
xi. National Survey of Student Engagement (NSSE), Major
Differences: Examining Student Engagement by Field of Study, Annual
Results 2010, sponsored by The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement
of Teaching.
xii. Military Service Members and Veterans in Higher Education:
What the New GI Bill May Mean for Postsecondary Institutions, July
2009, prepared by Alexandria Walton Radford, MPR Associates, Inc. with
support from the ACE Center for Policy Analysis Center for Lifelong
Learning and the Lumina Foundation for Education
xiii. From Soldier to Student: Easing the Transition of Service
Members on Campus, July 2009, prepared by ACE, SOC, AASCU, NASPA:
Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education, and NAPVA with
support from the Lumina Foundation for Education
SPECIAL ADVISORS
American Legion
The American Legion was chartered by Congress in 1919 as a
patriotic veteran's organization. Focusing on service to veterans,
service members and communities, the Legion evolved from a group of
war-weary veterans of World War I into one of the most influential
nonprofit groups in the United States. Today, membership stands at over
2.4 million in 14,000 posts worldwide. The posts are organized into 55
departments: one each for the 50 states, along with the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, France, Mexico and the Philippines. The birth of
the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, known informally as the GI
Bill of Rights, was a law that included several key parts: educational
opportunity; on-the-job training; unemployment benefits; home, farm and
business loans; review of discharges; health care; disability claims
and veteran employment services. Today, the American Legion continues
to work with all stakeholders in protecting and creating meaningful
veterans education benefits that truly meet the needs of our 21st
century veterans.
Student Veterans of America (SVA)
The mission of SVA is to provide military veterans with the
resources, support, and advocacy needed to succeed in higher education
and following graduation. Today's veterans face numerous obstacles in
their path to attaining a college degree. These challenges range from a
missing sense of camaraderie to feeling like an outsider amongst 18
year old traditional students to a lack of understanding by university
faculty. When coupled with the visible and invisible wounds of war, a
college degree can be an elusive goal for men and women returning from
military service. SVA makes that goal a reality. SVA is a coalition of
student veterans groups on college campuses around the globe. These
member chapters are the ``boots on the ground'' that help veterans
reintegrate into campus life and succeed academically. Each chapter
must be an officially recognized student group by their university or
college and provide a peer-to-peer network for veterans who are
attending the school. Additionally, chapters often coordinate campus
activities, provide pre-professional networking, and generally provide
a touchstone for student veterans in higher education.
Veterans of Foreign Wars of the U.S. (VFW)
Since 1899, the VFW has continued to be a leading voice in
veterans' advocacy, helping to enact nearly every major Quality of Life
initiative for the benefit of every generation of veteran, military
service member and their families. Composed of 2 million VFW and
Auxiliary members in 7,200 VFW Posts across the country and around the
world, the VFW creates, protects and enhances these benefits and
programs by actively engaging with Congress and the White House. From
the passage of the original World War II GI Bill of Rights in 1944 to
the Montgomery GI Bill and now Post-9/11 GI Bill, the VFW will continue
to advocate for student- veterans to improve their earned educational
benefits and the consumer product information they deserve to receive.

Prepared Statement of Dr. Daniel J. Carey
Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano, and members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate having the opportunity to appear today to
discuss the value of higher education for our nation's veterans. I am
Dan Carey, president of Edgewood College in Madison, Wisconsin.
Edgewood is a liberal arts Catholic college in the Dominican
tradition, with 3,064 undergraduate and graduate students. We offer
more than 40 academic and professional programs, including master's
degrees in business, education, nursing, and other fields, and two
doctoral degrees in educational leadership (Educational Leadership and
DNP - doctorate Nursing Practice.)
Today, I represent today both my college and the member
institutions of the National Association of Independent Colleges and
Universities. With more than 1,000 members nationwide, NAICU reflects
the diversity of private, nonprofit higher education in the United
States. Members include traditional liberal arts colleges, major
research universities, church- and faith-related institutions,
historically black colleges and universities, women's colleges,
performing and visual arts institutions, two-year colleges, and schools
of law, medicine, engineering, business, and other professions. NAICU
is committed to celebrating and protecting this diversity of the
nation's private colleges and universities.
At the outset, I would like to commend the committee for
highlighting the importance of veterans' receiving value for the time
and money they put into obtaining a higher education. As an independent
college president and as the former board chairman of NAICU, I welcome
the chance to talk about the value of private, non-profit colleges. I'm
proud of my service as an infantry officer in Vietnam, and I retired as
a full Colonel in the Reserves. The GI Bill changed my life and the
lives of countless others! I am personally committed to seeing that
veterans have a positive educational experience both at my institution
and at other high-quality colleges across the country.
Veterans' Education at Edgewood College
The post-9/11 GI Bill has opened the doors to higher education
across the country. The key question before this Committee today is how
to ensure veterans get the most out of the GI Bill. I believe the
answers lie in the success veteran students have at Edgewood. What
makes Edgewood and the other private non-profit colleges so successful
for veteran students? Three key factors:
First, we dedicate financial and personnel resources to students.
Like most non-profit colleges, Edgewood spends the vast majority of our
revenue on student education and student services.
Second, we focus on teaching. We have a top-notch faculty of PhDs.
Most of our students sit in small seminars of fewer than 20 students.
Like most non-profit colleges, we push our students to learn. We teach
them to think critically, to write effectively, and to work in teams.
Our nursing and science students learn in high quality labs. Our
students graduate with strong skills to tackle professional careers.
And when they graduate, we offer intensive job placement assistance to
every graduate.
Third, Edgewood offers significant student support services. Some
veteran students need a little extra guidance through their college
experience. We have a full-time Veterans Services Coordinator, Matthew
J. Schroeder, who served in the Army Reserve and United States Marine
Corps between 1996 and 2000. In response to the requests of our veteran
students, Edgewood will be providing a dedicated space for veterans on
the Monroe Street campus--beginning this July. We make psychological
counseling services easy to access. We also offer personalized academic
advising to assist veterans and dependents in determining their course
of study at Edgewood.
Because of these factors, our enrollment of veterans and dependents
at Edgewood College has grown dramatically in the past several years.
Fall enrollment has more than tripled in the last four years (from 43
to 144), and spring enrollment has nearly quadrupled (from 36 to 143).
Our graduates are appreciative of the high quality education
experience at Edgewood, and they find success on the job market.
Employers know that Edgewood students have benefited from hands-on
learning and deep engagement with faculty. Employers hire our
graduates.
Colleges can solve the drop-out problem and veterans can thrive -
if colleges make the spending choices to offer an excellent education,
dedicate resources needed by students, and build a strong sense of
community and support.
Edgewood College has partnered with multiple veterans groups and
agencies, including the Wisconsin Department of Veterans Affairs and
the Department of Workforce Development. These partnerships have
allowed Edgewood to provide our student veterans and dependents, as
well as the veterans community, the widest range of resources possible
during their academic pursuit and when looking for employment. Edgewood
College has been host to the Women Veterans Health Summit 2012, has
offered veterans' job fairs each of the last four years, and has held a
veterans employer symposium. These partnerships have contributed to
Edgewood College's strong reputation among veterans and their families.
Edgewood College has been recognized by several organizations for
our commitment to veterans. GI Jobs, a military and veteran focused
employment group, has recognized Edgewood as a Military Friendly School
since 2009, and Edgewood has been named by Forbes Magazine to the Best
Colleges List for the past three years. Edgewood's School of Nursing
has also been recognized for its contribution to the local VA hospital
and as part of the ``Joining Forces'' campaign to address veteran
health issues. In 2012, Edgewood College was recognized by Wisconsin
Governor Scott Walker for our efforts in helping area veterans find
employment.
Cost of Higher Education
Obviously, there are costs involved in providing this intensive
educational experience. At its simplest level, college prices have gone
up because institutions' annual costs have gone up, and because
colleges are providing more services than ever. While the list of cost
drivers changes somewhat from year to year, there are some expenses -
such as health insurance and financial aid - that have perennially been
major cost drivers over the past decade.
Among the reasons that the cost of doing business increases for
colleges are that:

Colleges are labor-intensive. On average, 75 percent of
the costs to run a college is related to personnel expenses, including
benefits. Thus, all the costs related to recruiting and retaining
staff, paying cost-of-living increases and keeping up with rising
health care expenses are paid by colleges and universities as a part of
doing business.

Colleges are highly regulated by both federal and state
governments. Compliance and reporting costs are substantial.

In addition to providing an education, colleges must
build and maintain large physical infrastructures that often include
libraries, computing/technology centers, academic and student-services
buildings and research facilities.

The primary sources of revenue for colleges are: tuition and fees;
government support; gifts, grants, and contracts; auxiliary income;
endowment income; and other income. Many of these sources of income are
variable - and sometimes volatile.
At Edgewood, we have made every effort to restrain our tuition
costs--holding increases below 3.9% in each of the past three years. We
participate fully in the Yellow Ribbon program, so that all tuition and
fee expenses are covered for eligible GI Bill recipients.
In general, private, nonprofit colleges have slowed annual tuition
increases to the lowest rates seen in at least four decades. In 2012-
13, published tuition and fees at independent, non-profit institutions
grew an average of 3.9 percent--the first time on record the rate has
been below 4 percent.
Value of Higher Education
The real question is what students are getting from the education
provided. Later in my testimony I'll outline the array of benefits
provided by higher education--ranging from higher employment levels and
higher lifetime earnings to healthier lifestyles.
But I think the value is best conveyed by the personal stories of
the veteran students I've come to know at Edgewood and beyond. Let me
share just a few of them:

From Ron Bettencourt: ``As a student in my late thirties I wanted
to attend a school that would give me the necessary education and the
proper attention. Edgewood College was my first choice as it had a top
notch nursing program and smaller class sizes. Due to being out of
school for so long, the smaller classes allowed me to ask questions and
interact with my professors to best learn the material. I am proud to
call myself a student of Edgewood College.''
I had dinner with Ron and his wife and several other veterans about
a month ago. Their drive, experience, and enthusiasm bring an energy to
the campus that benefits all of us.
From Shanna Pelkey: ``After being discharged from the Army I was
able to get a decent job as an LPN with the skills that I obtained
while in service. However, I knew that I wanted to further my education
but at the time I could not afford to attend school on the Montgomery
GI Bill. After hearing about the Post 9-11 GI bill and the yellow
ribbon program, going back to school was my best option.
``I choose Edgewood College even though it is a private school that
was beyond what my Post 9-11 benefits would pay for. The yellow ribbon
program helped to cover the cost allowing me to go to a college that
came highly recommended by other professionals. Going to Edgewood under
the Post 9-11 with the yellow ribbon program has allowed me to finish
my bachelor's degree with minimal amounts of debt as compared with my
other adult classmates. It has also allowed me to not rely on Student
loans. I am 1 semester away from graduating with my BSN and feel very
confident that between the vast experience that I received as an LPN
and combat medic in the army now coupled with my degree that I will
receive an excellent career path that will travel with me through my
husband's career in the Army.''
From Peter G. Shackelford, U.S. Navy veteran: ``When I transferred
into Edgewood, my goal was to get in and graduate as quickly as
possible without being noticed. That meant not wanting to be recognized
as a veteran in the classroom. This quickly changed when I added the
Ethnic Studies and Latin American Studies Minor programs to my degree.
I learned a key concept that I believe applies to all Veterans. That
concept is that race and ethnicity are not synonymous. Race is
biological, but ethnicity deals with one's culture and culture is a
product of one's environment. What I realized is that being in the
Navy, the military, and now a Veteran is a part of my culture.
``I come from the military culture. It is no different than any
other official ethnic group. We have our language, customs, traditions
and way of life. Upon this realization, I started identifying myself as
a veteran at every possible opportunity and I had nothing but positive
reactions from the students I interacted with both in and out of the
classroom.
``In summary, my time at Edgewood College was a very great
experience and I hope to continue being involved at some level as an
alum. The best support for most veterans is for them to be able to
speak to another veteran in a private setting when on campus. Thank
you.''
Another of our students was Jason Diaz--Class of 2010--whom I got
to know quite well during his time on campus. He is an Iraqi war
veteran who was inspired to go into nursing while in the military. He
was not a medic, but he was able to help keep a wounded comrade alive
long enough to reach safety. While a student at Edgewood College, his
wife was expecting twins and his father was struck with terminal
cancer. Edgewood rallied around, and he graduated with a nursing
degree. While in college he worked as a technician at Dean Clinic and
is now working in the emergency room at the University of Wisconsin
Hospital and Clinics.
Edgewood's Veterans Services Coordinator, Matthew J. Schroeder,
points out a number of reasons why Edgewood College is a good choice
for veterans:

- Commitment to the Yellow Ribbon program;
- A strong reputation for being community minded and encouraging
veterans to continue serving after their time in the military ends;
- Small class sizes;
- More opportunity to work one-on-one with professors and staff;
and
- Strong support and knowledge of College resources from the
veterans service department.

Matthew served in the Army Reserve and United States Marine Corps
between 1996 and 2000.
We are very proud of the retention rates of our veterans and
dependents. The last three degree completion program cohorts have
first-to-second- year retention rates of 85%, 85%, and 80%,
respectively. The last several transfer cohorts have had first-year
retention rates as high as 100%, with the largest cohort (2010)
retaining at 80% after one year. The overall one-year retention rate
for graduate students has been more than 76% across all beginning
cohorts in the study.
These stories are being repeated throughout private, non-profit
college campuses across the country--where personal attention,
counseling services, and smaller class sizes are hallmarks of the
student experience.
Return on Investment
A college education has enormous value and an enormous return:

Individuals with higher levels of education earn more and
are more likely than others to be employed.

I  As of April 2013, the unemployment rate for those with a
bachelor's degree or higher was just 3.9% compared to 6.4% for those
with some college or an associate's degree, and 7.4% for those with a
high school diploma. (Bureau of Labor Statistics)
I  For the first quarter of 2013, full-time workers age 25 and over
holding at least a bachelor's degree had median weekly earnings of
$1,189 compared to $651 for high school graduates (no college) and $457
without a high school diploma. (Bureau of Labor Statistics)
I  Over the course of their working lives, college graduates
typically earn about 66% more than typical high school graduates, and
those with advanced degrees earn two to three times as much as high
school graduates. (College Board, Education Pays 2010)

Federal, state, and local governments enjoy increased tax
revenues from college graduates and spend less on income support
programs for them, providing a direct financial return from investments
in post-secondary education. (College Board, Education Pays 2010)

I  In 2008, just over 1% of those with at least a bachelor's degree
ages 25 and older lived in households that relied on the Food Stamp
Program, compared to 8% of high school graduates . The pattern was
similar for the National School Lunch Program. (College Board,
Education Pays 2010)
I  Spending on social support programs and incarceration costs are
much lower for college graduates than for high school graduates.
(College Board, Education Pays 2010)

College-educated adults are more likely than others to
receive health insurance and pension benefits from their employers, and
to be satisfied with their jobs.

I  Among private sector employees, 68 percent of those with
bachelor's degrees or higher received employer provided health
insurance versus 50 percent of those with high school diplomas.
(College Board, Education Pays 2010)
I  Federal, state, and local governments spent about $43 billion on
payments for health care for the uninsured. (Kaiser Commission report,
2008)

The percentage of people who donate their time to
organizations increases with higher levels of education: 10.4% for
those with a bachelor's degree or higher versus 6.7% for those with
some college or an associate's degree and 5.1% for those with a high
school diploma. (Bureau of Labor Statistics)

College education leads to healthier lifestyles, reducing
health care costs for individuals and for society. Of households living
in poverty (age 25 and older), only 4% had bachelor's degrees or
higher, versus 7% for those with associate's degrees and 12% for those
who had attained only a high school diploma. (College Board, Education
Pays 2010)

College-educated parents engage in more educational
activities with their children, better preparing them for school.

I  Among parents with a bachelor's degree, 68% read to their
children daily. This compares to 57% of parents with an associate
degree, 47% of parents with some college but no degree, 41% of high
school graduates, and 26% of parents who did not complete high school.
(College Board, Education Pays 2010)
Public Law 112-249: Progress Towards Implementing Data Items
I know that the subcommittee is also interested in progress towards
implementing the data items included in Public Law 112-249. The law
identifies 10 information items that must be provided about each
institution of higher learning.
These 10 items are listed below--along with information about the
current availability of the data.

(1) Whether the institution is public, private nonprofit, or
proprietary for-profit.

This information is available on the Department of Education's
College Navigator site. (http://nces.ed.gov/collegenavigator/) The
Department of Veterans' Affairs also includes a link to this site.
(http://www.gibill.va.gov/resources/education--resources/college--
navigator.html)

(2) The name of the national or regional accrediting agency that
accredits the institution, including the contact information used by
the agency to receive complaints from students.

The institution's accreditor is available on College Navigator.
Institutions that participate in the Department of Education
student aid programs are required to provide students with information
about where they can register complaints with an accreditor. Edgewood
provides this information on our website at: http://www.edgewood.edu/
Portals/0/pdf/About/StudentComplaintsProcess.pdf.

(3) Information on the State approving agency, including the
contact information used by the agency to receive complaints from
students.

Institutions that participate in the Department of Education
student aid programs are also required to provide students with
information about where they can register complaints with the State.
However, this HEA requirement does not include the VA State Approval
Agency complaint information. Edgewood provides the HEA information on
our website at: http://www.edgewood.edu/Portals/0/pdf/About/
StudentComplaintsProcess.pdf

(4) Whether the institution participates in any programs under
title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.).

This information is available on College Navigator, and most
institutions also include it on their website. The information is
located on our website at: http://www.edgewood.edu/ProspectiveStudents/
Undergraduate/Freshman/FreshmanFinancialAid.aspx.

(5) Tuition and fees.

This information is available on College Navigator and most
institutions also include it on their website. The information is
located on our website at: http://www.edgewood.edu/ProspectiveStudents/
Undergraduate/Freshman/FreshmanFinancialAid.aspx.

(6) Median amount of debt from Federal student loans under title IV
of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.) held by
individuals upon completion of programs of education at the institution
of higher learning (as determined from information collected by the
Secretary of Education).

The ``typical amount borrowed for a student's undergraduate study''
may be found on the College Scorecard (http://www.whitehouse.gov/
issues/education/higher-education/college-score-card).
``Average undergraduate loans owed at graduation'' \1\ information
is also included on U-CAN. The University & College Accountability
Network (U-CAN) is designed to offer prospective students and their
families concise, web-based consumer-friendly information about the
nation's private, nonprofit colleges and universities in a common
format. It was developed and is maintained by the National Association
of Independent Colleges and Universities (NAICU). Edgwood's U-CAN
profile may be found at: http://members.ucan-network.org/edgewood.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The average per-undergraduate-borrower cumulative principal
borrowed of the 2012 undergraduate class (does not include students who
transferred in or any money borrowed while at other institutions) who
started at this institution as first-time students and received a
bachelor's degree between July 1, 2011 and June 30, 2012. Includes
loans through all loan programs: institutional, state, Federal Perkins,
Federal Stafford Subsidized and Unsubsidized, Federal Direct Student
Loans and Federal Family Education Loans, and private loans certified
by this institution; parent loans are excluded but co-signed loans are
included.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``Median borrowing'' will be included on the Shopping Sheet that
will be available for use beginning in the 2013-2014 award year.
(http://collegecost.ed.gov/shopping--sheet.pdf)

(7) Cohort default rate, as defined in section 435(m) of the Higher
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1085(m)), of the institution.

This information is included on College Navigator and on the
College Scorecard.
It will also be provided on the Shopping Sheet that will be
available for use beginning in the 2013-2014 award year. (http://
collegecost.ed.gov/shopping--sheet.pdf)

(8) Total enrollment, graduation rate, and retention rate, as
determined from information collected by the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System of the Secretary of Education.

This information is included on College Navigator.

(9) Whether the institution provides students with technical
support, academic support, and other support services, including career
counseling and job placement.

Most institutions provide this information on their websites. It
can be located on our site at: http://my.edgewood.edu/sites/services/
src/default.aspx
http://my.edgewood.edu/sites/services/src/personalcounseling/
default.aspx
http://lss.edgewood.edu/

(10) the information regarding the institution's policies related
to transfer of credit from other institutions, as required under
section 485(h)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C.
1092(h)(1)) and provided to the Secretary of Education under section
32(i)(1)(V)(iv) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1015a(i)(1)(V)(iv)).

Most institutions meet this requirement by posting the information
on their websites. It may be found on our site at: http://
www.edgewood.edu/ProspectiveStudents/Undergraduate/Transfer.aspx
http://www.edgewood.edu/ProspectiveStudents/Undergraduate/Transfer/
TransferEquivalencies.aspx
http://www.edgewood.edu/Veterans/CreditforPriorLearning.aspx
http://www.edgewood.edu/About/FederalCompliance.aspx

There is also a link to the information on our U-CAN profile.

Principles of Excellence (Executive Order 13607)
Finally, Edgewood College is one of the many institutions that have
voluntarily signed on to the Principles of Excellence outlined in
Executive Order 13607. The purposes of the Principles are to assure
that service members, veterans, spouses, and other family members:

(1) Receive meaningful information about the financial cost and
quality of education;

(2) Are not subject to abusive and deceptive practices; and

(3) Receive high-quality academic and student support services.

As noted throughout this testimony, Edgewood believes strongly in
these principles and consistently puts them into practice. We are proud
of the fact that our cohort default rate stands at 2.5%--well below the
national average of 13.4% and the proprietary school rate of 22.7%. And
this figure is not due to our having a wealthy student body; in fact,
35% of our current undergraduate full-time students are eligible for
Pell grants. We see providing a supportive environment as a key element
of our success. We provide individual support services for active
military students and veteran students, and we provide placement
support and assistance for all veterans of the state of Wisconsin.
I am confident that veterans are receiving value from my
institution and many other private, non-profit institutions that offer
a high-quality education, supportive veteran services, and a strong
sense of community for veterans and their dependents. Thanks you for
the opportunity to share some of these success stories with you today.
Executive Summary
I am testifying on behalf of Edgewood College and the National
Association of Independent Colleges and Universities (NAICU) regarding
the value of education for veterans at private, non-profit colleges.
Veterans' Education at Edgewood College: Our fall enrollment of
veterans and dependents has more than tripled in the last four years
(from 43 to 144), and spring enrollment has nearly quadrupled (from 36
to 143). Providing a supportive environment is a key element of this
growth. Our academic services include personalized advising to assist
veterans and dependents in determining their course of study. We
provide individual support services for active military students and
veteran students, and we provide placement support and assistance for
all veterans of the State of Wisconsin. Our cohort default rate stands
at 2.5%--well below the national average of 13.4% and the proprietary
school rate of 22.7%. This figure is not due to our having a wealthy
student body; in fact, 35% of our undergraduate full-time students are
eligible for Pell grants.
Cost of Higher Education: At its simplest level, college prices
have gone up because institutions' annual costs have gone up, and
because colleges are providing more services than ever. While the list
of cost drivers changes somewhat from year to year, there are some
expenses - such as health insurance and financial aid - that have been
major cost drivers over the past decade.
Edgewood has made every effort to restrain our tuition costs--
holding increases below 3.9% in each of the past three years. We
participate fully in the Yellow Ribbon program, so that all tuition and
fee expenses are covered for eligible GI Bill recipients. In general,
private, nonprofit colleges have slowed annual tuition increases to the
lowest rates seen in at least four decades.
Value of Higher Education: The real question is what students are
getting from the education they receive. For me, the value is best
shown by the personal stories of the veteran students I've come to
know. There are many reasons why my college is a good choice for
veterans, and these qualities are found at private, non-profit college
campuses across the country--where personal attention, counseling
services, and smaller class sizes are hallmarks of the student
experience. Moreover, as a general matter, a college education has
enormous value and an enormous return in terms of higher earnings,
higher employment rates, increased tax revenues, lower need for income
support, improved health and pension benefits, and higher job
satisfaction--to name a few.
Public Law 112-249: Progress on Data Items: In response to the
subcommittee's interest in progress towards implementing the 10 data
items included in Public Law 112-249, I have provided detailed
information regarding the current availability of the data in my full
written testimony.
Principles of Excellence: Edgewood College is one of the many
institutions that have voluntarily signed on to the Principles of
Excellence, which are intended to assure that service members,
veterans, spouses, and other family members: receive meaningful
information about the financial cost and quality of education; are not
subject to abusive and deceptive practices; and receive high-quality
academic and student support services. Edgewood strongly supports these
principles and consistently puts them into practice.

Prepared Statement of David Baime
Statement
The American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) is pleased to
provide testimony to the Veterans' Affairs Committee's Subcommittee on
Economic Opportunity. AACC represents the nation's almost 1,200
community colleges. Our member colleges, as well as AACC, have had a
long and strong record of service to our nation's veterans and we
expect this relationship to continue for many years. At this time, we
are particularly proud of the role of community colleges in helping
veterans transition successfully back into the workplace by leveraging
their education and skills.
Community colleges are as broad and complex as our nation. They are
large and small, urban, suburban, and rural, and serve the most diverse
population with a wide array of programs. They are constantly evolving
as the communities that they serve change. People often refer to ``the
community colleges'' as if they were a monolith, but nothing could be
further from the truth. For servicemembers and veterans, community
colleges provide trusted and accessible programs and services in an
environment where they feel welcomed.
Community College Veterans' Initiatives
Community colleges have a proud history of serving veteran and
active-duty students. According to a 2012 survey, nearly four out of
five community college respondents already had in place or were in the
process of implementing programs and services specifically designed for
servicemembers and veterans. These include professional development for
faculty and staff to help them better serve veterans, increasing the
number of services for these students, and establishing Web pages
specifically tailored to veterans. Many institutions, particularly
those with larger veteran populations, are establishing dedicated
veterans centers on campus where veterans have the opportunity to
congregate and receive tutoring and other services.
Many colleges have dedicated transition programs for student
veterans that aim to ease the transition from military to civilian
student life. A great example of this can be found locally at
Montgomery College, in Maryland, which has a program called
Combat2College (C2C). The program provides services to veterans, such
as dedicated academic advisors and veterans clubs and activities. Other
colleges have formed learning communities for student veterans. Several
of these efforts have been assisted by federal programs, such as the
TRIO Veterans Upward Bound Program, the Fund for the Improvement of
Postsecondary Education, and the Centers of Excellence for Veteran
Student Success, a Department of Education program that only received 1
year of funding.
Community colleges are partners in their communities to help
veterans in aspects of their lives outside of college. Many colleges
work with their local Workforce Investment Boards to implement
workforce training and employment services programs to meet veterans'
needs. AACC is a strong supporter of the Veterans Retraining Assistance
Program that seeks to help older veterans get the additional training
and education they need to find employment. Some community colleges
serve as conveners and provide space for community-wide programs
focused on specific issues, such as physical and mental health. Many
community colleges have established liaisons and centers where veterans
feel comfortable seeking support, including women veterans who are
least likely to self-identify.
Economic Benefits of Community College
Today, many people are asking, is college worth it? And the answer,
now more than ever, is yes. Although there can never be an absolute
guarantee, the evidence is overwhelming that the surest path to a
family-supporting job is by obtaining a postsecondary degree.
Multitudes of data support this conclusion.
For example, a study just released by the Hamilton Project states
that the average annual earnings return to those who received an
associate degree was 19.3%, higher than that associated with any other
type of college degree. On average, individuals with an associate
degree earn 20% more than those who hold just a high school diploma
(Education Pays, College Board, 2010). This May, the unemployment rate
for those with a bachelor's degree was 3.8%, while those without a high
school diploma had an 11.1% rate (New York Times, June 7, 2013). We
also note that between 1970 and 2005, associate degrees were the
fastest-growing type of college degree earned (Hauptman, 2011),
increasing at twice the rate of bachelor's degrees.
So, while college financing is a major concern for millions of
Americans, sticker shock and overblown accounts of a possible student
loan debt bubble should not obscure the reality that college remains
the best investment most Americans will ever make.
Nevertheless, the choice to enroll at a particular college, and a
program within that institution, carries immense consequences. Many
parties, both public and private, are working to ensure that students
are equipped to choose programs and colleges best suited to their
interests and abilities, but further progress needs to be made. In some
cases, there is no relevant information for prospective students, but
in other cases there is too much overlapping or confusing data about
graduation rates, loan debt, and post-college earnings. AACC continues
to work with both Congress and executive branch agencies in an effort
to consolidate and systematize the information that students receive.
An additional desirable strategy would be to convene a series of focus
groups to ensure that any information provided has maximum impact in
helping students make choices to guide education and careers.
Tuition
The first principle of community colleges is to be accessible
through low tuition, providing a significant cost-effective option for
servicemembers, veterans, and others. Last fall, according to the
College Board, the average community college tuition and fees for a
full-time student was just $3,131. This was a 5.8% increase over the
previous year. Over the last 5 years, inflation-adjusted tuitions have
risen by 24%. For better or worse, future college tuition will be
largely dependent on the level of public support the colleges receive.
We are hopeful that this support will strengthen as the economy
continues to recover.
Fortunately, in large part because of generous congressional
support for Federal Pell Grants, other federal student aid programs,
and the American Opportunity Tax Credit, net total costs for community
college students have remained fairly constant over the last 20 years.
We do not take this investment in our students for granted.
College tuitions are set by a variety of entities. In most states
they are a local decision made by institutional officials in concert
with their board of trustees. In some states, such as Virginia, the
state board sets them for all community colleges. In still other
states, such as California, they are fixed by state legislation. In all
cases, these actions are before the public. We note that there is no
relationship whatsoever between federal student aid and other benefits
and community college tuitions. The fact that the maximum Pell Grant is
and has been far higher than community college tuitions is prima facie
evidence of this reality.
Community colleges do frequently charge higher tuitions for either
out-of-district or out-of-state residents. The average out-of-district
(in-state) tuition and fees are 16.4% greater than in-district charges,
and on average out-of-state students pay 136% more than in-district
students. This practice is informed by a basic principle of equity--
heavily subsidized tuitions should be provided first and foremost to
those who bear the taxes that support them.
However, virtually no community college student pays the full cost
of his or her education. On average, each year institutions spend
$12,398 per student on education. Unfortunately, due primarily to
public funding cuts caused by the recession, this amount has declined
somewhat over the past few years.
Accountability and Outcomes
The accountability movement, with its emphasis on success as well
as access, infuses all aspects of our campuses. AACC took a hard look
at its member institutions with the issuance of the landmark report of
the 21st-Century Commission on the Future of Community Colleges,
Reclaiming the American Dream. This report acknowledged the fact that,
despite their essential role in the nation's economy and society,
community colleges must improve their performance dramatically in order
to fully realize their promise. It stated that ``community colleges
need to reimagine their roles and the ways they do their work.'' AACC
and its members are deeply engaged in implementing the comprehensive
recommendations contained in this report.
AACC is preparing to formally launch its Voluntary Framework of
Accountability (VFA), which will help institutions and the public
better assess how well colleges are doing. The VFA will provide a more
comprehensive and finer-grained account of college performance than
anything currently provided by the federal or state governments. AACC
is anxious to get this project fully implemented, as it should provide
a much clearer picture of institutional effectiveness in student
progress, workforce outcomes, and learning outcomes.
But the federal government also can engage in a more active role in
ensuring that colleges receive better data on the progress of their
students than it does at present. There is no national system that
tracks students through postsecondary education. While efforts continue
to be made to change this, those efforts are still being met with
strong resistance. In addition, the ability for institutional officials
to know about the workforce (primarily earnings) outcomes of program
completers is patchy, if slowly improving. While education should be
far more expansive in its ambitions than simply providing job training,
we also believe that obtaining data about the employment outcomes of
our students is essential for students, institutions, policymakers,
employers, and the general public. The federal government can play an
essential role in this regard.
New Forms of Credentialing
Community colleges are active in developing and using new methods
to evaluate the knowledge, competencies, and skills students bring to
campus. Nowhere is this more important than with the veteran
population, given the fact of their previous experience in the services
in what often are highly complex technical areas. Many means of
evaluating these competencies have been developed and continue to be
refined. These include direct assessment, credit for prior learning,
and new forms of credentialing, particularly in certain industries.
Companies are eager for this ``talent pipeline'' and work with colleges
to establish career paths.
Many, if not most, community colleges award academic credit for
prior experience gained in the military, and are working to help
military and veteran students complete certificates and degrees more
quickly. AACC is proud to be a partner with the American Council on
Education, the Council for Adult and Experiential Learning, and three
community colleges in the Maps to Credentials project, to design and
pilot credential road maps that are cross-walked with military
occupational specialties for veteran students. Another example is the
College Credit for Heroes (CCH) program, a partnership of the Texas
Workforce Commission and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Through the CCH program, seven Texas community colleges formed the
Texas Inter-College Council on Veterans (TICCV) under the direction of
the Texas Workforce Commission. The mission of the seven partner
colleges is to recommend best practices and processes in order for
Texas institutions of higher education to assist veterans and
servicemembers in achieving their educational and career goals. Most
community colleges also are members of the Servicemembers Opportunity
Colleges Consortium, a collection of 1,900 two-year and four-year
institutions that, among other things, are committed to having
processes in place to evaluate prior military and other learning for
college credit.
It should be stressed that much of this innovation is occurring
under the rubric of traditional academic institutions, not that it is
or should be limited to them. A variety of parties have responded to
the challenge of trying to document the learning experience that takes
place outside the classroom. We salute these efforts. We note, however,
that there is significant potential for abuse if federal funds are made
available to entities that would undertake new forms of assessment.
Therefore, we caution policymakers to move carefully into this realm.
It is also important to remember that, in addition to needing
specific skill sets to meet the demands of a given job, prospective
employers also need workers who can read, write, analyze, communicate,
show up on time, and have a positive attitude. Some of these traits can
be assessed, while others have to be demonstrated over time. We believe
that service in the military does show the type of commitment and
reliability valued by many employers.
Conclusion
Higher education has never been more important to our individual
and collective well-being. Those who have served our country in the
armed forces deserve the fullest ability to participate in
postsecondary education. Community colleges remain dedicated to keeping
the door wide open to these individuals to whom the country owes so
much and to helping them find the opportunities that will validate and
reward their contributions to the nation.
Executive Summary
The American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) represents
the nation's almost 1,200 community colleges. AACC and its member
colleges have a long and strong record of service to our nation's
veterans and we expect this relationship to continue.
Community College Veterans' Initiatives
Community colleges have a proud history of serving veteran and
active-duty students. Nearly four out of five community colleges have
indicated that they already have in place or are in the process of
implementing programs and services specifically designed for
servicemembers and veterans. Many institutions, particularly those with
larger veteran populations, have established dedicated veterans campus
centers where veterans can congregate and receive tutoring and other
services.
Economic Benefits of Community College
College education continues to be the best investment Americans
will make. Evidence is conclusive that attainment of postsecondary
education is the surest path to economic security in today's economy.
Community colleges play an essential role in making college accessible
to the broadest swath of American society. It remains extremely
important to ensure that veterans enroll in programs that best suit
their abilities and inclinations.
Community College Tuition
The first principle of community colleges is to remain accessible
through low tuitions. Last fall, the average community college tuition
and fees for a full-time student was $3,131. Tuitions are set by
institutions and their boards; at the state level by the system office;
or by state legislatures. Out-of- district or out-of-state students are
often charged higher tuitions because they do not contribute to the
state and/or local revenues that keep tuition low. Very few students
pay more than the actual cost of providing education, which is $12,400
for a full-time, full-year student.
Accountability and Outcomes
Community colleges are deeply engaged in improving their
performance. In particular, there is a concerted effort to increase
student completions. AACC has undertaken a major study of community
colleges, ``Reclaiming the American Dream,'' that calls for substantial
change, and it is also launching its Voluntary Framework for
Accountability. The federal government can play a key role by ensuring
that institutions receive better data to monitor their outcomes.
New Forms of Credentialing
Community colleges are at the vanguard of new means of evaluating
learning in higher education. These methods include prior learning
assessment and direct assessment. A number of programs targeted
specifically to servicepersons, both current and veterans, have been
developed. Congress needs to encourage these efforts but make sure they
do not become a vehicle for program abuse.

Prepared Statement of Robert M. Worley II USAF (Ret.)
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Takano, and other
Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss
the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) efforts to implement the
provisions of Executive Order (EO) 13607, ``Establishing Principles of
Excellence for Educational Institutions Serving Service Members,
Veterans, Spouses, and Other Family Members,'' and Public Law (PL) 112-
249, ``Improving Transparency of Education Opportunities Act of 2012.''
We are committed to ensuring that VA's education benefits provide
access to high-quality educational opportunities that will enhance
beneficiaries' ability to meet their academic and career objectives.
The actions required by EO 13607 and PL 112-249 align with these
objectives and reaffirm our commitment to ensuring Servicemembers,
Veterans, and their dependents are well served by these programs. My
testimony today will highlight VA's progress toward implementing EO
13607 and PL 112-249.
Executive Order 13607
Issued by the President on April 27, 2012, EO 13607 directs VA, the
Department of Defense (DoD), and the Department of Education (ED), in
consultation with the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), to develop and implement
``Principles of Excellence'' to strengthen oversight, enforcement, and
accountability within Veteran and military educational benefit
programs.
These principles apply to educational institutions receiving
funding from Federal military and Veterans educational benefit
programs, including benefits provided under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. The
principles will ensure that educational institutions provide meaningful
information to Servicemembers, Veterans, spouses, and other family
members about the cost and quality of educational institutions. The
principles will also assist prospective students in making choices
about their Federal educational benefits; prevent abusive and deceptive
recruiting practices that target the recipients of Federal military and
Veterans' educational benefits; and ensure that educational
institutions provide high-quality academic and student-support services
to Servicemembers, Veterans, and their families.
Immediately after EO 13607 was signed, VA began outreach efforts to
disseminate the EO to educational institutions as well as other key
stakeholders (including Veterans Service Organizations [VSOs] and
higher education representatives). We sent letters through the State
Approving Agencies (SAA) and VA's Education Regional Processing Offices
(RPO) to educational institutions to strongly encourage participation
and compliance with the provisions of the EO. VA, DoD, and ED conducted
three joint webinars in June 2012 for over 2,000 participants to
introduce and explain the various aspects of the EO and to address
questions and concerns from educational institutions. To further
encourage participation, we recently targeted outreach efforts to the
US News & World Report top 107 educational institutions and to
approximately 300 educational institutions, which each have more than
250 Veterans enrolled. I am pleased to report that 6,282 campuses have
voluntarily agreed to comply with the Principles of Excellence as of
May 29, 2013. These institutions are listed on our GI Bill Web site.
VA is developing a Comparison Tool/GI Bill Benefit Estimator that
will enable prospective students to compare educational institutions
using key measures of affordability and value through access to school
performance information, and consumer protection information.
VA placed a link to ED's College Navigator on the eBenefits website
in November 2012. VA subsequently embedded ED's College Navigator into
the GI Bill Web site in March 2013. As a long-term plan, VA will
integrate data from ED's College Navigator with data from VA's Web-
Enabled Approval Management System (WEAMS) to calculate tuition and
fees, monthly housing allowance, and books and supplies estimates. The
tool will include indicators on graduation rates, retention rates, loan
default rates, average student loan debts, Veteran population, Yellow
Ribbon Program and Principles of Excellence participation, as well an
estimated cost of attendance. We anticipate this tool will be available
on the GI Bill Web site and www.eBenefits.va.gov by April 2014.
In addition, VA in conjunction with our partners at DoD, ED, CFPB,
and DOJ, is developing student-outcome measures that are comparable, to
the extent practicable, across Federal educational programs and
institutions. We have vetted a set of proposed measures with VSOs and
school organizations, and received positive feedback. VA, in
collaboration with DoD and ED, will finalize the cohorts, definitions,
and measurement points at the end of June 2013. We will coordinate with
other government agencies to determine availability of data for post-
graduation outcome measures in July 2013. Finally, VA will begin
collecting data elements from our stakeholders in August 2013.
EO 13607 also requires VA and DOD, in consultation with ED, CFPB,
and DOJ, to collaborate on the creation of a centralized complaint
system for individuals to register complaints about educational
institutions regarding topics such as student loans, quality of
education, refund policies, and post-graduation job opportunities.
Complaints will be received, processed, responded to, and ultimately
transmitted to the Federal Trade Commission's (FTC) Sentinel database
to make the information available to other federal agencies, law
enforcement organizations, and SAAs. VA is developing a complaint form
that will be made available electronically through the GI Bill Web
site. Once complaints are received, VA will review and triage them.
Valid complaints will be sent to schools or employers for a response,
as well as to the FTC's Consumer Sentinel Network. VA will expand the
compliance survey program to incorporate both standard reviews and
risk-based program reviews to ensure compliance with the Principles of
Excellence at institutions who have agreed to comply.
Public Law 112-249
PL 112-249 was enacted on January 10, 2013, and much within the new
law overlaps and complements the work begun in support of EO 13607. PL
112-249 requires VA to develop a comprehensive policy to improve
outreach and transparency to Veterans and Servicemembers through the
provision of information on IHLs and to implement online tools to
facilitate the policy. The law also requires VA to develop a policy and
plan for promoting Chapter 36 educational and vocational counseling to
Veterans and recently separated members of the Armed Forces; develop a
centralized mechanism for tracking and publishing feedback from
students and SAAs regarding the quality of instruction, recruiting
practices, and post-graduation employment placement of IHLs; and
develop a policy and plan to disapprove any IHL that provides any
commission, bonus, or other incentive payment based directly or
indirectly on success in securing enrollments or financial aid to any
persons or entities engaged in any student recruiting or admission
activities or in making decisions regarding the award of student
financial assistance. VA was required to perform two market surveys
related to academic readiness and commercially available off-the-shelf,
online comparison tools.
To implement PL 112-249, VA is partnering with ED, DoD, CFPB, and
the National Association of State Approving Agencies. As required by
this law, VA submitted a report to Congress in April 2013 that includes
a description of the comprehensive policy, our plan to implement the
policy, and the results of the market surveys conducted to determine
the availability of commercially available off-the-shelf online tools.
The report is available on the GI Bill website.
As a result of the market surveys, VA plans to pilot an online
assessment tool called CareerScope that allows a Veteran or
Servicemember to assess whether he or she is ready to engage in
postsecondary education and determine his or her likely vocational
aptitude. VA conducted another market survey for an online tool that
provides a Veteran or Servicemember with a list of providers of
postsecondary education and training opportunities based on specific
postsecondary education criteria selected by the individual. We
discovered that many online tools provide much of the required
information; however, none of the Web sites provide all the data
required in the law. As a result, VA will build a tool that aggregates
information from existing websites to provide all data, which will be
hosted on gibill.va.gov and eBenefits.
To promote Chapter 36 educational and vocational counseling
(provided under 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3697A), VA will increase awareness and
inform eligible participants about Chapter 36 counseling services,
including how to determine an appropriate degree program and the
education benefit program most appropriate for their individual
circumstances. VA will facilitate applications for interested eligible
participants as a part of the redesigned Transition Assistance Program
(TAP) process. VA is also promoting Chapter 36 counseling services
through the VetSuccess on Campus programs at more than 35 schools. In
addition, we will provide information about Chapter 36 counseling
services to our stakeholders, including other federal agencies, VSOs,
School Certifying Officials, SAAs, and other private-sector entities
that provide information and guidance to Veterans and Servicemembers
about VA educational benefit programs. Title 38, section 3697, chapter
36, currently authorizes payments not to exceed $6 million in any FY
for vocational and educational counseling. VA submitted a FY 2014
legislative proposal to increase the amount to $7 million. By FY 2014,
VA expects a substantial increase in requests for these counseling
services due to vocational assessments required for VA's collaboration
with DoD's Integrated Disability Evaluation System, VetSuccess on
Campus program, and the ongoing modernization of the Transition
Assistance Program in conjunction with the current military drawdown.
PL 112-249 provides a process for acquiring the necessary information
and the guidelines for communicating with IHLs. It also specifies that
VA efforts should not duplicate the efforts being taken by other
Federal agencies. It further specifies that VA's comprehensive policy
must be consistent with the requirements and initiatives resulting from
EO 13607.
The Cost of Postsecondary Education and the Increase in Non-college
Degree Programs
VA's focus, through implementation of the EO and PL 112-249, is to
do everything possible to ensure Veterans and family members are
comprehensively informed consumers, so they are able to pursue an
approved program of education at the academic institution - public,
private non-profit, or private for-profit - that best meets their
specific needs. As part of the VOW to Hire Heroes Act of 2012, which
made TAP mandatory for all separating Servicemembers, VA worked with
our partners at DoD and ED to redesign the curriculum. The new TAP
Goals, Plans, and Success (Transition GPS) has several new components -
notably, an optional track, called Accessing Higher Education, which is
dedicated to providing information on education and/or training
opportunities, which includes VA education benefits. As part of the
curriculum, Servicemembers will receive pre-separation counseling and
register for an eBenefits account.
New Education Benefit Programs
Also, as the Subcommittee is well aware, in the past five years, VA
has implemented two new education benefit programs aimed at increasing
educational opportunities for Veterans, Servicemembers, and their
dependents. The Post-9/11 GI Bill, implemented by VA on August 1, 2009,
is the most comprehensive education benefit package since the original
``GI Bill'' was signed into law in 1944. As of June 6, 2013, over
977,000 Veterans, Servicemembers, and their dependents have received
approximately $29.4 billion in benefits under this new education
program. In fiscal year (FY) 2012, VA provided education benefits to
nearly one million Veterans, Servicemembers, and dependents under all
our educational benefit programs.
To further increase the educational options available to our
beneficiaries, Public Law 111-377, the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational
Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, made changes to the types of
training approved for benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. Effective
on October 1, 2011, the Post-9/11 GI Bill was expanded to include non-
college degree programs, such as on-the-job training, vocational flight
training, and correspondence courses.
The Veterans Retraining Assistance Program (VRAP) (section 211 of
Public law 112-56), which became law on November 21, 2011, and which is
our newest education benefit program, focuses on offering certain
Veterans the opportunity to train in non-traditional, postsecondary
education by requiring the training be completed at a community college
or technical school and lead to an associate degree, certificate, or
other record of completion in a high-demand field. In addition, SAAs
are contracted to perform outreach regarding available programs of
education, including apprenticeship and on-the-job training programs.
VA began accepting applications for VRAP on May 15, 2012, to help
retrain those hit hardest by unemployment - Veterans aged 35 to 60. As
of June 6, 2013, over 51,000 unemployed Veterans have received $317.2
million in benefits under VRAP.
Conclusion
VA has worked with key stakeholders to help ensure that Veterans
utilizing their education benefits are paid in a timely and accurate
manner. Through further continuing interagency cooperation and student
outreach, VA will ensure that Veterans are informed consumers and that
schools meet their obligations in training this Nation's next
``greatest generation.''
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions you or the other Members of the Subcommittee may
have.

Statements For The Record
The College Board
We are pleased to respond to the Chairman's request for testimony
on the growth in the cost of postsecondary education, non-loan student
aid, and student debt for students in different sectors of
postsecondary education.
As Table 1 shows, in 2011-12, the federal government awarded $12.2
billion in grant aid through educational assistance programs for
veterans. About three quarters of the total funding ($9.4 billion) was
awarded under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. (About 92% of the funding went to
undergraduate students, with the remainder financing graduate
education.) Expenditures more than doubled between 2008-09 and 2009-10,
with the introduction of the new benefits program.
In 2011-12, veterans' benefits accounted for 25% of all federal
grant aid to postsecondary students and 11% of the grant aid students
received from all sources. (The $34.5 billion Pell Grant program
accounted for 70% of total federal grant aid in 2011-12.)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

This significant level of funding for veterans and dependents makes
examining how students are using the funds, and whether the investment
is paying off, vital from the perspective of taxpayers and students.
Veterans are different from other students in a variety of ways.
Most are older than traditional-age college students and like other
adult students, many are juggling family and work responsibilities
while they are in school. While we do not have data on the enrollment
patterns of veterans, we do know where they are using their federal aid
dollars. As Table 2 shows, in 2009-10, 36% of the funding from the
Post-9/11 GI Bill went to students enrolled in for-profit institutions.
Overall, about 12% of postsecondary enrollments were in this sector.
Because low-income students are disproportionately likely to enroll in
for-profit institutions, this sector also received 21% of Pell Grants
in 2011-12.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The concentration of veterans in the for-profit sector is not new,
although it appears to have increased with the advent of the new, more
generous benefit program. In 2007-08, when 9% of all undergraduates
were enrolled in for-profit institutions, 14% of veterans were in this
sector. At that time, much of this difference could be attributed to
the older ages of all enrolled veterans, 59% of whom were age 30 or
older, compared to 22% of the students with no military experience.
Among students age 30 or older, 16% of veterans and 13% of non-veterans
were enrolled in the for-profit sector. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Center for Education Statistics, National
Postsecondary Student Aid Study, 2007-08.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Published Prices
Tuition prices vary considerably across sectors. Table 3 shows that
published tuition and fees at private for-profit institutions averaged
an estimated $15,172 in 2012-13, compared to $8,655 for in-state
students at public four-year colleges and universities and $3,131 for
those enrolled in community colleges. The price differential between
for-profit and public institutions is large and for many students, is
reflected in the higher student debt levels in the for-profit sector,
discussed below.
Eligible veterans attending a public college or university have all
of their in-state tuition and fee payments covered under the Post-9/11
GI Bill. Generally, students attending a private or foreign school are
covered for up to $18,077.50 in tuition and fees in 2012-13. (This
maximum is adjusted each year for inflation.) \2\ In addition to
tuition and fee coverage, eligible veterans receive a monthly housing
allowance and an annual books and supplies stipend. As a result of
these benefits, student debt levels are not likely to cause the same
problems for veterans as for students who are not eligible for these
subsidies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Department of Veterans Affairs, Post-9/11 GI Bill, Chapter 33
(http://www.gibill.va.gov/resources/benefits--resources/rates/CH33/
Ch33rates080112.html).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Student Financial Aid
In addition to federal grant aid, students receive grant aid from
state governments, from employers and other private entities, and from
colleges and universities. As Table 4 shows, 44% of the total grant aid
awarded in 2011-12 was from the federal government, up from 32% a
decade earlier. In 2011-12, full-time equivalent undergraduate students
received an average of $6,932 in grant aid from all of these sources
combined. They received an additional $1,169 in average benefits from
federal education tax credits and deductions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The composition of grant aid differs across sectors. In 2011-12,
full-time students in private nonprofit four-year colleges and
universities received only about 18% of their grant aid from the
federal government, and received 69% from institutions. At the other
end of the spectrum, about 92% of the grants received by students in
the for-profit sector were from the federal government.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Net Price
Although it is generally the published prices that make headlines,
it is the net prices paid by individual students that matter most for
college access and affordability. Table 6 shows the published price,
net price, and total grant aid and tax benefits per full-time
undergraduate student by sector over time. As Table 6 shows, while the
average published tuition and fee price at public four-year
institutions was $8,660 in 2012-13, the average net price was $2,910,
after subtracting $5,750 estimated grant aid and tax benefits from
published tuition and fees. In the same year, full-time students
received an estimated $4,350 in grant aid and tax benefits in the
public two-year sector. This aid averaged about $15,680 for full-time
students in the private nonprofit four-year sector and $10,220 for
those enrolled in for-profit institutions.
Over the past five years, the average published public four-year
in-state tuition and fee price has increased by 27% in real terms,
while the average net price has increased by 18%. During this period,
the average published tuition and fee price increased by 24% and 13%
for public two-year and private nonprofit four-year institutions,
respectively, while the net tuition and fee price in both sectors
declined.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Student Debt
The most up-to-date, reliable data about the debt levels of college
graduates in all sectors are from 2009. As Table 7 shows, in 2009, 37%
of bachelor's degree recipients who were dependent on their parents for
financial aid purposes graduated debt-free, compared to only 25% of
those who were independent. While we know that students borrow more
now, there is no reason to believe that the pattern across sectors has
changed significantly.
Table 7 shows that while 18% of dependent bachelor's degree
recipients graduated with more than $28,000 in debt in 2009, in the
for-profit sector that figure was 65%. (There were too few bachelor's
degrees awarded to independent students in the for-profit sector to
yield a valid figure for this group.)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Many students enroll in postsecondary programs but never earn
degrees. These students are likely to have difficulty repaying their
loans. As Table 8 shows, 30% of students who enrolled for less than one
year borrowed, 78% of those who enrolled for such a short period of
time in the for-profit sector borrowed and 13% borrowed more than
$10,000. Overall, 13% of students who left school after two years or
longer with no credential had accumulated more than $20,000 in debt;
30% of students from the for-profit sector had accumulated this level
of debt.
Again, the level of the federal assistance program for veterans may
shield this group of students from the debt problems facing others.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Completion Rates
It is difficult to predict outcomes for the veterans now
benefitting from the relatively new federal benefits. Many of these
students attend for-profit institutions. Because they are typically
adults with family and work responsibilities, they tend to seek
shorter-term programs with flexible schedules and specific occupational
direction. The for-profit sector offers many shorter-term certificate
programs and has relatively high completion rates for these programs.
Table 9 shows the percentage of students who completed a degree or
certificate by sector and cohort. For students who started at a four-
year institution in 2005, 65% of those in the private nonprofit sector
had received a bachelor's degree by 2011, compared with 57% of those in
the public sector and 42% in the for-profit sector. (It is important to
note however, that the bachelor's degree completion rates for the for-
profit sector have been volatile and should be interpreted with
caution.) Where the data shows a different picture, however, is the
awarding of two-year degrees in the for-profit sector. For students who
started at a two-year institution in 2008, 31% had received a degree or
certificate within 150% of normal time, ranging from 20% for students
in the public two-year sector to 62% for students in the for-profit
sector.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Table 10 shows the six-year completion rates for students who
started college in fall 2006 by age and enrollment intensity. Unlike
the Department of Education's IPEDS data on which Table 9 is based, the
data in Table 10, from the National Student Clearinghouse, allow
tracking of individual students as they switch institutions. Among
students who started at a four-year institution at the age of 24 or
younger and enrolled exclusively full-time, more than 80% of those in
the public and private nonprofit sectors had completed a degree or
certificate six years later. Of those who started at a for-profit four-
year institution, 54% had completed a degree or certificate. For older
students who enrolled exclusively full-time, about 70% of those who
started in the public and private nonprofit four-year sectors had
completed a degree or certificate within six years. Sixty-three percent
of those who started in the for-profit four-year sector had completed a
degree or certificate within six years, which may be a result of the
relatively high completion rate of certificates among these students.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Concluding Remarks
The Post-9/11 GI Bill should allow many veterans to continue their
education without extensive borrowing. The high correlation between
levels of educational attainment and employment and earnings makes this
a vital component of easing re-entry into the civilian world. However,
like other aspiring college students, veterans are faced with a wide
array of institutional options and available credential programs. A
significant problem faced by both veterans and other adults seeking to
return to school is a lack of adequate guidance in making these
important choices. This problem has led to proposals to assure that
these students have access to assessment and counseling from
disinterested experts before they commit to a program or an
institution. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Sandy Baum et al., Rethinking Pell Grants, The College Board,
April 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As documented in this testimony, students face very difference
price tags, student aid subsidies, and success probabilities depending
on the choices they make. Like other adult students, veterans are often
drawn to the for-profit sector because of the flexible schedules such
institutions offer.
The for-profit sector has a relatively high completion rate for
shorter-term certificates and two-year degrees, especially compared to
other sectors, including the public two-year sector. However, their
completion rates for bachelor's degrees are much lower.
It is important to assure that the federal aid dollars are well-
spent on cost-effective programs. Even with the growing availability of
on-line data on completion rates and short-term labor market outcomes,
veterans, even more than most other students, could benefit from
better, personalized advice about postsecondary choices.
Executive Summary:
The Value of Education for Veterans at Public, Private and For-Profit
Colleges and Universities
Prepared by Sandy Baum and Jennifer Ma
Co-authors, Trends in Student Aid and Trends in College Pricing, The
College Board
In 2011-12, the federal government awarded $12.2 billion in grant
aid through educational assistance programs for veterans. About three
quarters of the total funding ($9.4 billion) was awarded under the
Post-9/11 GI Bill. In 2011-12, veterans' benefits accounted for 25% of
all federal grant aid to postsecondary students and 11% of the grant
aid students received from all sources.
Eligible veterans attending a public college or university have all
of their in-state tuition and fee payments covered under the Post-9/11
GI Bill. Generally, students attending a private or foreign school are
covered for up to $18,077.50 in tuition and fees in 2012-13. In
addition to tuition and fee coverage, eligible veterans receive a
monthly housing allowance and an annual books and supplies stipend. As
a result of these benefits, student debt levels are not likely to cause
the same problems for veterans as for students who are not eligible for
these subsidies.
Veterans are different from other students in a variety of ways.
Most are older than traditional-age college students and like other
adult students, many are juggling family and work responsibilities
while they are in school. In 2009-10, 36% of the funding from the Post-
9/11 GI Bill went to students enrolled in for-profit institutions.
Overall, about 12% of postsecondary enrollments were in this sector.
It is difficult to predict outcomes for the veterans now
benefitting from the relatively new federal benefits. Many of these
students attend for-profit institutions. Because they are typically
adults with family and work responsibilities, they tend to seek
shorter-term programs with flexible schedules and specific occupational
direction. The for-profit sector offers many shorter-term certificate
programs and has relatively high completion rates for these programs.
Among students who started at a four-year institution in fall 2006
at the age of 24 or younger and enrolled exclusively full-time, more
than 80% of those in the public and private nonprofit sectors had
completed a degree or certificate six years later. Of those who started
at a for-profit four-year institution, 54% had completed a degree or
certificate. For older students who enrolled exclusively full-time,
about 70% of those who started in the public and private nonprofit
four-year sectors had completed a degree or certificate within six
years. Sixty-three percent of those who started in the for-profit four-
year sector had completed a degree or certificate within six years.
The Post-9/11 GI Bill should allow many veterans to continue their
education without extensive borrowing. However, like other aspiring
college students, veterans are faced with a wide array of institutional
options and available credential programs and would benefit from
clearer information about the relative performance of institutions with
respect to completion and better, personalized advice about
postsecondary choices.

Reserve Officers Association of the United States
The Reserve Officers Association of the United States (ROA) is a
professional association of commissioned and warrant officers of our
nation's seven uniformed services and their spouses. ROA was founded in
1922 during the drawdown years following the end of World War I. It was
formed as a permanent institution dedicated to National Defense, with a
goal to teach America about the dangers of unpreparedness. When
chartered by Congress in 1950, the act established the objective of ROA
to: ``...support and promote the development and execution of a
military policy for the United States that will provide adequate
National Security.''
The Association's 57,000 members include Reserve and Guard
Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, Airmen, and Coast Guardsmen who frequently
serve on Active Duty to meet critical needs of the uniformed services
and their families. ROA's membership also includes commissioned
officers from the U.S. Public Health Service and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration who often are first responders during
national disasters and help prepare for homeland security.
ROA is a member of The Military Coalition where it co-chairs the
Guard and Reserve Committee. ROA is also a member of the National
Military/Veterans Alliance and the Associations for America's Defense.
Overall, ROA works with 75 military, veterans, and family support
organizations.

President: Col. Walker Williams, USAF (Ret.) 202-646-7706

Staff Contacts:

Executive Director: Major General Andrew ``Drew'' Davis, USMC
(Ret.) 202-646-7726

Legislative Director: CAPT Marshall Hanson, USNR (Ret.)202-646-7713

Air Force Director: Col. Bill Leake, USAFR202-646-7713

Army and Strategic Defense Education Director: Mr. ``Bob'' Feidler
202-646-7717

USNR, USMCR, USCGR: CAPT Marshall Hanson, USNR (Ret.)202-646-7713

Service Members' Law Center Director: CAPT Sam Wright, JAGC, USN
(Ret.)202-646-7730

The Reserve Enlisted Association is an advocate for the enlisted
men and women of the United States Military Reserve Components in
support of National Security and Homeland Defense, with emphasis on the
readiness, training, and quality of life issues affecting their welfare
and that of their families and survivors. REA is the only joint Reserve
association representing enlisted reservists - all ranks from all five
branches of the military.

Executive Director: CMSgt Lani Burnett, USAF (Ret)202-646-7715

DISCLOSURE OF FEDERAL GRANTS OR CONTRACTS
The Reserve Officers and Reserve Enlisted Associations are member-
supported organizations. Neither ROA nor REA have received grants, sub-
grants, contracts, or subcontracts from the federal government in the
past three years. All other activities and services of the associations
are accomplished free of any direct federal funding.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Recommended Improvements to education supported by ROA and REA
follow:

Education:

Safeguard and implement a long term plan for sustaining
the Post 9/11 GI Bill.

I    Ensure transferability benefits are protected.
I    Guarantee that any future changes to the program that could
have negative effects on benefits will grandfather in current
beneficiaries.

Although Veteran Affairs call centers have been
established, there is still a need to properly train and staff to
adequately counsel student veterans.

Align the VA's work-study program for students to work as
guidance officers at their institutions to aid other student veterans,
to be matched up with institution's academic calendar.

Exempt earned benefit from GI Bill from being considered
income in need based aid calculations

Increase MGIB-Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR) to 47 percent of
MGIB-Active.

Move Montgomery GI bill for the Selected Reserve under
Veteran Affairs jurisdiction.
THE VALUE OF EDUCATION FOR VETERANS
On behalf of our members, the Reserve Officers and the Reserve
Enlisted Associations thank the committee for the opportunity to submit
testimony on veteran and National Guard and Reserve education issues.
ROA and REA applaud the ongoing efforts by Congress and this committee
to address education challenges faced by so many veterans and serving
members.
Between August 2009 and August 2012, the Post 9/11 GI Bill cost
$22.4 billion and educated 833,990 veterans, serving members and
dependents at a cost of $26,858 per student. Is that a worthwhile
investment? The Reserve Officers Association (ROA) and the Reserve
Enlisted Association (REA) say it is.
Education improves a veteran's chance for employment, and many
returning combat veterans seek a change in the life paths. While Army
National Guard unemployment numbers are high, many returning veterans
don't want to go back to the type of work that they did prior to
deployment. Newly acquired skills and combat experiences can change
career ambitions. The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides an opportunity for
veterans to seek new employment paths.
In 1988, the Joint Economic Committee's Subcommittee on Education
and Health released a study titled `A Cost-Benefit Analysis of
Government Investment in Post-Secondary Education Under the World War
II GI Bill' which calculated the ratio of return on investment to be
nearly seven-to-one. Every dollar the nation spent educating veterans
of WWII returned $6.90 in additional national economic output and
federal tax revenue. It took over 30 years to capture this statistic,
and similarly, it will be decades before the full economic benefit of
today's GI Bill will be known. However, we can reasonably expect it to
be just as immense.
Nearly eight million veterans of the 16 million that served took
advantage of the original GI Bill. Veterans made up 49 percent of U.S.
college enrollment in 1947. The WWII GI Bill proved to be largely self-
funding. Much of the cost of providing the original legislation's
sweeping benefits were financed by income tax pouring back into federal
coffers from the multitude of newly educated veterans joining the
expanding workforce.
While many economists feared a return of the Great Depression
following the war with an influx of returning warriors as war industry
was downsizing, the 1950s proved to be a period of economic growth and
broad prosperity that is rivaled by few other times in America's
history. The very face of the United States changed as this newly
educated population expanded outside the urban centers, creating
suburban neighborhoods.
A study published by authors Joshua D. Angrist and Stacey H. Chen
in the American Economic Journal on the GI Bill effects on Vietnam-era
Conscripts show that it ``increased schooling with effects of a
magnitude similar to those reported in studies of the WWII and Korean-
era GI Bills . . . The estimated economic returns to the Vietnam-era GI
Bill schooling increment are about 7 percent'' in earnings. They found
``a large veteran effect on public-sector employment.''
It is still too early to accurately measure the full extent of the
benefits the country will realize from our newest generation of
veterans' use of the GI Bill in pursuit of higher education and job
training. Undoubtedly, those benefits will mirror the vast returns of
the original post-WWII GI Bill.
Many of the benefits of the GI Bill can be identified, even if not
yet quantitatively measured. These benefits fall into two categories:
benefits to our Armed Services in recruiting young men and women
interested in both service and education, and benefits to our nation as
a whole in preparing young people to better contribute to a society
they have already demonstrated a commitment to serve.
First, educational incentives are key to recruiting the type of
individuals which make our military strong. Every Soldier, Sailor,
Airman, and Marine (whether Active, Reserve, or Guard) plays a crucial
role in our military's ability to defend this country and our national
interests. The quality of every individual service member will only
increase in impact as our military reduces its numbers while still
facing a complex national security environment. It is vital for our
military to be able to attract the high talent individuals that are
capable of carrying such a heavy responsibility - the GI Bill attracts
that quality of recruit.
Second, the GI Bill helps veterans transition to civilian life by
enabling them to gain the education and training required to compete in
the civilian job market. Many veterans would not otherwise be able to
afford this education due to the prohibitive costs of tuition; thus GI
Bill benefits not only prevent our returning veterans from being a
burden on society, but enable them to contribute and even lead the next
generation of American workers.
For those unassisted veterans who experience personal hardship and/
or unemployment, one of the greatest contributory factors to their
situation is the sense of lacking purpose or direction that was all-
encompassing in the military. Providing veterans with the resources
they need to pursue personal and professional self-improvement through
education and job training helps them replace a lost sense of purpose
and builds a resilience required to overcome their personal challenges.
It helps them direct their talents and energy toward the laudable goal
of preparing themselves for civilian employment and continuing to be
productive members of society.
According to the Department of Labor, unemployment rate of workers
with a bachelor's degree is 3.9% versus 7.5% for the overall workforce
in April 2013. Providing access to these high-tech and advanced
training skills will be a crucial element of America's future economic
viability.
Over this decade, employment in jobs requiring education beyond a
high school diploma will grow more rapidly than employment in jobs that
do not; of the 30 fastest growing occupations, more than half require
postsecondary education, reports the White House. With the average
earnings of college graduates at a level that is twice as high as that
of workers with only a high school diploma, higher education is now the
clearest pathway into the middle class.
America's ability to maintain its economic preeminence in the 21st
century will depend on its capacity to produce an educated and skilled
workforce and the demand for college educated workers will continue to
grow as America transitions to a knowledge-based economy. Higher
education will help fill the many job vacancies in the rapidly growing
information technology and business process management industries.
BACKGROUND ON GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT
Many for-profit colleges and universities endeavored to enroll as
many federal students as possible, often targeting veterans, Active and
Reserve serving members, and their families as their primary student
core. Some were not accredited, others misrepresented programs during
recruitment, and still others misstated financial costs. Post 9/11 and
Montgomery GI Bill dollars were being squandered without providing the
needed education to the beneficiaries.
The solutions:
Public Law (PL) 112-249 (H.R.4057), the Improving Transparency of
Education Opportunities for Veterans Act of 2012, was enacted January
10, 2013. It directed the Secretary of Veteran Affairs to develop a
comprehensive policy to improve outreach and achieve transparency of
higher education for veterans and members of the Active and Reserve
Armed Forces.
It required a centralized mechanism for tracking and publishing
feedback from students and State Approving Agencies regarding the
quality of instruction, recruiting practices, and post-graduation
employment placement, and permitted feedback from military students to
address concerns and issues.
Centralized complaint system - The law required ``the Secretaries
of Defense and Veterans Affairs, in consultation with the Secretary of
Education and the Director of the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau
(CFPB), as well as with the Attorney General to create a centralized
complaint system for students receiving Federal military aid and
Veterans' educational benefits to register complaints that can be
tracked and responded to by the Department of Defense (DoD), VA,
Justice (DOJ), ED, CFPB, and other relevant agencies.''
Complaints will be stored in the Federal Trade Commission's
Consumer Sentinel Network database. A pilot of the system was targeted
to be implemented by Spring of 2013.
DoD's Voluntary Education Management Information System that
registers student complaints about schools taking tuition assistance is
also still being worked on. In addition to complaints, it includes
gathering, collating, and verifying participation and cost data from
the Services. Hopefully complaint information will be shared with the
centralized complaint system.
Concern: While the complaints system will receive school
complaints/concerns from all agencies, process the complaints, and
refer matters for civil or criminal enforcement, it is hoped by ROA and
REA that the database can be publicized to provide consumer information
to the military student, and expand institutional transparency.
Executive Order 13607 was signed on April 27, 2012 and called for
accountability from educational institutions and vendors
concerning recruitment and enrollment of veterans, military
personnel, and their families. Institutions that agree with EO
13607 provide a benchmark toward education excellence.
The Executive Order addresses a number of concerns that were shared
by ROA and REA in earlier Capitol Hill meetings. Its Principles of
Excellence included:

Providing students personalized information regarding the
total cost of the program

Providing educational plans for all military and veteran
education beneficiaries

Ending fraudulent and aggressive recruiting techniques
and misrepresentation

Accommodating service members and reservists absent due
to service requirements, outlining readmission expectations, and
tuition refunds.

Designating a point of contact for academic and financial
advising

Verifying accreditation of all new programs prior to
enrolling students
The Financial Aid Shopping sheet was created that lists disclosure
fees and financial eligibility. It is a consumer tool that is designed
to simplify information that prospective students receive about costs
and financial aid so that they can make informed decisions about which
postsecondary institution to attend. While not mandatory, it gives a
recruiting advantage to schools that use it. The end result is a
simplified model financial aid award letter that clearly lists cost of
attendance, and separates grants from federal loans and work-study.
Registering the term ``GI Bill'' as a trademark ensures that all
potential military students won't be mislead by questionable marketing
practices.
EVALUATING THE POST 9/11 GI BILL
Measuring Success using the Graduation Rate
By January 2013, more than $23 billion had been spent to educate
and train our returning veterans - a significant investment. An
accounting of those funds to determine what the taxpayer receives for
that money is appropriate and necessary. To this end, ROA and REA
applaud the combined effort of the Student Veterans Association, the
Department of the Veterans Affairs, and the National Student
Clearinghouse to collect graduation rates of GI Bill beneficiaries.
Currently, a success is measured when a student completes a degree,
and does so within a prescribed number of years after entering an
academically designed program. Not all students follow that path, thus
graduation rates should not be the only measure of success.
Returning veterans are often non-traditional students. Measures
should be developed for non-traditional student performances as well.
Before graduation the non-traditional student may leave and be re-
admitted to a school several times, affected by priorities from current
employment and family. Attrition numbers can appear higher if an
individual is not tracked. The University Professional and Continuing
Education Association found that 43 percent of institutions don't have
systems to track the retention of a non-traditional student through
graduation.
Alternative Approaches to Higher Education
The original GI bill changed higher education. The GI Bill fueled a
major expansion of the nation's higher education system and made
college a cornerstone of middle-class American life.
Yet, after World War II, 7.8 million veterans trained at colleges,
trade schools and in business and agriculture training programs.
Overall, 2.2 million attended college and 5.6 million opted for
vocational training.
Those who went to agricultural colleges learned more about the new
technologies in farming and improved crop output. Other GI's learned
about electricity and helped install rural electric lines. The program
made business owners out of young men who just a few years earlier were
mere boys.
A four-year college program isn't necessarily the path for all
veterans. In addition to higher education, veteran students
participated in on the job training programs, apprenticeships, flight
schools, non-college degrees and correspondence training. Many want to
learn the job skills and avoid the electives. Many veterans question
college requirements that seem to be irrelevant to work.
Alternative institutions provide a pathway that often permits an
accelerated education, permitting veteran students the opportunity to
focus on a specialty area. As long as these schools are accredited and
meet the Executive Order 13607, they should be considered for Post 9/11
GI Bill.

VA Education Beneficiaries
Number of Participants Trained and Amount Paid per FY by Education Program
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Educ. Program        2011 Count           $ Paid           2012 Count           $ Paid        $Average/student
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1Post 9/11             555.33              $7.66             616.49              $7.53      $13.79/$12.21
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MGIB-AD             185.22              $1.39             114.14              $.881        $7.48/$7.72
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MGIB-SR              65.22              $.201              56.34              $.149        $3.09/$2.65
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REAP*               27.3              $.095              18.48              $.072        $3.49/$3.95
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DEA              90.66              $.462              78.83              $.408        $5.11/$5.18
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total             923.84              $9.80             884.32             $9.038
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
in thousands        in billions       in thousands        in billions       in thousands
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Veterans Benefits Administration briefing, November 2012, FY 2012 numbers are for the first 10 months.
* REAP is for mobilized Reservists that have were enrolled in MGIB-SR before deployment. REAP is an option to
increase MGIB benefits upon their return home.

MONTGOMERY GI BILL
The Montgomery GI Bill for Selected Reserve should be updated to
provide better education support. It pales in comparison to the Post 9/
11 GI Bill. The monthly education stipend of $356 for MGIB for Selected
Reserve is just 11.5 percent of the monthly tuition and allowance that
can be as high as $3156 for the GI Bill. As one Reserve Component
member shared, the monthly stipend barely pays for gas and parking. The
MGIB-SR monthly stipend should be increased to at least 47 percent of
the MGIB for Active Duty as was originally intended by Congress.
To assist in recruiting efforts for the Marine Corps Reserve and
the other uniformed services, ROA and REA urge Congress to reduce the
obligation period to qualify for Montgomery ``GI'' Bill-Selected
Reserve (MGIB-SR) (Section 1606) from six years in the Selected Reserve
to four years in the Selected Reserve plus four years in the Individual
Ready Reserve, thereby remaining a mobilization asset for eight years.
Jurisdiction should be moved under the Veteran Affairs committees.
Because of funding constraints, no Reserve Component member will be
guaranteed a full career without some period in a non-pay status. BRAC
realignments are also restructuring the RC force and reducing available
paid billets. Whether attached to a volunteer unit or as an individual
mobilization augmentee, this status represents periods of drilling
without pay. Currently one loses eligibility when they leave the
Selected Reserve.
MGIB-SR eligibility should extend to at least 10 years beyond any
separation or transfer from a paid billet. Current law permits 14 years
eligibility if a unit is disbanded between October 1, 2007 through
September 30, 2014.
Montgomery GI Bill for Selected Reserve is currently the orphan
child of education with the House and Senate Armed Services committees
retaining jurisdiction. The Pentagon continues to testify that MGIB-SR
is meeting their retention needs, while fewer Reserve Component members
are using the benefit.
CONCLUSION:
The cost of education is easily measurable, but the value of it is
less so. Money invested in the GI Bill is an investment in America's
future, and will be returned many times over. From it, the country will
gain a stronger national security, a more robust economy, and a
brighter future of all Americans.
These veteran students are the men and women that answered our
Nation's call once, and will do so again, whether in uniform or out. It
is from this group of action oriented, public service minded
individuals that many of our future leaders will emerge.
We must ensure they have the tools they will need to do so
effectively, just as the original GI Bill provided a start for three
presidents, three Supreme Court justices, and hundreds of Senators and
House Representatives. The education also led to fourteen future Nobel
laureates and two dozen Pulitzer Prize winners, 238,000 teachers,
91,000 scientists, and 67,000 doctors.
ROA and REA appreciate the opportunity to submit testimony. ROA and
REA look forward to working with the House Veterans' Affairs
subcommittee on Economic Opportunity, so that we can present solutions
to these and other issues, and offer our support. If you have any
questions, please contact us for clarification.

National Association of Veterans Program Administrators (NAVPA)
The National Association of Veterans Program Administrators is
pleased to provide brief comments regarding the issues to be covered
during the House Veterans Affairs Committee Economic Opportunity
Subcommittee June 20, 20123 on ``The Value of Education for Veterans at
Public, Private and For-Profit Colleges and Universities.'' NAVPA is
proud to represent over 300 educational institutions serving veterans,
military members, and their families throughout the nation. Our members
are those who serve as the first-line contact for these students at our
institutions.
The institutional reporting requirements under Public law 112-249
are met through the US Department of Education and relate to data for
institutions as a whole and not specifically for the veteran
population. This data is regularly provided by school offices
designated for institutional reporting and so we do not expect our
members to be directly involved in providing it to the federal agencies
tasked for collection. The transparency and communication requirements
in the Principles of Excellence for those schools that voluntarily
pledged to comply are student-facing and will serve to better inform
student veterans, military members, and their families about education
policies and practices.
NAVPA would like to express our appreciation for the dedicated
phone line at the VA's Education Call Center provided for school
officials. The ability for our members to quickly and easily access
information about specific students' eligibility, entitlement, or
tuition and fee payments has been extremely helpful. PL 112-249,
Section 3 requires VA to provide dedicated points of contact for school
certifying officials to assist in ``preparing and submitting such
reports or certifications.'' While the Call Center SCO Hotline provides
specific student eligibility and payment information, they are not
trained nor tasked to provide general information about VA policy or
certification procedures. SCOs still rely on their VA Education Liaison
Representatives to provide that information or to answer questions
about how a specific student situation should be interpreted and
certified. Unfortunately, ELRs often remain difficult to reach in a
timely fashion due to their many duties including travel for compliance
survey visits.
It is not in our area of expertise to comment on issues related to
education costs or value and we defer to other organizations more
suited to respond.

Dorothy Gillman
President, NAVPA

Wounded Warrior Project
Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Wounded Warrior Project (WWP) appreciates your holding this hearing
and welcomes the opportunity to share our perspective on wounded
warrior-student experiences in higher education.
With WWP's mission to honor and empower wounded warriors, our
vision is to foster the most successful, well-adjusted generation of
veterans in our nation's history. Achieving economic empowerment is
clearly a critical element to that end, and education is key.
With the Post 9/11 GI bill, Congress has provided this generation
of veterans an especially valuable gateway to economic success. Wounded
warriors are using this benefit; in fact, more than one in three of the
more than 5,600 wounded warriors who responded to our 2012 survey was
enrolled in school. \1\ However, as this Committee considers the value
of post-secondary education for veterans, we urge you to take account
of the stark challenges some of our wounded warriors face in pursuing
higher education. In many instances, their injuries - and particularly
the invisible wounds they have incurred - create obstacles their
student-peers do not experience or even understand. Some wounded
warriors simply need modest accommodations and supports. But without
such supports some are struggling, dropping out, or even failing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Franklin, et al., 2012 Wounded Warrior Project Survey Report,
66 (June 2012). Hereinafter, ``WWP Survey.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While a growing number of colleges are instituting some type of
programs and services for veterans, there is great diversity in how
these institutions serve veterans, and in the scope of the services
they provide. \2\ VA has begun efforts to improve support services for
veterans on campus; however, these are limited to a few, mostly large
institutions. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Id. at 21, 22; Lesley McBain, et al., ``From Soldier to Student
II: Assessing Campus Programs for Veterans and Service Members,''
American Council on Education, 8 (2012).
\3\ GAO, ``VA Education Benefits: VA Needs to Improve Program
Management and Provide More Timely Information to Students,'' 20-22,
GAO-13-338 (May 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On-Campus Challenges for Wounded Warriors
Wounded student-warriors report a range of challenges - difficulty
assimilating on campus and adapting to student-life; insufficient or
non-existent accommodations to their disabilities; and lack of
understanding on the part of faculty and fellow students of needs
arising from PTSD and TBI. Family issues, finances, and health problems
often compound these school-related stresses. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id. at 9-12; Wounded Warrior Project Campus Services Roundtable
Discussion Event, July 14-15, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emblematic of the experience of many, the experiences of a wounded
student-warrior, who suffers from combat PTSD and migraines, is
telling:

While going to school . . . my anxiety and frustration began to
kick in. Some days with my migraines it was too unbearable to show up
in the class room . . . My grades continued to drop . . . it was still
very difficult for me to focus in the classroom. I winded up failing
classes and having to pay out of pocket costs. It was very frustrating
for me sometimes to experience public panic attacks and keep up with my
classmates. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Wounded Warrior Project Alumnus Kathleen Evans (June 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Studies confirm the experiences our warriors have reported to WWP
campus-services staff. For example, one study found that the
``average'' student-veteran has experienced moderate anxiety,
moderately severe depression, and symptoms of PTSD. \6\ Specifically,
nearly 46 percent of the sample experienced ``significant symptoms of
PTSD,'' \7\ almost 35 percent suffered from severe anxiety, and nearly
24 percent had severe depression. \8\ Another study found that most of
the student veteran survey and focus group participants encountered
substantial transition challenges while adapting to life on campus. \9\
Among these students, one of the most frequently discussed challenges
was coping with service-related disabilities and PTSD. \10\ Overall,
about 68 percent of survey respondents rated the extent to which they
had to cope with such disabilities, and of those, 55 percent reported
it as a moderate or major challenge. \11\ Participants cited such
difficulties as being unable to move quickly from one class to the next
across campus, hyper-alertness and anxiety caused by PTSD, difficulty
concentrating due to TBI, and difficulty relating to other students.
\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ David Rudd, Jeffery Goulding, and Craig Bryan, ``Student
Veterans: A National Survey Exploring Psychological Symptoms and
Suicide Risk.'' 42(5) Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
354, 357-358 (2011).
\7\ Id. These exceed the cutoff score for PTSD in accordance with
the PCL-M score for OIF/OEF veterans, Dept. of Veterans' Affairs and
the National Center for PTSD Fact Sheet, ``Using the PTSD Checklist,''
available at: http://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/pages/assessments/
assessment-pdf/pcl-handout.pdf.
\8\ Rudd et al., supra note 6, at 357-358.
\9\ Jennifer Steele, Nicholas Salcedo, and James Coley, ``Service
Members in School: Military Veterans' Experiences Using the Post-9/11
GI Bill and Pursuing Postsecondary Education,'' RAND Corporation
(2011).
\10\ Id. at 36.
\11\ Id. at 39.
\12\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wounded warriors entering schools through the assistance of the
Post-9/11 GI Bill and Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E)
are not simply grappling with adjustment to the demands of higher
education. Many are also having difficulties relating to their non-
veteran peers. Staff and faculty are typically unaware of their
challenges with PTSD, TBI, and other often-severe disabilities. One
student-warrior cited returning to college as ``perhaps the hardest
thing I have done.'' \13\ Another student-warrior added, ``The
transition to an academic institution is delicate because of the close
interaction with students and faculty. The student veteran cannot hide
and is exposed in the class room. They are often misunderstood if a
[PTSD] flare-up occurs.'' \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ WWP Survey, at 107.
\14\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With these issues, wounded warriors face a steeper climb than their
fellow students. Reliable data on veteran graduation rates from
traditional non-profit schools are elusive. \15\ As existing studies
from VA and the Department of Education on outcomes of student veterans
generally don't capture Post 9/11 GI Bill beneficiaries, \16\ it has
been very difficult to confirm statements that graduation rates are low
and drop-out rates are high. VA's reported agreement with the National
Student Clearinghouse to obtain targeted completion data for veterans
who have attended college under the GI Bill, as well as the prospect of
further data from schools that voluntarily report graduation and
program completion rates, offer some hope for greater clarity on these
important questions. \17\ Recent statements by VA officials that they
have not yet determined how they will use this new data or if they
would publicly release it concern us. We urge the Subcommittee to
pursue these issues - to make certain VA is collecting the most
appropriate data, and to press the Department to improve management of
education benefit programs, assist veterans in making informed academic
choices, and facilitate their academic success. \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ David Wallis, ``Coming Home From War to Hit the Books,'' The
New York Times (Feb. 29, 2012).
\16\ Paul Fain, ``Colleges Fail to Track Performance of Student
Veterans, Survey Finds,'' Inside Higher Ed. (Dec. 4, 2012) available
at: http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2012/12/04/colleges-fail-track-
performance-student-veterans-survey-finds; GAO, ``VA Education
Benefits,'' supra note 3, at 24.
\17\ Paul Fain, ``Do Veterans Graduate?'' Inside Higher Ed. (Jan.
8, 2013), available at: http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/01/08/
new-effort-collect-student-veterans-graduation-rates; See also Remarks
by Secretary Eric Shinseki, Student Veterans of America 5th Annual
Convention, (January 4, 2013), available at: http://www.va.gov/opa/
speeches/2013/1--04--13.asp.
\18\ GAO, ``VA Education Benefits,'' supra note 3, at 29-30.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lack of Wounded Warrior Support Services
We further urge the Subcommittee to address wounded warriors' need
for support to foster educational success. The issue has several
facets. To illustrate, some wounded warriors do not understand how
their injuries affect their learning, and may be unaware what
accommodations they need (and might be able to receive) to be
successful. \19\ Conversely, many colleges and other institutions of
higher education appear not to recognize the unique transitional
challenges facing matriculating wounded veterans. While a recent report
found that a growing number of colleges have instituted some type of
programs and services for veterans - 62 percent in 2012 up from 57
percent in 2009 - the report found great diversity in how these
institutions serve veterans and in the variety of these programs and
services. \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ American Council on Education, ``Accommodating Student
Veterans with Traumatic Brain Injury and Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder: Tips for Faculty and Staff,'' at 5 available at http://
www.acenet.edu/news-room/Documents/Accommodating-Student-Veterans-with-
Traumatic-Brain-Injury-and-Post-Traumatic-Stress-Disorder.pdf.
\20\ Lesley McBain et al., ``From Soldier to Student II: Assessing
Campus Programs for Veterans and Service Members.'' American Council on
Education 8 (2012) available at http://www.acenet.edu/news-room/Pages/
From-Soldier-to-Student-II.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to an American Council on Education report, only 36
percent of postsecondary institutions with student-veterans have an
established department to assist these students and their families;
approximately 36 percent of these institutions have transition
assistance services available; less than 40 percent employ qualified
staff trained to assist with veterans' needs (or employ a single
individual who is expected to meet all these needs); nearly 36 percent
of college and universities with student-veterans have trained
counseling staff to assist students with brain injuries; and almost 42
percent of institutions with student-veterans have support groups or
mentoring programs available to active duty and veteran students. \21\
The same report cited the presence of staff and faculty with some level
of training in meeting the needs of military and veteran students,
including basic familiarity with the military culture, as a critical
factor in the success of student servicemembers and veterans. \22\ The
fact that schools are generally building these support services without
the guidance and assistance from VA - which could play an important
role by disseminating best practices - is especially troubling. \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Id. at 49-53.
\22\ Id. at 48.
\23\ GAO, ``VA Education Benefits,'' supra note 3, at 22-23.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Evidence that wounded warrior-students are not thriving
academically highlights the importance of fostering efforts to provide
them needed accommodations. Some institutions of higher education have
offered meaningful assistance, including providing accessible on-campus
mental health staff trained in military culture, counseling and
tutoring services for warrior-students; full-time staff to assist
student-warriors; training for faculty on TBI and PTSD; and peer-
support services. While model programs exist, they represent the
exception, not the rule. This Subcommittee can play an important role
in promoting efforts to expand the establishment of these models.
Efforts to Provide Student-Veterans On-Campus Supports
While some schools have recognized the value of such programs,
others may simply not have sufficient resources to mount such new
programs. Given the vulnerability associated with warriors' transition
into higher education and the very substantial federal investment
already being made under Post 9/11 GI Bill, it is timely to consider
steps to foster the development of campus programs that address the
very specific needs of wounded warriors. Past generations of veterans
have benefitted from congressional support aimed at fostering success
in post-secondary education.
In 1972, for example, Congress established a program to encourage
colleges and universities to serve the special needs of Vietnam
veterans who were using the Vietnam Era GI Bill to enroll in school.
\24\ That initiative, the Veterans Cost-of-Instruction Program (VCIP),
was a mandatory grant program, targeted particularly at service-
connected disabled veterans and administered through the Department of
Health, Education and Welfare (HEW). VCIP grantees were required ``to
maintain a full-time office of veterans' affairs with adequate support
services . . . in the areas of outreach, recruitment, special education
programs, and counseling.'' \25\ With the numbers of veterans enrolling
in higher education declining in the 1980's, Congress allowed VCIP to
expire and established the Veterans Education Outreach Program (VEOP).
\26\ The VEOP program provided formula grants to institutions based on
the number of enrolled veterans receiving veterans' educational
benefits or vocational rehabilitation services. \27\ Institutions that
received VEOP grants were required to maintain a veterans' affairs
office and provide outreach programs, counseling and tutorial services,
and special education programs for veterans, with an emphasis on
programs for the disabled and educationally disadvantaged. \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Dept. of Ed. Archived Information Biennial Report FY 93-94
Chapter 512, ``Veterans Education Outreach Program,'' available at:
http://www2.ed.gov/pubs/Biennial/512.html; H.R. 996-Veterans Education
Outreach Program: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Education, Training
and Employment of the H. Comm. on Veterans' Affairs, 103rd Cong. 26
(Mar. 25, 1993)(Opening statement of Chairman G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery).
\25\ Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Departmental Grant
Appeals Board Decision, Docket No. 78-11 (June 19, 1979) citing 45
C.F.R. Sec.  189.12 (1974). Under the program, HEW provided payments to
educational institutions based on increased veteran enrollments by
required percentages and establishment of special education programs
for veterans, that is, specifically designed remedial, tutorial, and
motivational programs designed to promote postsecondary success.
Federal regulations governing the program also set criteria for
evaluating the adequacy of such special educational programs. Id.
citing 45 C.F.R. Sec. Sec.  189.11(d), 189.16(d) (1974).
\26\ H.R. 996-Veterans Education Outreach Program: Hearing before
the Subcommittee on Education, Training and Employment of the H. Comm.
on Veterans' Affairs, 103rd Cong. 26 (1993).
\27\ Dept. of Ed., supra note 24.
\28\ Id. The program was not reauthorized and VEOP grant awards
ended in 1992.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As recently as 2010, the Department of Education initiated a grant
program to encourage institutions of higher education to develop model
programs to support veteran student success in postsecondary education.
\29\ The Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education (FIPSE)
program, ``Centers of Excellence for Veteran Student Success'' granted
awards to fifteen institutions nationally over a three year period.
\30\ Grant awards were made to institutions that were required to
provide a single point of contact to coordinate comprehensive support
services for veteran students; establish a veteran student support team
(including representatives from such campus offices as financial aid,
academic advising, student health, mental health counseling, career
advising, and disability support); monitor the rates of enrollment,
persistence, and completion; and develop a plan to sustain the program
after the grant period. \31\ While performance data on these awards are
forthcoming, they should provide valuable insights on assessing success
of veteran students on campus (many of whom also identify as wounded
warriors).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Dept. of Ed. Office of Postsecondary Education; Overview
Information Centers of Excellence for Veteran Student Success; Notice
Inviting Applications for New Awards for FY 2010, 75 Fed. Reg. page
37776 (June 30, 2010).
\30\ Dept. of Ed., Office of Postsecondary Education, Centers of
Excellence for Veteran Student Success, FY 2010 Awards, available at:
http://www2.ed.gov/programs/cevss/cevssabstracts2010.pdf.
\31\ 75 Fed. Reg. page 37776, supra note 29. According to the FIPSE
Program Coordinator, these grants, made available as one-time
specially-authorized funding, would be up for renewal in 2013, subject
to the availability of funding. Telephone interview, November 6, 2012.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While WWP is encouraged with a new VA proposal currently in
development, which would provide grants to selected large schools, or
those with large veteran enrollments, to demonstrate and share results
of student veteran support services, the lack of scope and timeframe
for the initiative, coupled with it moving slowly through the approval
process, concerns us. \32\ Additionally, we agree with the Government
Accountability Office and question whether it would even impact smaller
institutions, with less financial resources to mount their own support
services or have dedicated staff positions or offices to assist student
veterans. \33\ These smaller schools collectively serve a large number
of student veterans. \34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ GAO, ``VA Education Benefits,'' supra note 3, at 23.
\33\ Id.
\34\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As earlier Congresses recognized the challenges wounded warriors
faced in making the transition from combat zone to campus, the
Subcommittee can play a critical role today in helping this generation
of wounded student-warriors make that transition successfully. The
objective would be to enable student-warriors to thrive - not struggle
- on campus. Congress and the American people are, of course, already
investing in the future of this generation of veterans through the
Post-9/11 GI Bill. But we owe it to those wounded in war to make a
small additional investment in their academic success. Some
institutions have paved the way by taking steps to support student-
veterans. But more must be done. Federal funding can be invaluable in
helping colleges and universities to become ``centers of excellence''
in supporting America's heroes on campus. In establishing model
programs, and thereby attracting student-veterans, such institutions
will effectively raise the bar - making it vital for many more
institutions of higher education to invest in campus services for
student veterans and student warriors.
Fostering Informed Decision-making on Educational Options:
Achieving academic success can also be a matter of individual
warriors finding their ``right'' school and program. With the country's
important investment in the education of this generation of veterans,
\35\ it is incumbent on government and institutions of higher education
to provide those veterans as much information as possible to assess
their education options. With the additional challenges many face in
returning to school, wounded warriors, in particular, need to know
whether a school has credible support services for them and whether
other warriors have had a track-record of academic success. VA's
current efforts to develop and collect outcome information on student
veterans, including coordinating with DoD and the Department of
Education and the development of a long-term study, \36\ and its
agreement with the National Student Clearinghouse to obtain targeted
outcome data for veterans who have attended college under the GI Bill,
could ultimately be very helpful to prospective warrior-students as
they weigh educational options and choices. As mentioned above, WWP is
troubled that VA officials have not yet determined how they will use
this important new data and whether they would publicly release it,
potentially missing a critical opportunity to assist veterans in making
informed academic choices and facilitate their academic success. \37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ VA anticipates serving over 590,000 veterans using their VR&E
and Post 9/11 GI Bill benefits in 2013, spending over $10 billion
providing these benefits. Dept. of Veterans' Affairs Annual Budget
Submission (FY 2013), Vol. III, Benefits and Burial Programs (February
2012), 2B-8 and 2B-21.
\36\ VA has initiated several efforts to develop and collect
outcome data on student veterans, including coordinating with DoD and
the Department of Education to develop common measures to permit
comparisons across various education programs and types of institutions
as required by Exec. Order 13607 ``Establishing Principles of
Excellence for Educational Institutions Serving Service Members,
Veterans, Spouses, and Other Family Members,'' as well as developing a
long-term study to track student veteran outcomes over the next 20
years. GAO, ``VA Education Benefits,'' supra note 3, at 27-8.
\37\ Id. at 29-30.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prior to adjournment, the 112th Congress passed legislation aimed
at helping veterans make more informed choices in pursuing higher
education. \38\ That measure requires the VA Secretary to develop a
comprehensive policy to improve the transparency and dissemination of
education information to veterans, to include establishing a
centralized mechanism for tracking and publishing student feedback on
quality of instruction, recruiting, and post-graduation employment and
information on postsecondary institutions' enrollment, retention, and
graduation rates. In WWP's view, however, the measure falls short, as
it fails to address information of greatest significance to wounded
warriors. For example, while the measure requires publication of
retention and graduation rates as well as information on the
availability of support services, these requirements are not specific
to veterans and servicemembers, but to the overall student population.
A wounded warrior who wants to know how supportive a college-community
is to warrior-specific needs; whether that institution has veteran-
specific programs and what those are; or whether other wounded warriors
have had a track record of academic success at that institution would
gain little or no insight under the measure. WWP believes it is
important to go further so that wounded warriors can access the kind of
information they need to make well-informed decisions on their
educational options. Wounded warriors considering education as a
pathway to employment would benefit greatly from the publication of
reliable school-specific information on availability and types of
academic support, disability, and career counseling and job placement
services; specific programs and services principally or exclusively
targeted to assist student-veterans, particularly those with
disabilities or disabilities which impair learning; and designated
point(s) of contact for academic, financial, disability, benefits, and
veterans support services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ ``Improving Transparency of Education Opportunities for
Veterans Act of 2012,'' Public Law 112-249 (Jan. 10, 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recognizing the difficult transition many wounded warriors are
making, we also urge the Subcommittee to provide warriors every
opportunity to receive vocational and educational counseling at
multiple points in their transition and after. Currently, the VA is
authorized to provide educational and vocational counseling to
individuals eligible for education benefits regardless of disability.
\39\ However, veterans' awareness of this counseling option is very
low, and it is only available upon request. \40\ While VR&E provides
such counseling, the Post 9/11 GI Bill does not, and thus, wounded
warriors who opt for the GI Bill are surrendering - intentionally or
not - beneficial educational-counseling services. Such counseling could
be invaluable to wounded warriors going back to school, to include
assessing whether the wounded warrior is academically and emotionally
ready to engage in post-secondary education. Legislation passed at the
end of the 112th session requiring the Secretary of the VA to conduct
more effective and efficient outreach to make veterans more aware of
this benefit is an important first step. \41\ But we urge the
Subcommittee to go further and make this provision an ``opt-out''
rather than an ``opt-in'' benefit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ 38 U.S.C. Sec.  3697A.
\40\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``VA Education
Benefits: Actions Taken, but Outreach and Oversight Could be
Improved,'' GAO-11-256, 13 (2011).
\41\ Public Law 112-249, supra note 38.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Providing these modest, but important services - while offering
schools incentives to create model programs to support wounded warriors
on campus - would not only assist them in making informed decisions
about their education, but further the promise underlying these
educational benefits and improve the likelihood of warriors' achieving
success in higher education and beyond.
For-Profit Colleges
As this Subcommittee reviews the value of education for veterans,
we urge you to look hard at circumstances where the costs of higher
education may be outweighing the benefits. The for-profit college
industry is one such area for scrutiny. As documented in a widely
disseminated 2012 report by the Senate Committee on Health Education
Labor and Pensions (HELP Committee), for-profit colleges account for 13
percent of students in higher education in this country, but receive 38
percent of all Post-9/11 GI Bill funds, and yet represent 47 percent of
student loan defaults. \42\ The Committee found that taxpayers spend
more than twice as much to train veterans at for-profit colleges than
at public colleges, and that some 86% of 2009 revenue at publicly
traded for-profit education companies came from taxpayer dollars, while
marketing alone represented more than 23% of spending at those
institutions that year, with profits approaching 20%. \43\ There are
for-profit schools that are seen as having solid credentials and a
history of success for their graduates. Overall, however, studies have
questioned the relative value of a degree or certificate from for-
profit institutions, with one such study finding higher rates of
unemployment and lower earnings among students who attend for-profit
colleges than comparable students from other types of colleges, \44\
and another finding that for students in associate degree programs
there are large benefits from obtaining certificates and degrees from
public and not-for-profits institutions, but not from for-profits. \45\
Of particular significance to WWP, for-profit schools often lack the
academic and counseling support services that many wounded warriors
need to thrive in higher education.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ S. Comm. on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, ``Senator
Harkin's Findings Regarding Veterans and For?Profit Colleges,'' 5, 16
available at: http://www.harkin.senate.gov/documents/pdf/
4f9ac62292704.pdf (2012).
\43\ Id. at 4, 10-11.
\44\ Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and Employment,
``The For-Profit Postsecondary School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile
Predators?'' (February 2012).
\45\ The National Bureau of Economic Research, ``Evaluating Student
Outcomes at For-Profit Colleges,'' NBER Working Paper No. 18201 (June
2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For-profit colleges have a strong incentive to enroll
servicemembers and veterans because the so-called 90/10 rule - which
requires a for-profit college to obtain at least 10 percent of its
revenue from Title IV education funds - where GI Bill (and Tuition
Assistance) funds count toward that 10 percent. With this incentive to
enroll veterans and servicemembers, the industry has employed
aggressive and sometimes deceptive, exploitative recruiting practices.
As the HELP Committee report found, for-profit colleges employ many
recruiters, but very few placement staff. \46\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ S. Comm. on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, ``Senator
Harkin's Findings Regarding Veterans and For?Profit Colleges,'' at 14.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Against this backdrop and acting administratively, the
Administration last year established a set of principles for
educational institutions that serve servicemembers, veterans, and their
family members to rein in deceptive practices and promote better
information and academic and financial advising. \47\ That Executive
Order is a good first step, but we urge this Subcommittee to review its
enforcement as well as opportunities to strengthen it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ Exec. Order 13607, ``Establishing Principles of Excellence for
Educational Institutions Serving Service Members, Veterans, Spouses,
and Other Family Members,'' (April 2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We urge the Subcommittee as well to support efforts to avert
warriors' taking on substantial debt to pursue for-profit education
that carries high risk for default or of failing to prepare students to
earn a livelihood. Our own most recent survey of wounded warriors found
that 43% of respondents were carrying more than $20,000 in personal
debt (excluding mortgage debt); 35.7% of those respondents listed
education expenses as comprising part of that debt, and 38% of
respondents said that their financial situation was worse off than the
year before. \48\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ WWP Survey, at 78-79, 83.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For-Profit schools have a long history - dating back to the World
War II GI Bill - of taking advantage of veterans. \49\ GI Bill money
(and additional student loans encouraged by the schools) for programs
that don't provide skills that employers recognize or credits that
other educational institutions will accept will not foster the well-
adjusted, economically successful generation of wounded warriors that
WWP pursues and in which our nation is investing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ See Senate Report accompanying the Vietnam-era Veterans
Readjustment Assistance Act of 1976 detailing problems in that
Education Assistance program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you for consideration of WWP's views on this important
matter.


