- VA ACCOUNTABILITY: ASSESSING ACTIONS TAKEN IN RESPONSE TO SUBCOMMITTEE OVERSIGHT

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VA ACCOUNTABILITY: ASSESSING ACTIONS TAKEN
IN RESPONSE TO SUBCOMMITTEE OVERSIGHT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-54

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
87-667                    WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   DINA TITUS, Nevada
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
DAVID JOLLY, Florida
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Nancy Dolan, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

DAN BENISHEK, Michigan, Chairman

DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California,
JEFF DENHAM, California                  Ranking Minority Member
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             RAUL RUIZ, California
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Wednesday, February 26, 2014

VA Accountability: Assessing Actions Taken In Response To
Subcommittee Oversight.........................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Dan Benishek, Chairman......................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    31
Hon. Julia Brownley, Ranking Member..............................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    32

WITNESS

Hon. Robert Petzel, M.D., Under Secretary for Health, Veterans
Health Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans' Affairs....     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    33

Accompanied by:

Robert Jesse, M.D., Principal Deputy Under Secretary for
Health VHA, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Madhulika Agarwal, M.D., M.P.H., Deputy Under Secretary
for Health for Policy and Services, Veterans Health
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Rajiv Jain M.D., Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for
Patient Care Services, VHA, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs

And

Phillip Matkovsky, Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for
Health for Administrative Operations, VHA, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Letter and Questions From: Hon. Dan Ben to Hon. Robert A. Petzel.    39
Questions From: Hon. Dan Benishek and Responses From: VA.........    42
Letter From: Hon. Robert A. Petzel to Hon. Dan Benishek..........    73
Deliverables From: VA............................................    73

VA ACCOUNTABILITY: ASSESSING ACTIONS TAKEN IN RESPONSE TO SUBCOMMITTEE
OVERSIGHT

Wednesday, February 26, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Dan Benishek
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Benishek, Huelskamp, Wenstrup,
Brownley, Ruiz, Negrete-McLeod, and Kuster.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DAN BENISHEK, CHAIRMAN

Dr. Benishek. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order.
Thank you for joining us today for the oversight hearing VA
Accountability: Actions Taken in Response to Subcommittee
Oversight.
Almost one year ago today during my first hearing as
chairman of the Subcommittee on Health, we met to discuss the
persistent lack of productivity and staffing standards for
specialty care services at Department of Veterans Affairs'
medical facilities.
We learned that VA had yet to implement these standards
despite more than 30 years of reports and recommendations
directing the department to do so.
I was so alarmed by VA's decades long lack of action that I
quickly introduced H.R. 2072, the Demanding Accountability for
Veterans Act. H.R. 2072 would require VA to ensure that
inspector general recommendations concerning a public health or
patient safety issue were addressed, identify those within VA
medical facilities who are responsible for implementing needed
changes, and prohibit the VA from awarding a bonus or
performance award to any employee who does not fully address a
recommendation under his or her purview.
The goal of this legislation is to create a culture of
accountability within VA, a culture where problems are
identified and immediately corrected and leaders are held
responsible for their actions.
Were H.R. 2072 in place 30 years ago, VA would have been
required long before now to implement productivity and staffing
standards for all specialty care services and who knows how the
health and well-being of a veteran seeking care through VA
would have improved as a result.
I wish I could say that the first hearing was the only time
that we have seen evidence of a lack of timely action taken by
VA in response to serious problems. Unfortunately, that is not
true.
Since the conclusion of that hearing, we have held other
hearings and roundtables on topics ranging from the care
provided to veterans with chronic pain and who have experienced
military sexual trauma to concerns regarding department-wide
procurement reform and third-party collections.
At each of these oversight forums, we have heard example
after example of VA failing to act swiftly to address important
issues or respond to the subcommittee's requests for
information in a timely manner.
I am a surgeon. When a serious problem is identified, my
instinct is to act without delay, to cut out what needs cutting
out, and to fix what needs fixing.
While I understand that large-scale changes often happen
slowly, especially where large government bureaucracies like VA
are concerned, I think we can all agree that our veterans
deserve more than what we have seen in the last year.
I am hopeful that H.R. 2072 will be heard on the House
floor in the coming weeks. However, I am not content to wait
for what can often be a lengthy legislative process to ensure
that VA is on track to address the many issues the subcommittee
has identified through last year's oversight efforts.
During today's hearing, we will assess the progress, if
any, that VA has made in response to the subcommittee's
hearings and roundtables, determine whether appropriate steps
have been taken to ensure accountability when and where
deficiencies in care have been highlighted, and identify what
further actions may be necessary to improve the care and
services provided to our veterans.
Though the topics we address today are wide ranging, they
are undoubtedly interconnected. If we do not ensure the
department is on track to implement appropriate productivity
and staffing standards, then we cannot be sure that we have the
right staff in place to care for veterans experiencing chronic
pain.
Similarly, if we do not ensure that the VA is taking
necessary actions to improve the collection where appropriate
of third-party revenue, then we cannot be sure that we are
collecting every available dollar that could be used to improve
the care and services provided to veteran survivors of military
sexual trauma.
Last week, I had the privilege of conducting an oversight
visit to the West LA VA Medical Center. During my conversations
with the clinicians and support staff there, each of the issues
we will discuss today were brought up by the providers when I
asked them what needed to be improved in order to make it
easier for them to care for our veterans.
I cannot state enough how critical it is for VA to take
responsibility for gaps in care and, more importantly, to take
immediate and definitive steps to address them.
Unfortunately, I have seen little concrete evidence in the
past year that the department is doing either. Concurring with
IG and GAO reports is simply not enough. Sending out guidelines
without accountability is not enough. I sincerely hope that
today's conversation will change my mind.

[The prepared statement Hon. Dan Benishek appears in the
Appendix]

With that, I will recognize Ranking Member Brownley for any
opening statement she may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JULIA BROWNLEY, RANKING MEMBER

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
Today's hearing is intended to follow-up on various
oversight hearings and roundtables held during the first
session of the 113th Congress and to assess the progress that
the department has made in addressing these critical issues.
The subcommittee will also determine whether appropriate
steps have been taken by the VA to ensure accountability and
identify what further actions may be necessary in response to
subcommittee oversight.
Last session, this subcommittee held oversight hearings on
physician staffing standards, care and treatment for military
sexual trauma survivors, and VA's overuse of prescription
painkillers to treat veterans with chronic pain.
In addition to the oversight hearings, two roundtables were
held, one focusing on procurement reform and access to care and
one on billing and collecting from third-party health insurance
companies for nonservice-connected care.
There were many issues raised during these hearings and
roundtables, issues such as developing a plan to establish
productivity standards for all specialty care services within
three years, decreasing the amount of time it takes to procure
large medical equipment through the national acquisition
center, assessing the department's programs for veterans who
have experienced military sexual trauma, and ensuring the
effective use of opiate therapy for patients with chronic pain.
Mr. Chairman, these are but a few of the concerns that were
brought up during testimony and conversations we had with the
witnesses and participants during these forums. While we have a
lot of ground to cover today, I am especially interested in
hearing from the VA on improvements made in the military sexual
trauma program and in procurement reform.
At the MST hearing held last session, we heard firsthand
the experiences of veterans who have found the system
unfriendly and intimidating.
According to the VA, fiscal year 2013 saw an increase of
9.3 percent in rates of engagement of military sexual trauma
related care at VHA. Additionally, the VA reports an increase
of 14.6 percent in military sexual trauma related visits in
fiscal year 2013.
I would like to hear from the VA how they are addressing
these increases. I am sure we all agree that it is critical
that Congress do all that we can to make it easier for victims
of military sexual trauma to access needed benefits and
services and receive treatment. Compassion and care are a
significant part of healing those that have been sexually
assaulted.
Turning now to procurement reform, Mr. Chairman, last
session, we held a roundtable and during that roundtable
discussion, we heard about the long delays, some for up to two
years, in the delivery of medical equipment.
While I understand that VA is streamlining the procurement
process to decrease the amount of time it takes to procure
large medical equipment through the national acquisition
center, I do not feel confident that much progress has been
made in that area.
Stakeholders continue to report increased difficulties
accessing needed prosthetic equipment through VA and
significant delays in contract awards at the national
acquisition center. I find this very frustrating and
unnecessary. I hope the VA has good news on this front today.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing today, and
I want to thank everyone in attendance. There is obvious
concern for veterans and VA's ability to meet their healthcare
needs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.

[The prepared statement of Hon. Julia Brownley appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Ms. Brownley.
With that, I will introduce our first and only witness
panel. Representing the department is the Honorable Under
Secretary for Health, Dr. Robert Petzel.
Dr. Petzel is accompanied by Dr. Jesse, the principal
deputy under secretary for Health; Dr. Agarwal, the deputy
under secretary for Health for Policy and Services; Dr. Jain,
the assistant deputy under secretary for Patient Care Services;
and Mr. Philip Matkovsky, the assistant deputy under secretary
for Health for Administrative Operations.
Together each of you represent the lead VA witnesses at the
three oversight hearings and the two roundtable discussions
that will be the focus of today's hearing. Thank you all for
being here today.
Dr. Petzel, please proceed with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT PETZEL, UNDER SECRETARY FOR HEALTH,
VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS, ACCOMPANIED BY ROBERT JESSE, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY UNDER
SECRETARY FOR HEALTH, VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; MADHULIKA AGARWAL, DEPUTY UNDER
SECRETARY FOR HEALTH FOR POLICY AND SERVICES, VETERANS HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; RAJIV
JAIN, ASSISTANT DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR PATIENT CARE
SERVICES, VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS; PHILIP MATKOVSKY, ASSISTANT DEPUTY UNDER
SECRETARY FOR HEALTH FOR ADMINISTRATIVE OPERATIONS, VETERANS
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

STATEMENT OF ROBERT PETZEL

Dr. Petzel. Good morning, Chairman Benishek and Ranking
Member Brownley and Members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the progress that we have made regarding
Veterans Health Administration's physician staffing,
productivity standards, treatment for veterans who experience
military sexual trauma, pain management, and procurement
reform.
The chairman has already mentioned the people that are
accompanying me.
The Veterans Health Administration is the largest
integrated healthcare delivery system in the country providing
85 million total healthcare appointments and last year, we had
25 million consultation requests. And we deliver this care at
1,700 VA healthcare sites.
I want to address first the issue of accountability.
Allegations of misconduct by employees are taken seriously by
VA. When we learn of credible allegations of misconduct, VA
addresses them immediately. When incidents occur, we identify,
mitigate, and prevent additional risks.
Prompt reviews prevent similar events in the future and
hold those responsible accountable. If an employee misconduct
or failure to meet performance is identified, VA does take
appropriate action.
Effectively treating veterans who experience military
sexual trauma continues to be a top priority for VA. We are
committed to ensuring that appropriate MST services are
available to meet the treatment needs of both men and women.
Since last year's hearing on military sexual trauma, VA has
taken a number of steps that have resulted in improvements. VA
is in the process of administrating and implementing an
enhanced universal MST screening to include a clinical reminder
for referrals. We are providing military sexual trauma
telemental health for rural veterans and recently we
distributed to all affected employees an information bulletin
on managing military sexual trauma.
A number of roundtables were hosted to examine the impact
of department-wide acquisition reform. Since that roundtable
discussion, the department has expanded its use of authorities
to acquire care from community healthcare providers,
successfully launching the patient centered care in the
community or PC3. VA has completed its consolidation of billing
through the consolidated patient account centers. And,
additionally, we have welcomed the oversight from the Health
Subcommittee during our roundtables. We have used this
oversight process to inform continued improvements in our
administrative processes which we will illuminate during the
hearing.
Last year, we also participated in a hearing regarding VA
productivity and staffing. Today I am pleased to report that by
the end of March 2014, we will have productivity and staffing
standards in place for 25 different specialties representing 81
percent of our total physician workforce. And we are on target
to deliver productivity and staffing standards for all VA
physicians by the end of fiscal year 2014.
In October of 2013, VA briefed the OIG on its progress.
Based on VA's briefing, the OIG has closed out all of its
recommendations related to physician staffing. The work
continues and will not be finished until all physician
specialty productivity and staffing standards are complete,
implemented, and ready access to high-quality, efficient
specialty care is available to all of our Nation's veterans.
Lastly, VA is providing comprehensive pain management
services to improve the health of veterans. As an update to
last year's pain management hearing, VA recently developed and
implemented an opioid safety initiative program to ensure
opioid medications are used safely, effectively, and
judiciously.
The program is already bringing positive results. The basis
for this program is to make visible the totality of opioid use
at all levels, patient, provider, and facility, in order to
identify high-risk situations.
To support a system-wide approach, VA disseminated guidance
and tools to help providers to communicate long-term opioid
therapy expectations to the staff and to their patients.
In addition, a multi-module, team-based, stepped-care model
has been implemented throughout VA. Every VA medical center has
a pain clinic and a consultation service for pain and opioid
monitoring and provider feedback program and the capacity to
provide interdisciplinary treatment such as physical therapy,
behavioral therapy, non-opioid medications, and alternative
medical care such as acupuncture and meditation.
VA prescribers also have the ability to participate in the
state prescription drug monitoring program to determine if a
patient of theirs is receiving controlled substance
prescriptions from non-VA sources.
Mr. Chairman, the Department of Veterans Affairs is
committed to providing the highest quality of care that our
veterans have earned and that they deserve.
As mentioned earlier, important progress has been made
regarding these programs. We at VA will continue to identify,
mitigate, and prevent vulnerabilities within our healthcare
system wherever we find them. VA will continue to ensure
accountability and when adverse events do occur, we will learn
from them, improve our system to prevent these incidents from
happening again.
This concludes my testimony. I appreciate the
subcommittee's continued interest in the health and the welfare
of America's veterans. And at this time, my colleagues and I
are prepared to answer your questions.

[The prepared statement of Robert Petzel appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Dr. Petzel. I appreciate your
response.
I expect we will have multiple rounds of questions today,
and I will begin by yielding myself five minutes.
While the purpose of this hearing is to go over, the issues
that we raised over the past year in the hearings and
roundtables that we have done, I just want to ask a few
questions about your statement.
Specifically you said allegations of misconduct by
employees are taken seriously. When we learn of credible
allegations of misconduct, VA addresses them immediately.
So within the past year, the committee has examined, you
know, disturbing lapses of leadership including, several
incidents around VA like at the Pittsburgh VA Medical Center
where several veterans succumbed to Legionnaires' disease.
There was apparently some improper emergency room care that
led to three preventable patient deaths at the Memphis VA
according to the VA inspector general's report and recently 19
preventable deaths were reported nationwide including six
deaths at the Columbia, South Carolina VAMC and three deaths at
the Augusta, Georgia VAMC due to avoidable delays in care.
So were these instances I just reported to you, were they
considered credible allegations of misconduct?
Dr. Petzel. Yes, Mr. Chairman, they were.
Dr. Benishek. So then what specific actions were taken
immediately upon your being aware of these?
Dr. Petzel. Let's go back and go through each one of them
individually. At Memphis, two physicians have been disciplined.
One has been removed as a result of the actions in Memphis. At
Columbia, three senior executives have resigned under threat of
discipline.
And at Pittsburgh, as you may remember, there was a
criminal investigation done by our criminal IG and by the
Department of Justice. When they finished, they found that
there was no criminal activity. In fact, they found that only
one of those six patients had actually died from legionella and
the others died from other illnesses.
At any rate, we were forbidden from doing any further
investigation or taking any action until after those
investigations were finished. They finished and we're now in
the process of evaluating disciplinary action for people at
Pittsburgh.
Dr. Benishek. There was some other references to
mismanagement not linked to deaths or discipline described as
temporary written warnings.
Tell me more about that. it seems inadequate, that
mismanagement was not linked to deaths. What is the appropriate
action for that type of behavior?
Dr. Petzel. That is in my mind a hypothetical question. It
depends on what has happened. The range of discipline that can
be incurred is anywhere from an admonishment to removal. I
would point out that last year, VA removed 3,000 employees,
approximately one percent of its workforce.
They over the last two years have either removed or seen
resignations on threat of discipline from 14 senior executives
and an additional number of senior executives on probationary
periods were fired during their probationary period.
So, sir, we do discipline our workforce. We do hold our
workforce accountable.
Dr. Benishek. It is amazing when I keep hearing this, but
the specific instances seem to me to be a little bit more
difficult. I am happy to hear what you have to say about those
particular cases, but it seems from, you know, my experience
that finding the person responsible, seems to be difficult as
we talked about in the, physician staffing hearings that we
had.
Dr. Petzel. Let me just make just a couple more comments if
I could, Mr. Chairman.
We have got a pretty extensive oversight system that
includes the activities of this committee, the special counsel,
the Office of the Inspector General, the GAO, and the Office of
the Medical Inspector. These all help us determine whether or
not people were accountable for the action.
The IG investigated Pittsburgh as an example and did not
find that there was any individual----
Dr. Benishek. Well----
Dr. Petzel [continuing]. They felt was----
Dr. Benishek. Right. Well, you know, my best example of
that to tell you the truth, Dr. Petzel, is the example of when
we had at the physician staffing hearing. The IG over the last
30 years has eight times said that there should be a
centralized plan for physician staffing and, yet, that
centralized plan over the last 30 years does not exist.
When I asked the fellow testifying, he said, ``we will have
a plan in three years'' and, yet, I could not find out the name
of the person who was supposed to respond to that inspector
general report and make that plan happen.
The IG said you need a central plan. You agreed. Eight
times over 30 years and, yet, it did not happen. And we could
not find out who the person who was supposed to be doing that
is. This is the frustration that I have as chairman.
I am over time now, but maybe we will get back to that. I
would like to yield to Ms. Brownley for her five minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. I certainly want
your question answered.
And, you know, I wanted to just kind of follow-up as well
on the productivity standards for specialty physicians, too.
And if I heard you correctly, Dr. Petzel, you said that all
will be done by March 2014?
Dr. Petzel. That is correct, Congressman Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. Okay. So all of them will be done by 2014. So
then I have to assume that all of the various milestones and
both stage one and stage two as was laid out by you to me have
all been completed then at this particular point in time?
Dr. Petzel. I would ask Dr. Agarwal to comment on it.
Dr. Agarwal. So, Ranking Member Brownley, you are correct.
You know, we had stated in our testimony at that hearing that
we will complete all specialty physician standards within three
years. However, we have accelerated that path.
And at this point as Dr. Petzel mentioned, we have
completed the standards for 81 percent of our specialties and
we intend to complete all of them this fiscal year. So, yes,
ma'am, we----
Ms. Brownley. Could you give me an idea of what the
outstanding ones are?
Dr. Agarwal. Of the specialties?
Ms. Brownley. Yes.
Dr. Agarwal. Yes, ma'am. I do have a list with me. If you
would like me to go through, I will be happy to do so.
Ms. Brownley. Well, if you could just give me a few off the
top of your head just to have an idea of what they may be.
Dr. Agarwal. The ones that are remaining?
Ms. Brownley. Correct.
Dr. Agarwal. Okay. So we have for thoracic surgery,
vascular surgery, cardiology surgery, anesthesia, emergency
medicine, pathology amongst a few that we still need to
complete. The ones that we have already completed are as
follows:
When I had initially testified, we had the staffing models
for primary care as well as radiology and mental health was on
its way. And I am pleased to say that the directive for mental
health staffing went out a couple of months later after the
hearing.
Subsequently the standards that we have placed are for
dermatology, gastroenterology, neurology, ophthalmology,
orthopedic surgery, urology, as well as allergy, immunology,
endocrine, and I have the list with me. So I would be happy to
share that with you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much.
And just again as a follow-up question that once all of
these are established, then can you explain to me how we will
then measure sort of the accuracy and the effectiveness of
these standards for all of the specialties that you have
developed? So are you creating metrics for us to measure the
effectiveness and the quality responses?
Dr. Petzel. I will let Dr. Agarwal give you some details
about that. But just it is sort of an overview. The staffing
standards look at the delivery of services within a department,
say cardiology or ophthalmology, and they also blend with that
the access that we have to those services. So we look at the
access standards and we get a picture of the productivity of
our staffing and the effect that it is having on the ability of
people to access the care which I think is the ultimate thing
that we are looking for.
We want to have enough people to provide good access, not
so many people that we are not being effective in the way we
administer that program.
And Dr. Agarwal might add anything to that.
Dr. Agarwal. Sure. So subsequent to the hearing, ma'am, we
have gone ahead and we have developed many tools that will
assist the local facilities in managing the specialty resources
appropriately. We would like all our specialists to work at the
top of their license which entails that they also need to have
the necessary support staff so that they are able to perform
their specialist duties in helping veterans.
And to that end, I will reference back to the tool that Dr.
Petzel just mentioned. It is an algorithm that links access
with specialty productivity. All our leadership has been
trained to use this tool and how they manage the specialty
resources in the clinics and appointments.
Ms. Brownley. I think what I am trying to drive at and I
think it is important for you as the experts to be able to
evaluate the effectiveness and the quality of delivery of
services, what kind of tools will Congress have, will the
veteran community have to also be able to measure the quality
and effectiveness of these specialties?
Dr. Agarwal. That is an excellent point, ma'am. So this
tool has been currently distributed to all our facilities and
they are using it to manage the resources within their medical
centers.
So the ultimate outcome of this is going to be better
access of specialty services to the veterans as well as our
ability to use our specialists most efficiently and
effectively.
To that end, we would like to share that information with
Congress as and when you would like to have it. We can do that
periodically at your request.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield back. I exceeded my time.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Ms. Brownley.
I would like to yield five minutes to Dr. Huelskamp.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to follow-up on some issues we have discussed in
the last year. I appreciate your line of questioning and
hopefully you will take that up when you return to that.
But one thing I would like to first ask the VA is in
reference to a year ago, approximately a year ago during a
March 6 hearing, I asked the GAO some questions regarding the
scheduling practices at the VA. During the course of my
questioning, the GAO noted the dates were changed to game the
system at several clinics.
And I believe, Mr. Matkovsky, you were in attendance at the
hearing and I asked your colleague, Mr. Shonnard, what was
being done to prevent this from happening again and whether any
penalties were imposed on the employees caught doing this.
My question for the VA is this. Who has been held
accountable for these actions?
Dr. Petzel. Before I turn to Mr. Matkovsky, Congressman
Huelskamp, let me answer that.
The GAO was referring to a system that we used for
scheduling that we have since abandoned which had in it the
possibilities of both misunderstanding of what might be
scheduled and what the times might mean.
We have moved to having the fundamental scheduling criteria
be what we call the create date. And that create date is not
fungible. That is the date that the individual calls into the
medical center or wherever it might be and asks for an
appointment. That becomes then the starting point for measuring
whether or not we have accomplished seeing that patient within
the 14-day criteria that we set out.
So that should not occur. I cannot speak to what has
happened previously. I----
Dr. Huelskamp. Doctor, so you have abandoned the system
that allowed and permitted employees to falsify and game the
system.
My question is, have you held anybody accountable for the
actions that were identified by the GAO?
Dr. Petzel. I would have to go back, sir, and look to see
if there were any disciplinary actions in those 3,000 that I
mentioned that were specifically related to that issue. I do
not know the answer to that question here.
Dr. Huelskamp. Any of the other conferees, can you answer
that question, whether anybody was held accountable for gaming
the system?
Dr. Jesse. I cannot answer the question directly because
there are 70 some thousand people who have scheduling keys on
our system. So I do not know, you know, specifically whom you
are referring.
I think the important point is----
Dr. Huelskamp. Did you follow-up with the GAO? They had
evidence of that. They had identified specific instances.
Dr. Jesse. Like I say, I cannot give you the specifics on
that.
Dr. Huelskamp. No one here followed up on the GAO? And you
saw this report yesterday suggesting that is going on elsewhere
in the system in which the VA purged thousands of medical
tests, this is just yesterday's article, to game its backlog
stats.
So first question, follow-up of the GAO report, it was just
ignored then?
Mr. Matkovsky. No, Congressman Huelskamp. I went back and
asked some of our team to identify, if we could, the
allegations that were presented by the GAO during that hearing.
We were not able to find concrete evidence that the GAO had and
they did not actually give us the specifics so that we could go
to the individual and find it.
So we did follow-up. We could not find the concrete
evidence to engage an appropriate disciplinary action, sir.
Dr. Huelskamp. So you just abandoned the system and those
employees that were followed up?
A little more on the GAO. So the GAO made allegations and
you never reported back to the committee that I am aware that
GAO was mistaken or provided no evidence of that. I have
appreciated the product from the GAO and you are saying here
they had no evidence of that?
Mr. Matkovsky. That is not what I am saying. I am saying
that we did not have independent evidence outside of the GAO
report that could identify an individual who engaged in the----
Dr. Huelskamp. Well, where did they come up with that, sir?
Mr. Matkovsky. They had their evidence.
Dr. Huelskamp. Their evidence is from your system.
Mr. Matkovsky. That is correct, sir.
Dr. Huelskamp. So their evidence was inaccurate?
Mr. Matkovsky. It was interview based, if you recall, so
they had a series of clinics that they visited and then they
went through and monitored the behavior. They measured that
behavior against the policy and they identified that someone
instead of selecting the desired date of the veteran, they were
asking the veteran when they wanted to be seen and using that
as the desired date.
So they were monitoring behavior specifically and we were
attempting to find evidence of that on our own and we could
not.
Dr. Huelskamp. And, lastly, any responses to this report
again of gaming the system that came out yesterday? Apparently
any request for documents describing when the practice began or
how many employments have been cancelled was refused.
Dr. Petzel. That was almost what I would call a scurrilous
newspaper report. Several years ago, the West LA Greater Los
Angeles healthcare system embarked on a very carefully thought
out review of past requests for consultation or x-rays in the
imaging department to see if indeed there were requests that
had not yet been closed out.
They identified 300 requests that had not been closed out.
They had not been closed out because the patients had moved,
because the patients had failed to show up for the appointment
or repeat appointments.
There was nobody who needed the care that was denied the
care. There was no attempt to eliminate a backlog by destroying
records. You cannot destroy the records. They are electronic
and they are there forever.
Dr. Huelskamp. But they were administratively closed, is
that----
Dr. Petzel. They were administratively closed.
Dr. Huelskamp. And according to the article, it is not a
few thousand. It is 40,000 in LA and 13,000 in Dallas. And I
appreciate it.
One last thing. It does say in the article, and I would
like to follow-up on each of these, Mr. Chairman, if I might,
it says performance reviews and bonuses of top hospital
administrators are linked to meeting those goals. I would like
to see if there is a connection like that as indicated in the
article.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Huelskamp.
Ms. Negrete-McLeod.
Ms. Negrete-McLeod. [Nonverbal response.]
Dr. Benishek. Dr. Ruiz.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you for being here. I thank you for your
service and thank you for all your hard work.
We definitely have to continue your efforts. There is a lot
of problems that we need to fix and I appreciate that we are
moving in the right direction albeit it perhaps impatiently
slow, but we have to continue to move in that direction.
You know, Mr. Matkovsky, I wrote a letter to you dated
February 6 about procuring three ultrasound machines for my
regional VA hospital. They have been waiting for a long time to
get three simple ultrasound machines.
When I was in Haiti after the disaster as the medical
director for the largest internally displaced camp in Port-au-
Prince with about 60,000 Haitians living under sheets and
sticks in the midst of our western hemisphere's most severe
disaster, we needed ultrasound machines.
And I made a phone call to a local hospital in my area. Two
weeks later, we get an ultrasound machine. And you talk about
logistical nightmares. You talk about bureaucracy. You talk
about the difficulty in transporting ultrasound and getting the
right one, et cetera, to an earthquake stricken country.
Why does it take so long to get those ultrasounds? Two,
when can we get those ultrasounds?
Mr. Matkovsky. Thank you, Congressman Ruiz.
That letter is actually being responded to by Mr. Frye. He
is our senior procurement executive as well. I think it was co-
addressed.
If I may, I may just address a little bit of the
consolidation process that we have historically used in VA. We
have a national acquisition center that has all of our national
contracts for what we call high cost medical equipment. The
high cost, high tech ultrasound, MRIs, CT scans, et cetera, are
all acquired through that central service.
What we have typically done historically is we consolidate
our purchases. We did that under the premise that through
consolidation, we would achieve better price competition and
then achieve some measure of return.
We have looked at that process in 2012. At the end of 2012,
our consolidation was 909 pieces of equipment. These ultrasound
machines were part of that consolidated purchase. We expect to
finish all of the delivery orders for those by April of this
year.
So in answer to your question, the delivery orders, if they
have not been issued, will be issued by April.
Now, we are looking at that process and figuring out how we
can do it a little bit faster and a little bit different.
Dr. Ruiz. Can I ask you a question there?
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes.
Dr. Ruiz. You said delivery orders. My goal is the end
goal, the actual outcome. So tell me the time it takes between
delivery order and then actually the Loma Linda VA receiving
the ultrasound.
Mr. Matkovsky. Sir, I do not have an answer for that. That
would depend on the manufacturer that gets the ultimate
delivery order, but it can be as quick as three months or less
depending upon the manufacturer.
We ran a separate process. Let me just--I can see your
expression, sir. So we ran a separate process as a result of
our roundtable which Chairman Benishek and Ranking Member
Brownley held. And we carved out some different cost items,
portable x-rays, C-arms, and we ran those at the network level
in VISN 15 which is the heartland of the country, Missouri.
And those that we purchase through that process from the
beginning of the requirement through the actual contract award
was 90 days, right, as compared to 400 or so days for a
consolidated process. That equipment began arriving, the
portable x-rays began arriving before the end of calendar year
2013. Start to finish, less than six months.
Not exactly the same as your Haiti example, but
considerably faster. We are going to try that again in Network
23 just to make sure we can iron out some of the kinks and we
are going to use that process system-wide from here on out once
we finalize just a couple of details.
We hope that is going to speed it up a lot and then we are
also going to look at the consolidation process and change that
as well.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you very much.
I am going to continue to follow the natural life history
of requesting three ultrasound machines until they are born in
the womb of our Loma Linda VA Hospital. So, you know, thank you
so much and I will follow-up with you.
Dr. Benishek. How long has it been that this is going on?
Dr. Ruiz. How long has it--it has been two years, my
friend, two years for three ultrasound machines.
Dr. Benishek. All right.
Mr. Matkovsky. It is too long, I agree.
Dr. Ruiz. Thanks for that.
Dr. Benishek. Five minutes for Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate you all being here today.
And forgive my ignorance on my first question, but I am
curious if any of you have ever as doctors been in private
practice where you ran your own business. Have any of you been
in private practice?
Dr. Petzel. I have not. I have worked in academic medicine,
but not private practice.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. Because this is where I draw the line
on so many things. For example, if the VA hospitals and their
providers operated under Medicare rates, for example, or even,
say, 105 percent of Medicare rates and providers were paid fee
for service, do you think the VA hospitals would be in the
black?
Dr. Petzel. Yes, personally I do. We have done several
studies going back as many as ten years and looked at our cost
to providing a service as opposed to the private sector cost of
providing a service or compared to the Medicare reimbursement.
And in virtually every instance, we are talking 15 to 25
percent less cost associated with providing that service. So,
yes, I think we could survive very well on Medicare rates, very
well.
Dr. Wenstrup. Because there is a part of it sometimes that
makes me curious as to what motivates the VA system, the way it
is funded, et cetera, to really be effective and efficient
compared to, say, private practice because I have operated
under both systems.
And besides personal pride in the work that I do and
besides motivated to try and see as many patients as I possibly
can effectively, those are personal things, but what within the
system motivates that?
For example, because I found, and I will use DoD as an
example, as a reservist in private practice, in the time that I
would see 45 patients effectively and efficiently in my private
practice because of the way military hospitals are set up and
the physician staffing, et cetera, I could only see 15. I mean,
that is just a fact.
And I have offered to you in the past to come into the VAs
and work with you on the staffing issues. And I have not heard
anything from anybody on that, and I mentioned it to Secretary
Shinseki as well.
So what within the system motivates, stimulates the entire
system to be extremely effective and efficient? What does that?
Dr. Petzel. Well, thank you, Congressman Wenstrup. That is
an excellent question.
First of all, it is the mission. I mean, we are taking care
of people who have earned and deserve the care that we are
delivering.
The second thing is that we have an unlimited demand on the
service with a limited budget. We do not generate more money if
we do more work. We get our budget at the beginning of the year
and we have to take all comers because of that. That has driven
tremendous efficiencies in this system, tremendous
efficiencies. We roll by one to 1.5 percent in terms of the
number of people we treat every year.
Our models for funding have in them productivity standards
which say that we have to increase our productivity by one to
two percent every year. That is a tremendous, tremendous
motivator. I would match our efficiency and our cost of doing
business against the private sector at any time.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. In the effort that you are making with
providing appropriate staffing, you know, in our private
practices, are we increasing our staffing so that we can treat
patients more effectively, increase access, things like that as
well as have good outcomes? You know, there is a real number
value to that.
So are you doing a follow-up on that that will show, yes,
we are now seeing more patients at least cost and being
efficient and will we have access to those types of numbers?
Dr. Petzel. I would ask Dr. Agarwal to comment on that.
Dr. Wenstrup. Sure.
Dr. Agarwal. This is an excellent question, sir. And that
is exactly what we recently asked since we have provided these
tools to our local managers in managing these resources as to
how it is that they are using it to make the clinics much more
efficient and ensure that all the specialists are working at
the top of their license. And the information that we have
gotten back has actually been very good. Managers are looking
at the resources that they are providing to the clinics and
understanding what is the output, what is the value that they
are achieving I think was made possible by these tools. So to
be able to tell a specialist that you need to spend more time
in the clinic or take care of, certain groups of patients has
been possible because now when the access data and the
productivity is aligned and it is sort of placed in a way that
people can understand much better, it gives you insight into
whether additional resources are needed or enough resources
have already been provided but some other changes need to be
made in specialty clinic. So we believe that in the longer run
once this becomes the norm in how we practice, especially with
the resource management part, this is going to be extremely
beneficial.
Dr. Wenstrup. Yes, I think it can be. I mean, assuming you
are going to see everyone eventually that needs care we
actually have a tremendous savings if we see them sooner and do
it more efficiently and effectively. So you want to make sure
that when you add a staffer it is because you get a better
result and better outcomes.
Dr. Agarwal. Exactly. Exactly.
Dr. Wenstrup. I think that is what we want to hear back
from you on over time as this is implemented.
Dr. Agarwal. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Benishek. I just want to comment for a moment. Dr.
Petzel, that answer you just gave Dr. Wenstrup, that is just
completely ridiculous.
Dr. Petzel. I am sorry?
Dr. Benishek. You know, I worked at VA? In order to get the
number of cases that I had done in the private sector in VA it
took me a year to get the staff up to speed so I could do the
same amount of cases at VA that I could do in the private
sector. Motivating the staff at a VA hospital to get things
moving and to use your time effectively is a tremendous,
tremendous problem. And that answer that you gave, that said
that you would put VA up against the private sector anytime,
that is a complete fabrication of what actually occurs at the
VA. I worked at VA for 20 years. I know that that is just not
true. And having people from the outside who have been in the
private sector whose time is valuable sitting in the doctor's
office doing nothing for a half a day with you, a turnover time
of a half an hour which is done in like seven minutes in the
private sector is very frustrating to physicians. That kind of
answer is not going to wash it here. With that I am going to
give Ms. Kuster an opportunity to ask a question. Thank you.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Chair Benishek, I
appreciate it. And thank you to Vice Chair Brownley for your
leadership on these issues. I have two questions, if I could.
One has to do with a company in my district in New Hampshire,
Salem, New Hampshire, the company is named Gamma Medica. And
they make a medical device that produces bone density imaging
to help with early detection of breast cancer. And my question
is not specifically about them but my understanding is in New
England many of our VA health facilities have requested this
life saving device but due to over two-year-long delays many
veterans seeking early breast cancer detection are not
receiving the treatment that they, delays at the NAC. And my
question, this is to Dr. Petzel, can you tell me how VA is
actively engaged with improving delays for new technology at
local facilities? And what steps have you taken since the round
table last April on procurement wait times that we had to work
with NAC on improving the amount of time it takes to deliver
lifesaving devices?
Dr. Petzel. I would defer in a moment to Mr. Matkovsky who
has gone through that. But just to say that we are, we are not
happy with the two-year process as well. The bundling, from my
personal perspective, puts delays on this acquisition that I
think are unnecessary. There is a compromise here between
trying to save money by bundling on the one hand and on the
other hand delaying the acquisitions because we are bundling.
But Mr. Matkovsky, why do you not just go through again what
you had said about what we are trying to do to reduce that
time?
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. And I apologize that I had to come
in late.
Mr. Matkovsky. No, that is okay. Congresswoman Kuster, the
one thing I would state is that in our efforts to establish a
structure that was more economical we left out a critical
variable in history, which was speed. Our supply chain should
also focus on speed. Procurement reform should establish
compliant, economical acquisitions, but they should also be
fast.
Following our round table we did review how we do the
consolidations. We are trying to change those. It is going to
take us a little bit of time. The big focus was the end of
fiscal year 2012 orders that went in. There were 900 of those.
The bone densitometers for Gamma Medica may in that
consolidated process. But it is not a process that is working
in terms of speeding the new technology for application. What
we are trying to do now is move the less complex items so that
they can be purchased at our 21 network offices through their
contracting officers. In a sense instantaneously you have 21
additional work teams now focusing on it rather than just the
one up in Chicago.
We wanted to make sure we could test it. We found out that
there were some clauses that were competitive with our national
contracts. We are going to extend the test a little bit more
and then beginning in fiscal year 2015 that will become that
way of business. That will free up these national acquisitions
to be a little bit faster as well.
By April of this year we expect to be finished with all of
the delivery orders from that last major consolidation. Then it
will still take some time for the technology to be in medical
center.
Ms. Kuster. Okay. Thank you very much. My other question
has to do with an issue that many of us have been involved with
in the past year on military sexual assault treatment. I have
been visiting the VAs in White River Junction and in Manchester
and have actually been quite impressed by the protocols there
but I am not familiar across the country.
We had a hearing last July where we had some very
compelling testimony from veterans. And we were talking about
whether veterans are being adequately screened for military
sexual trauma. I think if I recall the testimony they were only
asked on the initial visit and they were not asked on
subsequent visits. So I would like to hear how the VA is
following up with the local VA health facilities to measure the
effectiveness of screenings and follow ups and also how are you
providing local smaller VA facilities the information and tools
they need to train and educate providers to treat survivors of
MST?
Dr. Petzel. Dr. Jain was at that hearing, as you remember.
And I would ask him to comment on the changes and improvements
we have made since then.
Ms. Kuster. Great. Thank you.
Dr. Jain. Thank you, Congresswoman Kuster, for that
question. So as you mentioned this was fairly compelling
testimony that we heard last year. So we have taken several
steps. First of all the entire screening has now been revised.
So that questions are being revised. We believe that the
questions were not very clear before so we added a little more
clarity. We have also added an option where the veteran could
decline to answer the question. So they could answer the
question whenever they felt they were ready, and to whom they
felt comfortable with answering the question. So if the veteran
were to decline to answer the question, then within the year
the reminder would kick back in and the question would be asked
again so we do not lose that opportunity.
Ms. Kuster. Oh, that sounds good. Instead of people
assuming that that is a no answer----
Dr. Jain. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kuster [continuing]. It is a decline answer and then
you would revisit it?
Dr. Jain. We will revisit that. We will also have added
actually a functionality where a third question has been now
added. Through the pilot we learned that the veterans want to
be referred to mental health or to specialty care and now we
will be able to track those referrals and will be able to
follow up through our data and numbers to see how the
individual facilities are doing with following up on the
reminders.
Ms. Kuster. That sounds great. And could, I do not know if
this would be possible to add to your protocol but I just want
you all to be aware and maybe there is a way it could be
factored in, we were successful in passing a bill to provide
whistleblower protection to members of the military who come
forward with claims of sexual assault, men and women. And I
think it is an important piece of information because of the
history on this issue and because of the retribution and
retaliation in some cases in people's careers, that there was
good reason not to come forward. And so I am hoping that you
will find a way to incorporate this, to reassure victims to
come forward that this whistleblower protection will be in
place.
Dr. Jain. We can certainly look into that, Congresswoman,
and see how we could incorporate that.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Dr. Benishek. Yes. I am going to start another round of
questions, and I have got a couple of things. Dr. Petzel, would
you provide the committee for the record the circumstances
surrounding the 14 SES employees you said the VA forced to step
down in the past two years? We would like to have that by the
end of the week, if we could.
Dr. Petzel. If I could clarify that, Mr. Chairman. Let me
clarify that, sir. I had the numbers wrong. There were 14
serious disciplinary actions taken. Six SES employees were
dismissed over the last two fiscal years, three non-
probationary, and three first-year probationary. And we will
provide whatever information you want related to that.
Dr. Benishek. All right. All right, thank you. I am going
to go back to one of the hearings that we did in the past to
follow up. It is concerning the care and treatment of military
sexual trauma and I think Dr. Jain was the, primary witness at
that hearing. And I just want to follow up a bit more. You said
we are going to take a critical look at how we structure
services and what we can do to address some of the gaps. And
you also said, ``I think there are many points that the veteran
witnesses made in terms of suggestion that we would take to
heart, and we will go back and review our current policies and
procedures.'' So Dr. Jain, what specific actions have you taken
to improve the situation? You mentioned, the questioning or the
asking about sexual trauma. But what else specifically have you
done to address the concerns that we brought up in that
hearing, and that were brought forth by that testimony?
Dr. Jain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that question. So as
I was just stating to Congresswoman Kuster, so the first big
thing we did is to do a careful analysis of our screening
process. And as I was indicating earlier----
Dr. Benishek. All right. You went through that. But go
through something else.
Dr. Jain. So that was number one. Secondly, we have also
looked at our outreach activities that we are doing. So we have
modified our outreach posters where the male and the female,
survivors are, included in the posters. We are also doing
outreach with the Department of Defense so that at the time of
transition this is an activity we have taken in the last few
months. So as the servicemembers transition from DoD to the VA
the information regarding MST services is now provided to them
so they know and they understand what services will be
available to them in the veteran status. So that is an
improvement.
We have also taken education and training activities. So we
have trained the MST coordinators on the sensitivity relating
to the male survivor issue that was presented at the hearing.
We want to make sure that our male survivors can receive care
in a gender sensitive manner in our outpatient clinics so they
do not have to go for a women's clinic, for example, to receive
services.
We have also made sure that the----
Dr. Benishek. That change has occurred, then, you are
saying?
Dr. Jain. Yes, sir. That training has already occurred. We
have also trained the VISN leads that provide the MST services
to monitor that activity. We also make site visits. And so we
are tracking this as part of the site visits to make sure the
facilities are providing the care in a gender sensitive manner.
And then we are also doing a mystery shopper type sort of
activity where both the male and the female staff members would
call, randomly call the VA facilities to speak to the MST
coordinator to just understand how will it take them to reach
an MST coordinator, whether they are able to address the
questions in a sensitive manner. So these are all the changes--
--
Dr. Benishek. How is that working out?
Dr. Jain. That is actually going quite well. We have been
very pleased with the training and how that has taken hold.
Dr. Benishek. Well I would like to see a report on what
you----
Dr. Jain. Yes, sir. We can certainly.
Dr. Benishek. That is a great idea, I think. Having
somebody just call in anonymously and figure out what is
actually happening. So if I could get a report on that, I would
like to see that.
Dr. Jain. We would be happy to----
Dr. Benishek. How many times you called, the response, all
of that. I appreciate your answer there. I think I will yield
to Ms. Brownley. I want to keep the questions coming. Thank
you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, I wanted to
also follow up on the military sexual trauma issue as well. You
talked about the outreach that you are doing and thanks to the
chairman we had a hearing in my district last week talking
about mental health services but a component of that discussion
was about outreach. And one of the problems that was discovered
in the various testimony is that the West L.A. facility was
doing the outreach for mental health services for Ventura
County, and Ventura County was not providing the outreach. And
it was clear that the West L.A. facility was not aware of all
of the programs that were accessible to programs in the county.
So their outreach is basically ineffective because they have no
idea about all of the nonprofits and volunteer organizations
and so forth that could help our veterans. So when you talk
about outreach for the, for our victims, or survivors I should
say, of military sexual trauma, what does that outreach really
look like? And I know that the IG had recommended and thought
it would be very, very beneficial to have a central sort of
program resource list that would be, at every VA medical clinic
or in every community-based outpatient clinic, across the
country. So if you could respond to that, please?
Dr. Jain. So thank you, Ranking Member Brownley. I think
there are a couple of things that we have done so I may not
have a complete answer for you. But part of the outreach, as I
mentioned earlier, is with our Department of Defense
colleagues. But the other part of the work that we have done is
reached out to OEF/OIF counselors within our own system. As you
know, within the VA the majority of the outreach work in the
communities is done by our OEF/OIF counselors. So our MST team
has now trained the OEF/OIF counselors to begin to do the kind
of outreach that you are referring to so that we can reach out
into the community with nonprofits and also with other types of
resources that are out there. So I cannot honestly say to you
that it is completely functioning. But this is part of the
process that we are now beginning to go beyond just the DoD
into the community.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. And I also wanted to get a
clarification in the testimony. Dr. Petzel's testimony
indicated that the VA established a benchmark of .2 full time
equivalent employees per 100 veterans who screen positive for
MST. So help me to understand what that means. Is that the
equivalent of a full FTE per 500 veterans affected by MST?
Dr. Jain. So thank you, Ranking Member Brownley, for that
question. So the process, the way it works is that in our
Office of Productivity and Efficiency we have created a tool
that monitors the numbers of MST survivors that we are treating
and the staff resources that are dedicated to treat this MST
survivors. So from that tool what we have determined is that it
takes on an average two staff per thousand, or 0.2 per hundred.
The staff would include all of the mental health staff, not
just a particular staff member. So those facilities, so the
last report that we have available is for fiscal year 2012. For
fiscal year 2012 99 percent of the facilities met that staffing
standard. There was only one facility that fell off. So after
the hearing we immediately got after that particular facility,
developed an action plan, and since then they have made the
corrections. The fiscal year 2013 report would be available
within the next few weeks. And we will be able to see how the
facilities are doing to these staffing standards.
Ms. Brownley. Okay. Well we would certainly like to see
that report. It is hard for me to comprehend honestly that when
we have a veteran who is in dire need and who is experiencing
very, very deep trauma that a .2 FTE is adequate. And I know
you said that is from a variety of services, but kind of culled
together it equates to a .2 FTE correct?
Dr. Jain. So let me clarify again, Congresswoman. This is
at a larger data trend issue. But for that individual veteran,
we will provide them whatever services they need through our
mental health clinic. Now what we emphasized right after the
hearing, as you recall, some of our witnesses were very
concerned that when the VA was not able to provide the care in
a timely manner that we did not refer them to a non-VA care. So
we continue to emphasize to our staff that non-VA care is an
available option. And I think as Dr. Petzel said PC3 and the
availability of PC3 that would happen starting April and beyond
will make it easier to reach out to community providers. So for
individual veterans the .2 issue does not apply. This is for
monitoring purposes that we keep track of what staffing
resources are being dedicated to provide the services.
Ms. Brownley. I am just, so if that is the benchmark of
what you are going to measure, then it is hard to measure that
a veteran who, again, is in deep trauma in the moment that they
need our help, if they have gotten all of the resources,
because your measurement is going to be, you know, a .2, sort
of a, kind of a across the board in the aggregate. So you know,
it is, I am not sure that that is a good metric. Maybe I need
to understand the metric in further detail. But I think we are
all most interested, you know, in the, obviously the screening
part that you have talked about. But when, you know, when we
have a veteran who has gone through this kind of trauma and
needs our help in that moment, you know, it takes a lot of, I
think a lot of attention and a lot of support. So it does not
translate for me.
Dr. Petzel. Just if I could respond a little bit to that,
Congresswoman Brownley. The metric looks at the system overall,
that. We would be evaluating the effectiveness of caring for
individual patients through a variety of different ways. I am
not familiar exactly with what we do in military sexual trauma.
But as an example with depression, they would take a survey
beforehand, they would take a survey after one year that they
have been treated to look at their score on a depression scale.
Those are the kinds of things----
Ms. Brownley. A survey which is to ask veterans----
Dr. Petzel. Yes.
Ms. Brownley [continuing]. How the VA responded to their
needs?
Dr. Petzel. Exactly. Or how did they feel.
Ms. Brownley. Right.
Dr. Petzel. The Beck Depression Scale measures your level
of depression. I am just using that as an example. That is the
kind of thing that we would use to measure the effectiveness of
what we are doing. Not this metric of, this is just a gross way
to say the facility appears to be devoting in the aggregate the
resources needed. But you are absolutely right. We need to
look----
Ms. Brownley. But the report, I am sorry, may I just have
one more second? But the report you are saying that was in 2012
and we are going to get in 2013 is a measurement based on this
metric?
Dr. Petzel. Correct.
Ms. Brownley. Not a survey of veterans who are survivors of
military sexual trauma and how the VA responded to them?
Dr. Petzel. Correct.
Ms. Brownley. That data we will not get?
Dr. Petzel. Not in that 2013 report. But Dr. Jain and I
will talk about what we can do to provide you with information
about the effect of what we are doing.
Ms. Brownley. I yield back, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you. Mr. Huelskamp?
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I might, I would
like to follow up on a few of your questions and drill down
some of the accountability issues with employees and these
preventable deaths which have I guess been confirmed by the VA
to committee staff. But in the Columbia, South Carolina, which
were six preventable deaths, were there any employees held
accountable for those preventable deaths?
Dr. Petzel. Well first of all, the concept of preventable
deaths I think requires some discussion, not here. Yes, there
were. There were three employees at senior levels who
resigned----
Dr. Huelskamp. Resigned or----
Dr. Petzel [continuing]. Under threat of discipline.
Dr. Huelskamp. But they were not disciplined? Is that, they
left----
Dr. Petzel. They left before they could be disciplined,
correct.
Dr. Huelskamp. So perhaps, and I guess we are arguing about
whether they were preventable deaths, they were allowed to
resign and move on----
Dr. Petzel. Allowed to resign? It is their right to retire
or resign.
Dr. Huelskamp. There is no way to hold them accountable
when people die because of their failures?
Dr. Petzel. If somebody wishes to retire or resign, we
cannot prevent that from happening.
Dr. Huelskamp. There is no way, no criminal investigation,
nothing along those lines to hold these former VA employees
accountable?
Dr. Petzel. There is no criminal, there was no criminal
charges or intent involved in any of these situations.
Dr. Huelskamp. And then the three deaths at the Augusta,
Georgia center? I do not know if you answered that. Was anyone
held accountable for those three preventable deaths?
Dr. Petzel. We had a similar situation where a number of
people have either retired or resigned.
Dr. Huelskamp. And of course I would hope you could provide
that information to the committee within 30 days. The other one
that I did not see was the VA Pittsburgh system with
Legionnaires', and we had a hearing and it was just a shocking
hearing to me. I guess it is arguable in your mind how many
veterans died as a result of that, but you did indicate at
least one actually died of Legionella. Was any VA employee held
accountable for the failures that led to this death?
Dr. Petzel. Yes, as I said earlier Congressman Huelskamp,
we are in the process of evaluating the disciplinary action
taken at Pittsburgh. It was delayed because of the criminal
investigation, which did not allow us to do anything.
Dr. Huelskamp. So you had a criminal investigation there,
but you did not pursue that, no one pursued that at Columbia
where there were six preventable deaths?
Dr. Petzel. The IG pursued a criminal investigation. There
was no indication, nobody raised the question of whether there
was criminal intent at any of these other facilities.
Dr. Huelskamp. The preventable death, at least the one that
you confirm here, when did that occur at the Pittsburgh VA
Center?
Dr. Petzel. One moment, sir. July 12, 2012.
Dr. Huelskamp. How quickly do you expect, the criminal
investigation is complete or not and when will you move to some
accountability action?
Dr. Petzel. Criminal investigation by the criminal IG is
complete. They found no criminal activity or intent. And I am
hoping that very quickly we will have the evaluation of
disciplinary action at Pittsburgh concluded and we will know
what we are going to do.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. I look forward to that report. And
lastly, at the Atlanta VA Medical Center the Inspector General
linked three preventable patient deaths to widespread
mismanagement. Yet we heard that the Medical Center Director
maintained no employees responsible for the mismanagement
linked to the deaths should be fired. Is that still the case?
Dr. Petzel. Well first of all the IG did not link any
deaths to the activity at Atlanta. There were three mental
health deaths but the IG made no comment in their report on the
quality of care that was delivered to them or the course of
action. And seven people at Atlanta have been disciplined in
various ways as a result of that activity.
Dr. Huelskamp. The IG's report I thought linked that to
mismanagement issues. You are saying it did not but you
disciplined someone anyway?
Dr. Petzel. Yes, specifically the IG said that there had
been mismanagement of the contract for contract mental health
services and there had been mismanagement on the mental health
ward. They did not link any deaths to those activities.
Dr. Huelskamp. But you do say that seven employees have
received some type of disciplinary action. Last we had heard in
the Fall it was three employees received temporary written
warnings. Can you describe the seven, the actions of the seven
employees that were held accountable?
Dr. Petzel. Congressman Huelskamp, I do not have the
specifics of what happened with the seven but we certainly can
provide that generically to you.
Dr. Huelskamp. Well I would like it, rather than generic I
would like it answered obviously----
Dr. Petzel. Well we cannot name the individuals but we can
tell you exactly what was done.
Dr. Huelskamp. Oh, absolutely. But again, last Fall this
committee was told there was temporary written warnings for
three individuals and so I would like clarification. Apparently
you have done some more since then.
Dr. Petzel. There were, yes, at the time of the previous
hearing there were three actions that actually had been taken
and there were four actions pending. All have been now taken.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. I look forward to that report. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Huelskamp. Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I
appreciate all of your level of expertise and your medical
backgrounds. But to be honest I am a little surprised that
there is not people involved with administration that have been
in the private sector. I think it would be extremely helpful.
And I did not come to Congress to sit here and to complain
about things but to try and bring solutions. And that is the
drive of my efforts here.
Let me ask you Dr. Agarwal a question on, for example, in
an eight-hour day in the VA system on average how many patients
would an orthopaedic surgeon see?
Dr. Agarwal. Sir, you know, that would be hard for me to
sort of say. If it is an outpatient clinic I would assume
that----
Dr. Wenstrup. I am talking about in the outpatient clinic
setting. Assuming their surgery day is different, we can get to
that later. But just in an eight-hour day, in the outpatient
clinic, doing their post-ops, etcetera, how many patients do
they see on average? And if you do not know, that is okay.
Dr. Agarwal. I actually do not know.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. See, this is the type of thing I am
talking about when I am talking about measuring productivity.
And you say you have been doing this, and we have talked about
it for the last year, and you do not have an idea. So what are
you measuring? Because I was operations chair for a 26-doctor
orthopaedic group. These are the things we looked at and how do
we improve our staffing so that we can be more productive and
still provide the care. And our reputations are on the line
with this, too. So it is important. So I would like to know
what type of metrics you are going to use, and that goes back
to my previous question before. And I am not trying to be a
pain. But are you going to do something that is effective and
efficient. And if you do not know those numbers then you do not
even have a baseline to start with.
That being said, let me go back to where Dr. Benishek
weighed in having his experience at a VA and your comments to
Dr. Petzel. You know, I am just curious to know if a VA
hospital budget was based on the previous year's activities
submissions at a Medicare rate, fee for service. If that was
your budget based on your previous year's productivity, based
on Medicare rates, you say that yes you would be in the black.
So it would be interesting to know if that actually would cost
the taxpayers more or less, if that is how your budget was
based. And based on your comments it almost sounds like that
would come in less than what we actually budget for you. And so
would you be comfortable exploring that notion?
Dr. Petzel. Certainly.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. And I yield back.
Dr. Benishek. Thanks, Dr. Wenstrup. I have another question
and I am just trying to cover the issues that we have covered
over the last year, and one of them is the third party billing
issue that we had talked about. Perhaps Mr. Matkovsky can
answer this. Can you tell us about what is happening since you
gave us the testimony there? Are you, are you collecting
better? Have you changed anything since I talked to you last? I
have got a couple of follow ups, too.
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir. We covered two topics there. One
of them was non-VA medical care. And if you want I can give you
a little update on where we are with----
Dr. Benishek. Well let us start with the collection----
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir.
Dr. Matkovsky [continuing]. Because that is what we are
here for. And then for collections, as a result of that round
table discussion we had public requests for information, which
is a precedent to a request for proposals, to look at are there
industry systems that would allow us to automate the billing
process a little bit better. When we analyzed the turn around
time for billing we noticed that one of the longest times that
it takes us is actually from the outpatient event, the
inpatient event, to the generation of the bill. And a lot of
that is because of the manual process. So we had a competitive
RFI, request for information, and we are evaluating those
responses. We are also working with our IT organization to
determine whether or not the systems enhancements would be
considered IT and subject to that funding or whether we could
use them under administrative funds.
Dr. Benishek. All right. Okay. Well I think that gives me
an idea of where you are at.
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir.
Dr. Benishek. The only other question, I know you talked
about this PC3 thing and you kind of led me to believe that
this is going to help solve the problem of getting outside care
to our veterans in a more timely fashion. But my concern
frankly is two things. The reimbursement rate that providers
are going to be provided through VA. And like sort of what is
the take from the insurance people? What percentage of the
total spending is going to be made to get these third party
networks on board? Can you tell me about that?
Mr. Matkovsky. Sure. First I would tell you that we kicked
it off in January on time. There was a little bit of a delay,
but it is now running. It is in 47 of the initial 50 medical
centers are referring patients through to the PC3 networks.
There are somewhere north of 5,000 referrals that have been
made to the network. I will tell you that our agreement,
however, is with the intermediaries not with the firms
themselves. So we have an agreement with TriWest, we have an
agreement with Health Net organizations, not with their
provider networks. However, both contractors are required by
their contract to have a built out network for us. So the
incentive for them is to have as competitive a network as they
can for us to provide them referrals, and that is actually by
the basis of the contract as well.
Dr. Benishek. But the question I asked was the
reimbursement to the providers, what level is that going to be
at? And what percentage of the total money that you are
spending on TriWest or wherever it is, what percentage of the
total spending is going to go to their management fees and
which is going to go to actual provider care? Do you
understand?
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes I do, sir. So there----
Dr. Benishek. Can you answer that question?
Mr. Matkovsky. I will.
Dr. Benishek. Or is it not available?
Mr. Matkovsky. First of all, our agreement is with TriWest
and Health Net. Not with their subcontractors. Second of all,
though, the structure of the contract is that we pay at a CMS
rate to TriWest and Health Net and then they will have a rate
somewhere below that but we are not privy to that. There is an
administrative fee which is separate to the direct clinical
fee, which TriWest and Health Net would also bill us. And we
expect that their administrative charges would be captured
there and not to the detriment of their network. There are
incentive structures in the contract as well. So based on the
ability of those organizations to build out their networks they
get an incentive payment as well.
Dr. Benishek. So there is a separate administration fee?
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir.
Dr. Benishek. And then there is a payment that you are
saying is based of off Medicare rates to the providers?
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir.
Dr. Benishek. Or that is to Tricare, and they are going to
pay the providers less than that then? Is that what you said?
Mr. Matkovsky. We are not privy to the information about
their agreements with their subcontractors.
Dr. Benishek. Well I am just trying to be sure that the
system actually is able to procure providers. Because if
somebody is offering, a very low rate of reimbursement you are
not going to get very many people to sign up.
Mr. Matkovsky. So far we are not seeing it, be the case
across the country. That we are actively starting up the sites
where we are. In VISN 23 it is up and running. There are a
number of referrals. We should not be seeing the inability to
build out networks at this point.
Dr. Benishek. All right.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I will promise you
I will watch my time. I wanted to go back to the one question
that I did not think got answered. Maybe it did but I did not
hear it about the IG's recommendation for establishing a
central program resource list for MST related programs? Is that
something the VA is going to do? Or believes that it is also
beneficial?
Dr. Jain. I am not sure, Congresswoman Brownley, about the
question. I am not aware of any central program list in the OIG
recommendation that is outstanding that I know of. The only one
that we know of that is outstanding is the whole issue of
travel and any travel issue. That was the only one that we were
aware of. The only other thing that does occur to me, so there
was one issue in OIG, yes, I do recall. And that was the issue
that within the VA's intranet there is the availability of
different programs and who are the MST coordinators. And we
have addressed that concern and we have updated that list, make
sure that the staff is aware that when they need to refer a
patient to a larger VA, for example, for MST related services,
who is the contact person? Who do they need to contact? That
has been updated and has been addressed.
Ms. Brownley. Okay. Thank you very much. And I just wanted
to go to the issue of chronic pain and I am wondering about in
testimony before we have had testimony with the Tampa Chronic
Pain Rehabilitation Program and sort of what are we learning,
you know, best practices, lessons learned there?
Dr. Petzel. Congresswoman Brownley, let me make a couple of
comments then I am going to turn it over to Dr. Jesse, who was
at that pain, at that hearing. The VA has developed what I
think is probably the most robust pain management program for a
large integrated delivery system in the country. The Tampa
inpatient program for pain management is an example of the
kinds of services that we have to offer. We have taken very
seriously the problem with opioid management and pain. I think
the physicians in this room will remember that 15 years ago it
was felt that pain was undermanaged, and pain medications were
pushed. You need to get rid of the pain. That has obviously
led, and I am not talking about the VA, I am talking about
medicine in general, led to a problem in this country of the
overuse of opioids in managing pain. And the VA I think is very
seriously addressing that problem. And Dr. Jesse?
Dr. Jesse. Thank you. So there are some very long and
detailed explanation I can give. I think the VA has a very good
story to tell. But if coming back specifically to Tampa, Tampa
is an inpatient rehabilitation facility that is unlike almost
anything else you can get. That a patient get this without
paying out of pocket is unheard of in this country. It is a
CARF-accredited program. In 2000, we had I think one CARF-
accredited program. We now have ten. We have 14 in process,
that accreditation process. Our goal is to ensure that every
VISN, every network has at least one. And that is part of the
overall strategy that Dr. Petzel referenced of a stepwise pain
management program, beginning with a very comprehensive base in
primary care including the ability to use therapies other than
pharmacologic. You heard about acupuncture, about medication,
imaging therapy, behavioral therapy, and escalating, the
ability to have consultation from pain experts, and escalating
up to the higher level pain centers where in fact we use a
much, we can use much more technical programs like spinal
stimulation, which was discussed at the last hearing, like
nerve blocks, injections, thermal nerve ablations. And frankly
those are the kind of very intensive inpatient rehabilitation
programs that Tampa offered.
Ms. Brownley. So you believe that that is moving really
across the country in terms of looking at all of the
alternative therapies that you just suggested?
Dr. Jesse. Oh yes, absolutely. And so, you know, we have
our, we have as part of this strategy not just the opioid
safety initiative, which is key, but it is also the ability to
use other strategies to relieve pain rather than just masking
them, that is not the right way to say that, but rather than
just using, you know, pharmacological therapy. So for instance
as part of the joint program with the Department of Defense
there is a program called ATAX, I think is the acronym, I do
not remember exactly what it stands for, but it is to train
acupuncturists in what is called battlefield acupuncture,
auricular acupuncture. Relatively effective at managing pain.
The goal, we presently have I think just shy of 20 trainers.
The goal is to have 400 enrolling that program out. Developing
that capacity is key. And you know, frankly the whole goal of
VA as we have discussed in the past is to provide personalized,
patient driven care. Which really includes a wholesale
embracement of I think what the industry would call integrative
care, integrative medicine. And that is, you know, that is part
of our fundamental plan of healthcare deliver in VA.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. I will yield.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Ms. Brownley. Dr. Jesse, I also
want to ask a couple of questions on that.
Dr. Jesse. Sure.
Dr. Benishek. On our pain hearing that we had. And I do not
know, I just want to hear that specifically, you give some,
generalized answer here. But specifically since our hearing,
what have you done to educate the physicians within VA about
pain management? What has anything changed since our hearing
last year? What have you done?
Dr. Jesse. If I may, clearly things have changed because
since the hearing last year there are 20,000-some fewer
veterans on opioids. You know, we have been rolling out these
initiatives not since the hearing but literally since, for four
to five years. They take time to get in place, they take time
to build the infrastructure. The opioid safety initiative began
to be rolled out prior to that hearing and since the hearing
there has been a significant acceleration of that. The pilots
at Minneapolis, for instance, there has been over a 50 percent
reduction in the use of opioids. There is a, what is called
JPEP, it is the Joint Pain Education Program that is done, run
jointly with the Department of Defense. Because as we have
discussed in the past one of the key issues, and this came up
in the past hearing if you remember, we do not want a lapse
between somebody who is being treated on the military side and
coming over to the VA. And part of that is to ensure that we
actually have the same approaches to managing pain across the
spectrum of the delivery systems, the military system and into
the VA system. So that program is being rolled out. As I
mentioned, the acupuncture training program is ramping up. So
yes, there are a number of issues that are in play that have
been much more accelerated since that past, that past hearing.
The Post Deployment Health has calls that average about 400
people on those monthly calls. We have another set of specific
pain management calls that have been averaging about 300 in the
past several months, it is moving up to close to 400. Primary
care providers are mostly engaging in these calls. So I think
the answer is yes. There is concrete and accelerated activity
in these areas.
Dr. Benishek. Well I thank you for that answer. I do not
mean to be overcritical. We just went to the West L.A. Medical
Center and, met with a couple of their pain specialist
providers. And the system they had in place there, at least the
way they explained it to me, it sounded like it was actually
pretty effective with, alternative modalities, being
incorporated, and having the pain specialist involved in the
case at a certain level. And they had a pretty good criteria.
And so I do not mean to say that everything is bad. But the
purpose of today was for me to get a follow up on what, is
happening. Because I hate to have these hearings where we bring
up these issues and then, nothing else gets done. I do not know
the follow up being done. So I truly appreciate you all being
here today for me to try to get some more information.
I understand Dr. Wenstrup has a follow up question he would
like to ask.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Actually sort of on
that subject, do you know what percentage of the VA hospitals
are participating in the prescription drug monitoring programs
in cooperation with the states?
Dr. Petzel. That is a very good question, Congressman.
Everybody is querying, that is our providers are asking the
state about their patients. As near as we know, that is
happening across the country. The reporting of our activity is
an IT issue. We have six pilots in places like Kentucky and
Tennessee, which have been very successful and the process is
in place now to roll this out to the rest of the country. The
limitation is IT, is getting the right people, it is complex.
You have got different reporting phenomena in each state. And
you have got 152 medical centers. And getting that stuff
married up IT-wise is taking us some time.
Dr. Wenstrup. Is there anything we can do?
Dr. Petzel. Oh dare I say it, IT money. You know. IT is our
lifeblood. You know, everything anymore that we do in medicine
has an IT component to it one way or the other. But I think
that the money is in place to do this. The people are in place
to do it. It is just a matter of getting it done.
Dr. Wenstrup. Do you have a timeline, do you think? We have
a pretty big problem in my district with prescription drug
abuse. It has been cracked down on----
Dr. Petzel. In----
Dr. Wenstrup. In Ohio.
Dr. Petzel. In Ohio.
Dr. Wenstrup. Yeah. And it has been cracked down a lot. We
have closed down a lot of the pill mills. That has all been
done at a local level within the state. But it is still an
existing problem. Plus, we border other states. Some sometimes
we have got it within Ohio, but not necessarily in the other
states. And having the VA information would be helpful as well.
Dr. Petzel. It is. And I would like to take for the record
the question of how long. And we will get back to you quickly
about exactly what the timeline is.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay, thank you.
Dr. Petzel. Just a little bit about that, it is very
important and from our perspective to know the prescriptions
are going on on the outside.
Dr. Wenstrup. Right.
Dr. Petzel. Are people, doctor shopping? Are they using
other people? And it is important for the states to know what
we are doing----
Dr. Wenstrup. Right.
Dr. Petzel [continuing]. So that they can put that and make
that information available to the private sector. This is very
important.
Dr. Wenstrup. It is helpful both ways, there is not doubt
about it.
Dr. Petzel. Yes, absolutely.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Benishek. Well I think that concludes the questions
that we have today. I do have to ask before we adjourn that we
do have some further written questions we would like to have
submitted for the record. I suspect that you guys hopefully
will get those answers to us. There is a lot of lengthy stuff
there that I would like to get some follow up for but we do not
need to have it here today.
Dr. Petzel. Yes, sir.
Dr. Benishek. So I appreciate you all being here. I ask
unanimous consent that all members have five legislative days
to revise and extend their remarks and to include extraneous
materials. Without objection, it is so ordered. And the hearing
is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
Prepared Statement of Hon. Dan Benishek M.D., Chairman
Good morning and thank you for joining us for today's oversight
hearing, ``VA Accountability: Actions Taken in Response to Subcommittee
Oversight.''
Almost one year ago today--during my first hearing as Chairman of
the Subcommittee on Health--we met to discuss the persistent lack of
productivity and staffing standards for specialty care services at
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) medical facilities.
We learned that VA had yet to implement such standards despite more
than thirty years of reports and recommendations directing the
Department to do so.
I was so alarmed by VA's decades-long lack of action that I quickly
introduced H.R. 2072, the Demanding Accountability for Veterans Act.

H.R. 2072 would:

Require VA to ensure that IG recommendations
concerning a public health or patient safety issue were
addressed;

identify those within VA medical facilities who are
responsible for implementing needed changes; and,

prohibit VA from awarding a bonus or performance award
to any employee who does not fully address a recommendation
under his or her purview.

The goal of this legislation is to create a culture of
accountability within VA--a culture where problems are identified and
immediately corrected and leaders are held responsible for their
actions.
Were H.R. 2072 in place thirty years ago, VA would have been
required long before now to implement productivity and staffing
standards for all specialty care services and who knows how the health
and well-being of the veterans seeking care through VA would have
improved as a result.
I wish I could say that first hearing was the only time that we
have seen evidence of a lack of timely action taken by VA in response
to serious problems.
Unfortunately, that is not true.
Since the conclusion of that hearing, we have held other hearings
and roundtables on topics ranging from the care provided to veterans
with chronic pain and who have experienced military sexual trauma to
concerns regarding Department-wide procurement reform and third-party
collections.
At each of these oversight forums, we heard example after example
of VA failing to act swiftly to address important issues or respond to
the Subcommittee's requests for information in a timely manner.
I am a surgeon by trade.
When a serious problem is identified, my instinct is to act without
delay to cut out what needs cutting out and fix what needs fixing.
And, while I understand that large-scale changes often happen
slowly--especially where large government bureaucracies like VA are
concerned--I think we can all agree that our veterans deserve more than
what we have seen in the last year.
I am hopeful that H.R. 2072 will be heard on the House floor in the
coming weeks.
However, I am not content to wait for what can oftentimes be a
lengthy legislative process to ensure that VA is on track to address
the many issues the Subcommittee identified through last year's
oversight efforts.

During today's hearing we will:

Assess the progress, if any, that VA has made in
response to the Subcommittee's hearings and roundtables;

Determine whether appropriate steps have been taken to
ensure accountability when and where deficiencies in care have
been highlighted; and,

Identify what further actions may be necessary to
improve the care and services provided to our veterans.

Though the topics we will address today are wide-ranging, they are
undoubtedly interconnected.
If we do not ensure that the Department is on track to implement
appropriate productivity and staffing standards, then we cannot be sure
that we have the right staff in place to care for veterans experiencing
chronic pain.
Similarly, if we do not ensure that VA is taking all necessary
actions to improve the collection, where appropriate, of third-party
revenue, then we cannot be sure that we are collecting every available
dollar that could then, in turn, be used to improve the care and
services provided to veteran survivors of military sexual trauma.
Last week, I had the privilege of conducting an oversight visit to
the West LA VA Medical Center.
During my conversations with the clinicians and support staff
there, each of the issues we will discuss today were brought up by the
providers when I asked them what needed to be improved in order to make
it easier for them to care for our veterans.
I cannot state enough how critical it is for VA to take
responsibility for gaps in care and, more importantly, take immediate
and definitive steps to address them.
Unfortunately, I have seen little concrete evidence in the last
year that the Department is doing either.
Concurring with IG and GAO reports is simply not enough.
Sending out guidelines without accountability in not enough.
I sincerely hope that today's conversation will change my mind.

Prepared Statement of Julia Brownley, Ranking Member
Good morning. Today's hearing is intended to follow up on various
oversight hearings and roundtables held during the first session of the
113th Congress and to assess the progress that the Department has made
in addressing the issues.
The Subcommittee will also determine whether appropriate steps have
been taken by VA to ensure accountability, and identify what further
actions may be necessary in response to Subcommittee oversight.
Last session, this Subcommittee held oversight hearings on
physician staffing standards, care and treatment for military sexual
trauma survivors, and VA's over-use of prescription painkillers to
treat veterans with chronic pain.
In addition to the oversight hearings, two roundtables were held,
one focusing on procurement reform and access to care and one on
billing and collecting from third-party health insurance companies for
nonservice-connected care.
There were many issues raised during these hearings and
roundtables. Issues such as developing a plan to establish productivity
standards for all specialty care services within three years,
decreasing the amount of time it takes to procure large medical
equipment through the National Acquisition Center, assessing the
Department's programs for veterans who have experienced military sexual
trauma, and ensuring the effective use of opioid therapy for patients
with chronic pain.
Mr. Chairman, these are but a few of the concerns that were brought
up during testimony and conversations we had with the witnesses and
participants during the forums.
While we have a lot of ground to cover today, I am especially
interested in hearing from the VA on improvements made in the MST
program and in procurement reform.
At the MST hearing held last session, we heard first hand the
experiences of veterans who have found the system unfriendly and
intimidating.
According to the VA, fiscal year 2013 saw an increase of 9.3
percent in rates of engagement of MST-related care at VHA.
Additionally, VA reports an increase of 14.6 percent in MST-related
visits in fiscal year 2013. I would like to hear from VA how they are
addressing this increase.
I am sure we all agree that it is critical that Congress do all
that we can to make it easier for victims of MST to access needed
benefits and services, and receive treatment.
Compassion and care are a significant part of healing those that
have been sexually assaulted.
Turning now to procurement reform, Mr. Chairman, last session we
held a roundtable and during that roundtable discussion, we heard about
the long delays, some for up to two years, in the delivery of medical
equipment.
While I understand that VA is streamlining the procurement process
to decrease the amount of time it takes to procure large medical
equipment through the National Acquisition Center, I do not feel
confident that much progress has been made in that area.
Stakeholders continue to report increased difficulties accessing
needed prosthetic equipment through VA and significant delays in
contract awards at the National Acquisition Center.
I find this very frustrating and unnecessary. I hope VA has good
news on this front today.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing today and I want
to thank everyone in attendance. There is obvious concern for veterans
and VA's ability to meet their health care needs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and I yield back the balance of my time.
Prepared Statement of Robert Petzel, M.D.
Good morning, Chairman Benishek, Ranking Member Brownley, and
members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
progress made regarding the Veterans Health Administration's (VHA)
physician staffing and productivity standards, treatment for Veterans
who experienced military sexual trauma, pain management programs, and
procurement reform. I am accompanied today by Dr. Robert Jesse,
Principal Deputy Under Secretary for Health, Dr. Madhulika Agarwal,
Deputy Under Secretary for Health for Policy and Services, Dr. Rajiv
Jain, Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for Health for Patient Care
Services, and Mr. Philip Matkovsky, Assistant Deputy Under Secretary
for Health for Administrative Operations.
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is committed to providing
the highest quality care, which our Veterans have earned and deserve.
VA operates the largest integrated health care delivery system in the
country, with over 1,700 sites of care. It is important to acknowledge
that each year, over 200,000 VHA leaders and health care employees
provide exceptional care to approximately 6.3 million Veterans. The
high quality health care VA provides is consistently recognized by The
Joint Commission and other internal and external reviews.
I want to address the issue of accountability. The Veterans Health
Administration is the largest integrated health care system in the
country, providing 85 million total health care appointments last year
and 25 million consultations at more than 1,700 VA health care sites.
Allegations of misconduct by employees are taken seriously. When we
learn of credible allegations of misconduct, VA addresses them
immediately.
When incidents occur, we identify, mitigate and prevent additional
risks. Prompt reviews prevent similar events in the future and hold
those responsible accountable. If employee misconduct or failure to
meet performance standards is identified, VA takes the appropriate
action.
I would point out that VA appreciates and values the role that
Congress, this Committee, VA's Office of the Inspector General (OIG),
the Office of Special Counsel, and the Government Accountability Office
have played in identifying areas where the VHA can improve. VA utilizes
their insights when forming policy and taking action to strengthen our
healthcare delivery programs.

Care and Treatment Available to Survivors of Military Sexual Trauma

Effectively treating Veterans who experienced military sexual
trauma (MST) continues to be a top VA priority. We are committed to
ensuring that appropriate MST services are available to meet the
treatment needs of both men and women Veterans. Rates of engagement in
care and the amount of care provided have increased every year that VA
has monitored MST-related treatment. In fiscal year (FY) 2013, 93,439
Veterans received MST-related care at VHA. This is an increase of 9.3
percent (from 85,474) from FY 2012. These Veterans had a total of
1,027,810 MST-related visits in FY 2013, which represents an increase
of 14.6 percent (from 896,947) from FY 2012.
At last year's hearing on care and treatment available to survivors
of MST, we discussed VA initiatives to provide counseling and care to
Veterans who experienced MST; monitor MST-related screening and
treatment; provide VA staff with training; and inform Veterans about
available services. Since that hearing, VHA has made significant
improvements in these areas. VA has implemented improvements in MST
care to include enhanced screening, expanded telemental health
services, and expanded guidance.
As discussed during the hearing, VHA has a universal screening
program for MST. A Clinical Reminder in the electronic medical record
alerts providers of the need to screen the Veteran, provides language
to use in asking the Veteran about MST, and documents the Veteran's
response to the screen. Because a revision of the MST Clinical Reminder
will be rolled out by the end of FY 2014, VHA will implement several
changes including changing the Clinical Reminder language to make the
questions asked more readily understandable to Veterans. Also, an
explicit option to ``decline'' has been added, to allow Veterans to
choose when and with whom they would prefer to disclose their
experience. Veterans who ``decline'' are automatically re-screened
again in a year. Although the intent of these changes is to facilitate
disclosure, the revised Reminder language also capitalizes on screening
as an opportunity to provide all Veterans with information about VHA's
specialized MST services, regardless of whether or not they disclose
having experienced MST. Veterans who express interest in MST-related
treatment will have streamlined access to care via an option in the
Reminder itself to initiate a referral for services.
In conjunction with the rollout of the revised Clinical Reminder,
VHA has engaged in efforts to provide staff with additional training on
how to screen and respond sensitively to disclosures of MST. National
educational resources have also shifted to clarify the importance of
creating multiple opportunities for disclosure of experiences for MST--
for example, re-screening all Veterans who are seen in clinics for
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or other specialty services.
The addition of the referral question to the Clinical Reminder will
allow for increased accountability with respect to the MST-related
treatment provided by VHA. First, it will provide national monitoring
data that will allow VHA to track whether Veterans who request MST-
related mental health services are able to access those services.
Second, it will allow VHA to establish benchmarks for what percent of
Veterans (on average) might be expected to access MST-related care
after screening positive. Veterans who screen positive for MST will
vary in their need and interest in MST-related treatment through VHA;
without some indication of what percent of Veterans are interested in
treatment, it is currently difficult to know the extent to which VA is
reaching the subset of Veterans who actually need care.
Given the increases in MST-related treatment mentioned earlier, it
is important to ensure that facilities have adequate capacity to meet
the demand for care. Analyses conducted by VHA's national MST Support
Team established a minimum staffing benchmark of 0.2 full time
equivalent employees per 100 Veterans who screen positive for MST.
Annual monitoring of all VHA facilities using this benchmark
demonstrated a positive impact on the availability of services. These
analyses, in conjunction with the new referral question associated with
the Clinical Reminder, will assist VHA in assessing continued progress
towards the goal of ensuring that all Veterans who would benefit from
MST-related care are able to readily access that care.
During the previous hearing on MST, we discussed the geographic
challenges some Veterans face when seeking to access care. VHA is
providing services via information and telecommunication technologies
that give Veterans more options and have improved access to care.
Telemental health approaches can be used to treat most every mental
health condition and deliver all Evidence-based Psychotherapies (EBP).
As part of its strong commitment toward providing high quality mental
health care, VHA has nationally disseminated and implemented specific
EBPs for PTSD and other mental and behavioral health conditions.
Because PTSD, depression and anxiety are commonly associated with MST,
these national initiatives are important means of expanding MST
survivors' access to treatments. Furthermore, several of these
treatments were originally developed to treat sexual assault survivors
and have a particularly strong research base with this population.
Veterans who experienced MST can receive EBPs at every VA medical
center and increasingly via telehealth. VHA's work in this area is
supported by recent research, including research conducted within VHA
that has shown these therapies to be effective and well-accepted by
patients when delivered. VA administrative data indicates that from FY
2011 to FY 2013 psychotherapy telemental health encounters with
Veterans with primary diagnosis with PTSD has increased more than 3-
fold and during the same time frame, the number of unique Veterans with
primary diagnosis of PTSD receiving psychotherapy via telemental health
has more than doubled. This is due in part to national VHA efforts to
expand the use of telehealth to providing care, particularly to
Veterans with PTSD.
In September, an Information Bulletin was distributed to Veterans
Integrated Service Network (VISN) leadership that provided guidance on
the importance of protected time for the MST Coordinator, ensuring
facilities have sufficient capacity to provide MST-related care, and
clarification that non-VA (fee basis) care can, and should, be provided
when there will be a delay in the facility's ability to meet a
Veteran's treatment needs, or if it is otherwise clinically indicated
for the MST-related care to be delivered at a non-VA facility. The
Information Bulletin also underscored the need to ensure adequate
services are available to meet the needs of male Veterans who
experienced MST and that these services are provided in a manner that
recognizes some of the unique challenges men may face in accessing care
and in their recovery more generally. The revised MST Clinical Reminder
will include a mental health services referral question, which will
streamline access to care for Veterans who express interest in MST-
related treatment. In recognition of this, at a national level, MST is
clearly defined as an issue of concern for both men and women, in that
it has been under the administrative oversight of the national Mental
Health Services program office since 2006.
In 2013, VHA concurred with the Office of the Inspector General's
recommendation to review existing VHA policy pertaining to
authorization of travel for Veterans seeking MST-related treatment at
specialized inpatient/residential programs outside of the facilities
where they are enrolled. VHA agreed to establish a workgroup to review
the issues and provide recommendations to the Under Secretary for
Health. After reviewing current policies, the workgroup confirmed that
currently, MST status does not in and of itself qualify Veterans for
reimbursement of travel expenses (called Beneficiary Travel) and
drafted an initial proposal discussing potential options for addressing
this issue. The work group has been directed to conduct further
analysis and reach consensus on a recommendation.

Department-Wide Acquisition Reform

The Subcommittee also hosted a number of roundtables to examine the
impact Department-wide acquisition reform has had on access and quality
of care for Veteran patients and opportunities to improve patient care
in addition to the authority to bill and collect from third party
health insurance companies. We discussed the processes used to provide
non-VA care for Veterans and how billing was conducted following the
care being delivered. We also discussed VA standards for claims payment
and performance metrics used to track VA results as well as the
consolidation of billing and the improvements and efficiencies
recognized from the changes.
Since the roundtable discussions, the Department has expanded its
use of authorities to acquire care from community health care
providers. In January 2014, we successfully launched delivery of
healthcare through Patient Centered Community Care (PC3) contracts,
beginning a phased deployment across the VA health care system. This
new program employs nation-wide contracts to improve Veterans' access
to quality health care. These contracts also standardize our referral,
authorization and payment processes. Our phased deployment will achieve
delivery of health care through PC3 across all VISNs in April of 2014.
VA completed its consolidation of billing through the Consolidated
Patient Account Centers (CPAC) in September 2012. This effort was
completed ahead of schedule, and has improved the reliability and
performance of our billing and collection processes. Since our
roundtable discussions we have conducted requests for information
through the Federal government procurement system to identify
commercial best practices for automation of health care billing
systems. This approach was a direct result to the discussions conducted
at the roundtable, and it allows our VA team to collect competitive
information from numerous firms. We are now processing responses and
assessing how best to further develop a solicitation to improve our
automation of hospital billing.
Additionally, we met with the Health Subcommittee regarding claims
payment timeliness. We have established a nation-wide effort to improve
the timeliness of all claims VA pays to providers who provide
authorized care to Veterans. We are currently working with our legacy
systems and have increased oversight of our claims payment processes.
We have partnered with our Department colleagues to develop a fully
automated and commercial claims payment system that will enable
improved and sustainable performance in our payment processes. This
system is in field-testing in one of our networks and will complete
development by the end of this calendar year, with a subsequent
national roll-out and training for all our claims payment staff by the
end of FY 2015.
We have welcomed the involvement from this Subcommittee during our
roundtables, which has informed the continued improvements in our
administrative processes.

Physician Staffing and Productivity Standards

At last year's hearing, we discussed how VHA was addressing
productivity and staffing beginning with Primary Care Services followed
by Radiology and Mental Health. We also discussed the complexities
associated with measuring productivity in a health care setting. VHA
reported in March 2013 that more than 54 percent of its physician
workforce had standards in place to measure their productivity and
efficiency.
Today, I am pleased to report that we are on target to deliver
productivity and staffing standards for all VHA physicians by the end
of FY 2014. In October 2013, VHA briefed the OIG on its progress on
developing and implementing specialty physician productivity and
staffing standards. Based on VHA's briefing, the OIG closed out its
``Audit of Physician Staffing Levels for Specialty Care Services,'' OIG
report 11-01827-36, in November of 2013. The work continues and we will
not be finished until all physician specialty productivity and staffing
standards are complete and ready access to high quality, efficient
specialty care is available to our Nations Veterans
Today, I'd like to share with you some of the details of what we
have accomplished and assure this Subcommittee of VHA's commitment to
the results-oriented approach we have taken in accomplishing the
implementation of physician productivity and staffing standards. VHA
has adopted an activity-based productivity and staffing model for
specialty physicians. Utilizing an industry accepted Relative Value
Unit (RVU)-based model, specialty physician productivity standards have
been developed and implemented. In FY 2013, productivity standards for
six specialties (dermatology, neurology, gastroenterology, orthopedics,
urology, and ophthalmology) were developed, piloted in four VISNs
(VISNs (7, 12, 19 & 22)) and then implemented VHA-wide in FY 2013. All
VISNs and medical centers were informed of the new productivity
standards for the six physician specialties listed above on July 26,
2013. The standards were implemented VHA-wide on September 30, 2013. By
the end of March 2014, VHA will have productivity and staffing
standards in place for 25 different specialties representing more than
81 percent of its total physician workforce.
A critical component of the productivity and staffing standard
implementation is the Specialty Productivity-Access Report & Quadrant
(SPARQ) tool that provides an algorithm for the effective management of
VHA's specialty physician practices. This tool is designed to assess
VHA specialty physician practice business strategies and drive
performance improvement in Veteran access to specialty care. This tool
was recognized by our OIG colleagues as one of the most important
managerial tools developed in support of physician productivity and
staffing standards and its ability to go beyond standard implementation
to ultimately drive system performance.

The SPARQ tool includes important measures, such as support staff
ratios for VHA specialty physicians so as to maximize physician
efficiency. The SPARQ tool measures the care team, including advanced
practice providers such as Nurse Practitioners, Physician Assistants,
and Clinical Nurse Specialists, and their RVU contribution. The SPARQ
tool also measures specialty physician value in the form of
`compensation per RVU' so as to demonstrate VHA's ability to be good
stewards of public health care resources. Additional views for local
medical center and VISN leadership have been added to permit a view of
all specialties so that local leaders can make informed decisions about
specialty care resources and be accountable for these decisions.
VHA has also undertaken a comprehensive education and communication
plan about the specialty physician productivity and staffing standards.
VHA has held national calls to actively engage its specialty physician
workforce. VHA specialty physicians are committed to demonstrating and
improving specialty productivity and access. VHA has also held national
calls with its medical center leadership in an effort to clearly
communicate the expectations of full implementation of specialty
physician productivity and staffing standards. All medical centers have
been provided with access to a variety of tools that permit
productivity and staffing measurement at the individual physician and
specialty practice level. Our national and local specialty leaders have
been trained on the business strategies and tools available to assist
them in managing their specialty practices with the goal of ready
access to quality specialty care for our Veterans.

VA's Pain Management Programs and the Use of Medications to Treat
Veterans

At last year's hearing, we discussed how VA is providing
comprehensive and patient-centered pain management services to improve
the health of Veterans. We also highlighted VA's current pain
management strategies, the prevalence and use of opioid therapy to
manage chronic pain in Veterans who are potentially at increased risk
for a medication-related adverse event such as someone taking a high
dose of an opioid at the same time as taking a benzodiazepine
medication, the challenges of prescription drug diversion and abuse
among Veterans, and the actions VA is taking to improve the management
of chronic pain.
Today, we are providing an update on our progress and the on-going
challenges that we are working on in order to provide the best care to
our deserving Veterans when it comes to managing their pain. This
includes the integration of both medications and non-pharmacologic
evidence-based strategies.
Veterans enrolled in VA's health care system suffer from higher
rates of chronic pain than the general population.\1\  Almost 60
percent of Veterans returning from the Middle East and more than 50
percent of Veterans in the entire VA health care system experience some
form of chronic pain. Many have survived severe battlefield injuries,
resulting in life-long severe pain related to damage to their
musculoskeletal system, as well as permanent nerve damage, which can
impact their emotional health and brain structures. Many have also
incurred head injuries, collectively referred to as traumatic brain
injuries (TBI), which can compound psychological injuries such as PTSD.
The extent and complexity of these multiple conditions can make
effective pain management difficult and increase the risk for
complications, due to both over-and under-treatment, including overdose
and suicide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ According to a 2010 Institute of Medicine estimate, the rate of
chronic pain in the general population is approximately 32 percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2011, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) issued their report
describing general deficits in the training of U.S. health care
professionals in pain management. VA's health care system had
identified and broadly responded to these deficits starting in the late
1990s through policy, education and training, clinical monitoring, and
the expansion of clinical resources and programs. For instance, VA
recognized that in the management of pain, and for mental health
problems such as PTSD, that can accompany combat injury related pain,
there may be value to non-medication treatment approaches, including
evidence-based psychotherapy and complementary and alternative medicine
(CAM) approaches such as meditation, animal-assisted therapies and
acupuncture. Several of these approaches are in active use and are
under ongoing evaluation.
VA recently developed and implemented an Opioid Safety Initiative
program to better ensure opioid pain medications are used safely,
effectively and judiciously. The basis for this is to make visible the
totality of opioid use at all levels, patient, provider and facility,
in order to identify high-risk situations. The Opioid Safety Initiative
includes key clinical indicators such as the number of unique pharmacy
patients dispensed an opioid, unique patients on long-term opioids who
receive a urine drug screen, the number of patients receiving an opioid
and a benzodiazepine (which puts them at a higher risk of adverse
events) and the average dosage per day of opioids such as
hydromorphone, methadone, morphine, oxycodone, and oxymorphone.
Patients at risk for adverse events from use of opioids are identified
through the use of administrative and clinical databases using pre-
determined parameters based on published evidence and expert opinion.
Several aspects of the Opioid Safety Initiative were underway at the
time of the October 10, 2013, hearing and have begun to bear positive
results:

Despite overall growth in the number of Veterans who
were dispensed any medication from a VA pharmacy, between the
quarter beginning in July 2012 compared to quarter ending in
December 2013, 33,142 fewer Veterans received any opioid
prescription (including short and long term use) from VA.

Performing urine drug screens is a useful tool to
assist in the clinical management of patients receiving long-
term opioid therapy. Between the quarter beginning in July 2012
compared to quarter ending in December 2013, the number of
patients on long term opioid therapy who have had at least one
urine drug screen increased by 27,783, while the total number
of patients on long term opioids decreased by 13,859.

Whenever clinically feasible, the concomitant use of
opioid and benzodiazepine medications should be avoided.
Between the quarter beginning in July 2012 compared to quarter
ending in December 2013, 10,664 fewer patients were receiving
these drugs at the same time.

Lastly, the average dose of selected opioids has begun
to decline slightly in VA, demonstrating that prescribing and
consumption behaviors are changing.

These facts signal an important downward trend in VA's prescribing
of opioids. VA expects this trend to continue as it renews its efforts
to promote safe and effective pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic pain
management therapies. Very effective programs yielding significant
results have been identified, and are being studied as strong practice
leaders.
At the Tampa VA medical center, a safety-focused pain treatment
program has been in place since 1988. The goal of the program is to
replace the use of opioids for pain management with non-pharmacologic
treatments such as behavior therapy, physical therapy, occupational
therapy and/or kinesiotherapy. Tampa also has a long-standing process
of identifying and conducting clinical reviews of Veterans who have
received high morphine equivalent doses. At the Columbus, Ohio VA
Outpatient Clinic, a Veteran-centered approach on opioid safety is
focused on minimizing short acting opioids. This program has resulted
in fewer Veterans on opioids with an 80 percent decrease in short
acting opioid doses dispensed.

Current VA Pain Management Strategies

Many Veterans require a combination of strategies for the effective
management of pain, including treatment with opioid analgesics, which
are known to be effective for at least partially relieving pain caused
by many different medical conditions and injuries. VA treatment
involves 1) interrupting or moderating the pain signal from peripheral
disease/damage (e.g., medications/injections, transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation (TENS), acupuncture, and stimulation.); 2) supporting
structures (e.g., spine) to reduce activation of pain signals (physical
therapy and exercise to build strength and flexibility and help control
weight); and 3) help the Veteran cope with pain and learn better self-
management strategies (behavioral therapies).
In 2010, the Department of Defense (DoD) and VA jointly published
evidence-based Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) for the use of
chronic opioid therapy in chronic pain available on the internet.
Guidelines reserve the use of chronic opioids for patients with
moderate to severe pain who have not responded to, or responded only
partially to, clinically indicated evidence-based pain management
strategies of lower risk, and who also may benefit from a trial of
opioids. A toolkit has also been published and widely distributed to
assist clinicians in using the Guidelines: (https://www/
qmo.amedd.army.mil and http://www.healthquality.va.gov). VA has also
developed and disseminated a patient education resource, entitled
``Taking Opioids Responsibly'', to increase Veterans' awareness of the
risks and benefits of opioid treatment. More recently, the DoD-VA Pain
Management Work Group (PMWG) of the VA-DoD Health Executive Council
(HEC) has built upon the past work begun with the 2010 CPG and meets
monthly to evaluate progress and improve effectiveness of projects
focused upon the VA-DoD mission to improve pain management. These
include two projects funded in 2013 and well underway: Joint Pain
Education and Training Project (JPEP)'', and ``Tiered Acupuncture
Training Across Clinical Settings (ATACS).''
To support a system-wide approach, VA disseminated guidance and
tools to providers to communicate long term opioid therapy
expectations. Among the tools and guidance are:
a. VA National Pain Management Strategy--VA has established pain
management as a national priority. The objective of the strategy is a
comprehensive, multicultural, integrated system-wide approach to pain
management that reduces pain and suffering and improves quality of life
for Veterans experiencing acute and chronic pain. The strategy
incorporates care by pain medicine, behavioral health, physical
medicine and rehabilitation and other specialty providers to manage
complex patients.
b. VHA Pain Management Directive--VA's Pain Management Directive
defines and describes policy expectations and responsibilities for the
overall National Pain Management Strategy and Stepped Care pain model.
In coordination with DoD, a multi-modality, team-based, stepped
care model is being implemented throughout VA. VA and DoD have
developed patient and provider educational materials and two Joint
Incentive Fund sponsored initiatives are underway.
The Acupuncture Training Across Clinical Settings Project will
create access to acupuncture for Veterans and Servicemembers in all
clinical settings throughout VA and DoD.
Forty-eight states have implemented Prescription Drug Monitoring
Programs (PDMP) as a means to improve the quality of care and prevent
the diversion of controlled substances. Two additional states and the
District of Columbia have enacted legislation to develop a PDMP or have
legislation pending. VA published an Interim Final Rule to allow
participation in these programs and is successfully transmitting data
from six pilot sites to state PDMPs. The remaining VA facilities are
scheduled to begin transmitting data by the end of FY 2014.

Non-pharmacologic Approaches to Treatment of Veterans' Mental Health
Problems and Pain Management

The treatment of PTSD in VA follows the evidence-based
recommendations of the Joint VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for
PTSD, most recently published in 2010 and accessible on the Internet at
http://www.healthquality.va.gov/ptsd/. The first-line treatments for
PTSD are evidence-based trauma focused psychotherapies such as
Cognitive Processing Therapy (CPT) or Prolonged Exposure (PE) that have
the highest level of evidence (Level A) indicating ``a strong
recommendation that the intervention is always indicated and
acceptable.''
In terms of medications, the Guidelines strongly recommend (Level
A) selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or serotonin norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors. To date, VA has provided training in Cognitive
Processing Therapy and/or Prolonged Exposure to more than 6,000 VA
mental health staff. All VA medical centers provide at least one of
these therapies, as required in VHA Handbook 1160.01, Uniform Mental
Health Services in VA Medical Centers and Clinics. According to a 2011
VA survey, 89 percent of VA facilities offered CAM treatments, an
increase from 84 percent in 2002. The most common types of CAM provided
are meditation (72 percent of VA hospitals); Stress Management/
Relaxation Therapy (66 percent); and Guided Imagery (58 percent);
acupuncture (41 percent), and yoga (44 percent). The most common uses
of CAM are for stress management, anxiety disorder, PTSD, depression,
back pain, and wellness-promotion.
The Acupuncture Training Across Clinical Settings Project is now in
development to ensure, through standardized training of medical and
battlefield acupuncturists, that all Veterans and Servicemembers in all
clinical settings throughout VA and DoD have access to appropriate
levels of acupuncture. VA has submitted a request for job
classification to OPM for the hiring of certified acupuncturists.
VA and DoD combined VA's Health and Information Group survey of CAM
modalities with the RAND survey of DoD Innovative Mental Health
Programs as the foundation for a joint registry that will provide a
record of innovative treatment programs. The combined list now includes
over 700 programs and is a substantial initial step toward
characterizing and tracking innovative treatment modalities.

Conclusion

As stated earlier, the Department of Veterans Affairs is committed
to providing the highest quality care, which our Veterans have earned
and deserve. Progress has been made regarding physician staffing and
productivity standards, treatment for Veterans who experienced military
sexual trauma, pain management programs, and procurement reform, and we
will continue to seek improvement as we deliver high quality health
care.
We will continue to identify, mitigate, and prevent vulnerabilities
within our health care system, wherever we find them, and we will
continue to ensure accountability and develop a culture in which
accountability principles are clearly stated. And when adverse events
do occur, we will identify them, learn from them, improve our systems,
and do all we can to prevent these incidents from happening again.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I appreciate the
Subcommittee's continued interest in the health and welfare of
America's Veterans. At this time, my colleagues and I are prepared to
answer your questions.

[F-dash]

March 20, 2014
The Honorable Robert A. Petzel, M.D.
Under Secretary for Health
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
810 Vermont Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20420

Dear Dr. Petzel:

Thank you for testifying at the February 26, 2014, Subcommittee on
Health oversight hearing entitled, ``VA Accountability: Assessing
Actions Taken in Response to Subcommittee Oversight.''
As a follow-up to that hearing, I request that you respond to the
attached questions and provide the requested materials in-full by no
later than close of business on Friday, April 25, 2014.
If you have any questions, please contact Christine Hill, Staff
Director for the Subcommittee on Health, at

[email protected]
or by calling (202) 225-9154.
Your timely response to this matter and your commitment to our
nation's veterans are both very much appreciated.

Sincerely,

DAN BENISHEK M.D.
Chairman

Questions for the Record From Chairman Dan Benishek M.D.,

1. During the hearing, you stated that, `` . . . last year, VA
removed 3,000 employees--approximately one percent of its workforce.''
Please provide the location, position, salary grade, and reason for
dismissal for each of the 3,000 employees that the Department removed
last year. Please also provide the number of employees that were
resigned on threat of discipline last year.
2. During questioning by Representative Wenstrup, you stated that
the Department has conducted ``several'' studies comparing the cost of
providing a given medical service through VA to the cost of providing
the same service through either Medicare or the private sector. Please
provide an electronic copy of such studies.
3. Please provide a copy of the Information Bulletin that was
distributed to Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) leadership in
September 2013 regarding Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Coordinators and
describe how the Department intends to measure and track the
implementation, utilization, and effect of the Information Bulletin.
4. Please describe how the Department intends to measure and track
the implementation, utilization, and effect of the revised MST clinical
reminder screening process. Is the Department on track to roll out the
revised screening process by the end of fiscal year 2014?
5. Please provide information regarding the number and location of
any and all inpatient facilities or programs that exist specifically
for the treatment of MST and whether such facilities or programs treat
male veterans, female veterans, or both.
6. Please describe the actions the Department is taking to expand
access to care for male veterans who have experienced MST.
7. Please provide a copy of the ``national educational resources''
referenced in the Department's written statement that have been
``shifted to clarify the importance of creasing multiple opportunities
for disclosure [of MST.'' What impact are these resources expected to
have and how will such impact be tracked and measured?
8. Please provide information regarding the pilot program that Mr.
Matkovsky, VA's Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for Health for
Administrative Operations, stated the Department was undergoing in VISN
15 and VISN 23 to test an alternate procurement structure for certain
high-cost medical equipment. Please include information regarding how
the Department intends to measure the outcome of the pilot program.
9. Is the Department still on track to complete the approximately
909 outstanding delivery orders from 2012 by the end of April 2014? If
now, why not and when will the outstanding delivery order be filled?
10. Please describe how the Department intends to, `` . . . look at
the consolidation process and change that as well.'' What changes are
planned for VA's current consolidation process and what is the
Department's timeline for full implementation of the planned changes?
11. Please describe the actions that have been taken in the last
year to respond to veteran and stakeholder concerns regarding the
negative impact of changes to VA's prosthetic procurement process.
12. Please list the ``incentive structures'' in the Patient
Centered Community Care (PC3) program that Mr. Matkovsky mentioned in
response to questions regarding PC3 reimbursement rates.
13. What impact does the Department estimate full implementation of
PC3 will have on VA's third-party collections?
14. Please provide an update on the request for information (RFI)
that the Department released to `` . . . identify commercial best
practices for automation of health care billing systems . . . '' What
response has the Department received to the RFI and how and when does
the Department intend to incorporate those best practices into VA's
third-party collections processes?
15. Please list and briefly describe each of the ``many tools''
that Dr. Agarwal, VA's Deputy Under Secretary for Health for Policy and
Services, testified had been developed to, `` . . . assist the local
facilities in managing specialty [care] resources appropriately.''
Please also describe how the Department intends to track the
implementation and utilization of these tools and measure the impact
they have on veteran access to specialty care services.
16. Please provide information regarding the ``comprehensive
education and communication plan'' that is currently underway regarding
specialty physician productivity and staffing standards.
17. VHA Directive 2009-053, which provides pain management policy
and implementation procedures, is scheduled to expire on October 31,
2014. Please describe the Department's efforts to-date to prepare to
update and reissue this directive and list any and all proposed policy
or implementation changes that have been proposed.
18. Please describe the role of the Opioid Safety Initiative within
VA's existing pain management programs and provide information
regarding how the Department intends to measure and track the
Initiative's implementation, utilization, and impact.
19. Please describe that actions, if any, that the Department has
taken to ensure that pain management points of contact (POCs) within VA
medical facilities regularly communicate with pain management
specialists, as appropriate, about veteran patients experiencing acute
or chronic pain. Please include any and all guidance that has been sent
to the field regarding the referral process from pain management POCs
to pain management specialists.
20. During the Subcommittee's October 10, 2013, oversight hearing
entitled, ``Between Peril and Promise: Facing the Dangers of VA's
Skyrocketing Use of Prescription Painkillers to Treat Veterans,'' a VA
witness testified about a VA-wide best practice in pain management
called the ``Chronic Pain Rehabilitation Program.'' Please describe
what efforts, if any, VA has taken to implement related or similar
programs in other VA medical centers and clinics.
21. Please describe the six ongoing pilot programs that are in
place to test the Department's initiative regarding state prescription
drug monitoring programs, to include information regarding how VA
intends to measure the outcome of the pilot programs. Please also
elaborate on the Information Technology ``limitations'' that were
referenced in regard to the pilot programs.
22. Please describe the actions, if any, that have been taken to
make the VA formulary more consistent with the DoD formulary.

Questions for the Record From Hon. Keith Rothfus

1. On September 9, 2013, you testified at a field hearing in
Pittsburgh that VA would delay taking any administrative disciplinary
action relating to the systemic failures and mismanagement at the VA
Pittsburgh Healthcare System (VAPHS) that resulted in the deaths of at
least six veterans due to an outbreak of legionella until the U.S.
Justice Department concluded its criminal investigation. Then, on
November 21, 2013, the Justice Department announced that it had
concluded that investigation and that no criminal charges would be
brought. It has now been over three months since that announcement, and
the VA has yet to hold anyone at VAPHS accountable. Accordingly, please
provide a detailed explanation of what VA has done internally to
investigate those responsible for these preventable deaths, what VA has
left to be done to conclude that investigation, and a date certain by
which the families of the victims and Members of Congress can expect
that the VA will take such administrative disciplinary action.
2. On November 26, 2013, following the conclusion of the Justice
Department's investigation into the legionella outbreak at VAPHS,
Senator Pat Toomey and I sent a letter to Secretary Eric Shinseki
requesting information about what administrative disciplinary action
the VA planned to take, if any. To date, though, over three months
later, neither Senator Toomey nor I have received any response. Can you
please explain why the Secretary's office found it acceptable to not
send any response to our inquiry? Is this indicative of how VA and the
Secretary's office views Congressional inquiries and oversight
generally?
3. During the hearing on February 26, 2014, you stated that only
one death resulted from the legionella outbreak at VAPHS. Yet, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found in its
investigation that at least 21 veterans were sickened as a result of
the outbreak, five of whom died. Moreover, since the CDC released its
report, a sixth veteran death has been connected to the outbreak as
well. Accordingly, please provide a detailed explanation why VA has
concluded, despite the findings of the CDC, that only one death
resulted from the outbreak of legionella at VAPHS.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Letter From Robert A. Petzel to Hon. Dan Benishek
March 13, 2014
The Honorable Dan Benishek Chairman
Subcommittee on Health Committee on Veterans' Affairs
U.S. House of Representatives Washington, DC 20515

Dear Mr. Chairman:

I have reviewed the February 26, 2014, Committee on Veterans'
Affairs, Subcommittee on Health hearing's unofficial transcript. I am
writing to clarify responses I gave to questions during the hearing.
First, let me state again that the Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) cares deeply for every Veteran we serve. Our goal is to provide
the best quality, safe and effective health care our Veterans have
earned and deserve. We take seriously any issue that occurs at any one
of the more than 1,700 VA health care points of care across the
country.
I would like to clarify that I made an error when I stated the date
of death of one of the patients occurred on July 12, 2012, at the VA
Pittsburgh Healthcare System. The date of death was July 4, 2012.
Further, of the six deaths discussed at the hearing, the Veterans
Health Administration (VHA) is in possession of five death
certificates. In the case of the sixth death, the Veteran passed away
at a community hospital and VHA does not currently possess the death
certificate. As previously reported, one death was attributed to
Legionella pneumonia as the primary cause of death. I based my
testimony on the immediate cause of death. However, there was a second
patient who had a contributing cause of death listed as Legionella
pneumonia on the death certificate, but it was not the primary cause of
death. VA extends its condolences to the families of the Veterans
affected by acquiring Legionella in our healthcare system.
We are committed to doing whatever it takes to minimize the risk of
Legionella and create the safest environment possible for our nation's
Veterans to heal.
Additionally, I would like to clarify a response I gave to a
question on three deaths in Atlanta and the Office of the Inspector
General (OIG) findings. There were two OIG reports on Atlanta, both
published on April 17, 2013. The report titled ``Patient Care Issues
and Contract Mental Program Mismanagement Atlanta VA Medical Center
Decatur, Georgia'' (Report 12-02955-178) addresses two deaths that
occurred under contract care; a report titled ``Mismanagement of
Inpatient Mental Health Care Atlanta VA Medical Center Decatur,
Georgia'' (Report 12-03869-179) addresses one death that occurred at
the Atlanta VAMC. When I responded to the question regarding ``three
deaths'' I was referring to deaths mentioned in Report 12-02955-178,
not the death at the Atlanta VAMC Inpatient Mental Health Unit. It was
my intent to say that the OIG report numbered 12-03869-179 did state
that the staff's failure to watch patients may The Honorable Dan
Benishek have contributed to the patient's death on the Atlanta VAMC
Inpatient Mental Health Unit. VHA recognizes the significance of the
tragic events that occurred in Atlanta and has taken action there to
improve mental health services for Veterans. VHA's first priority is
the delivery of high quality care to our Nation's Veterans including
access to quality mental health care.
I request that this letter be made an official part of the record.
Thank you for your assistance.

Sincerely,

Julia Brownley,
Ranking Member

[F-dash]

DELIVERABLES
Context of Inquiry: On February 26, 2014. Dr. Robert Petzel, Dr.
Robert Jesse, Dr. Rajiv Jain, Dr. Madhulika Agarwal and Mr. Phillip
Matkovsky testified before the HVAC-Health committee at a hearing
titled: ``VA Accountability: Assessing Actions Taken in Response to
Subcommittee Oversight''. There were seven deliverables from the
hearing.
Question 1:  Please provide the complete list of specialty care
services that have not yet implemented productivity standards.

Response: Specialties scheduled for implementation during the 3rd
and 4th quarters this year:

Cardiology

Pulmonary/Critical Care

General Surgery

Physical Medicine and Rehab

Anesthesiology

Emergency Medicine

Laboratory/Pathology

Geriatrics

Question 2:  Please provide an examination of the need for and
potential incorporation of whistleblower protections for Veterans
reporting military sexual trauma.

Response: As noted by Committee Member Kuster, the Department of
Defense is currently reforming policies regarding Servicemembers'
protection against retaliation after reporting experiences of military
sexual assault. VHA cannot conceive of a scenario where a parallel set
of policies in VHA would be necessary.

Disclosures of MST to a VA staff member would be
considered protected health information and thus subject to the
provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA). Penalties for unauthorized use of
medical record information are already covered under HIPAA and
do not need to be duplicated by VA MST-specific whistleblower
protections.

VA does provide care for some active duty
Servicemembers or Reservists who later return to active duty.
In these cases, VA medical record information may be shared
with the Department of Defense. If a disclosure of MST noted in
a Servicemember's medical record subsequently led to
retaliation against the Servicemember, the transgression would
presumably be covered under the Department of Defense's
whistleblower protections. Again, there is no need for a
parallel set of VA policies.

Eligibility for VA care is independent of any
Department of Defense disciplinary or other proceedings, unless
the Veteran was to ultimately receive an Other Than Honorable
or Dishonorable discharge. If this discharge were the result of
retaliation, this would also presumably be covered by the
Department of Defense's whistleblower protections.

Question 3:  The Circumstances surrounding the six members of the
SES who had ``serious disciplinary actions'' taken against them over
the last two years.

Response: The Department is currently working to provide the
circumstances surrounding the six members of the SES who has
disciplinary actions taken and will provide this information as soon as
possible.

Question 4:  Provide a report on MST anonymous callers (Mystery
Shopper).

Response: The MST anonymous caller initiative targets a potential
barrier to accessing MST-related care: difficulty contacting the MST
Coordinator at a VHA health care facility. The initiative was first
authorized in June 2010, and four rounds of review have been conducted
since at an approximately yearly interval.

During each round, two members of the MHS national MST Support
Team--one female and one male--placed calls to the primary switchboard
phone number of each facility during normal business hours. Following a
standard script, callers asked for assistance in reaching the facility
MST Coordinator. Calls were rated based on the ability of operators and
other frontline staff (e.g., clinic clerks) to identify the MST
Coordinator, the seamlessness of the transfer, and staff members'
courtesy and sensitivity to callers' privacy concerns. Each facility
was rated as Satisfactory, Marginal, or Unsatisfactory based on results
from both calls. All facilities with a Marginal or Unsatisfactory
rating received detailed feedback on the calls, and, to date, have
submitted action plans to VA Central Office to address the identified
issues negatively impacting MST Coordinator accessibility.
The MST Support Team has taken several steps to assist facilities
with preparing for the calls and with writing action plans. These
include hosting a webinar presentation on the initiative, disseminating
tip sheets of strategies on increasing and maintaining accessibility,
and consulting with MST Coordinators to problem solve identified
barriers.
The initiative has been successful in improving nationwide MST
Coordinator accessibility. In Round 4 (Aug-Sep 2013), 83.6% of
facilities were judged to have Satisfactory accessibility, 13.6%
Marginal, and 2.9% Unsatisfactory. These results represent a nearly 30
percentage point improvement in Satisfactory accessibility and 16
percentage point drop in Unsatisfactory accessibility since Round 1
(Jul-Aug 2010).

Question 5:  Provide the FY 2013 Office of Productivity and
Efficiency's staffing standard report for MST (measuring the number of
MST patients that VA facilities are treating and the staff resources
available to treat them);

Response: The Annual Report on Counseling and Treatment for
Military Sexual Trauma (MST) for Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 is currently
being reviewed and we will provide the report to you as soon as it is
available.

Question 5a:  Please also provide information paper on the .2 FTE
for MST.

Response: Please see below for the methods and results regarding
decision to have .2 FTE for MST.

Methods

The VA MHS MST Support Team completes an annual report
to determine the number of trained full time equivalent
employees (FTEEs) required to meet the mental health needs of
Veterans who have experienced MST, to fulfill the requirements
of 38 United States Code, Section 1720D(e). Because MST is
associated with a variety of mental health conditions and is
treated across multiple outpatient treatment settings, we could
not rely solely on the number of providers in a given mental
health service line or clinic. Therefore, we relied on methods
developed by the VA Office of Productivity, Efficiency, and
Staffing (OPES) to quantify workload associated with MST-
related mental health care and calculate the effective number
of FTEEs associated with this care at each VA Health Care
System (HCS). From this we created a metric so that staffing
levels could be compared across facilities.

Each VA HCS varies in the number of Veterans that it
serves who have experienced MST and therefore varies in the
demand for MST-related mental health care. To enable
comparisons across facilities, we calculated a ratio of
provider staffing against population size: the total FTEEs
providing MST-related mental health care for every 100 Veterans
with positive MST screens. It is important to note that not all
Veterans with a positive MST screen will want treatment and
among those that do request care, the amount of MST-related
care required by each Veteran will vary due to the range of
mental health conditions associated with MST. But in general, a
larger staffing ratio indicates greater staffing and
availability of MST-related mental health services.

We examined the amount of MST-related mental health
care that each VA HCS provided and ranked facilities on two
indicators: 1) the proportion of Veterans with a positive MST
screen who received any MST-related mental health care; and 2)
the median number of visits among patients who received MST-
related mental health care. We identified health care systems
that ranked in the top 25% for both indicators. We then used
staffing ratio data from these ``high volume'' VA health care
systems to establish the benchmark.

The benchmark of 0.2 FTEE per 100 Veterans (or 2 FTEE
per 1,000 Veterans) who experienced MST is based on a
comparison with these ``high volume'' VA health care systems.
This benchmark is within two standard deviations of the average
staffing ratio at high volume health care systems. Even
staffing levels that are only a portion of a single FTEE
represent portions of workload from several different providers
due to the wide range of mental health conditions and clinic
settings associated with MST-related mental health care.

Results

All VA health care systems provide MST-related care to
both female and male Veterans and all VA health care systems
have mental health providers knowledgeable in the treatment of
MST-related mental health conditions. In the most recent
analysis, 99 percent of VA health care systems were at or above
the established benchmark for MST-related mental health
staffing capacity. Over 64,000 Veterans received MST-related
mental health care from a VA health care facility. These
Veterans received a total of over 693,000 MST-related mental
health care visits from over 17,950 individual providers. Not
all of those 17,950 individual providers, however, spent all of
their clinical hours delivering MST-related mental health care.
The care delivered by those providers was equivalent to 580
FTEEs.
Question 6:  Provide the committee with information about the VA
employees that were held accountable for patient deaths at the Augusta
VAMC and the Atlanta VAMC.
Response: Disciplinary actions for Atlanta and Augusta are below:

Disciplinary Actions

Atlanta VAMC

Chief of Staff--Reprimand
Associate Director--Reprimand
Associate Director/Nursing and Patient Care Services--
Reprimand
Chief, Mental Health Service Line--Reassigned
Mental Health Inpatient Nurse Manager--Reprimand
Associate Nurse Executive/Mental Health and Geriatrics--
Reprimand
Mental Health Inpatient Unit Medical Director--Admonishment
Former Medical Center Director--Retired
Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) Chief of Mental
Health Services--Retired

Augusta VAMC

Chief of Staff-Received performance Counseling (Voluntarily
resigned from position)
Question 7:  Please provide the timeline for VHA to contribute to
the State Prescription Drug Monitoring Program?
Response: VA participation with State Prescription Drug Monitoring
Program is estimated to begin August 2014. This is predicated on a
contract award by May 5, 2014, with a contract start shortly after
award. The timeline includes achieving Milestone 2 (development enters
implementation phase) by May 30, with code changes to other patches and
Medication Order Checking Application (MOCHA 2.0) completed,
documentation updated, and identification of additional test sites by
the end of June. It is expected that this work would enter the national
release process near the middle of July with testing and deployment
leading to a mid-August completion. The State Drug Monitoring Program
patch is dependent on MOCHA 2.0 which will deploy in waves between
March 24, 2014 and June 16, 2014, as well as a titration management
patch that will start simultaneously with the State Drug Monitoring
Program patch. There are potential risks of delays to the August 2014
start date that could arise from dependencies that include contract
start date and unforeseen technical issues with states that are not
part of the test site process. The VA Office of Information and
Technology is responsible for oversight and management of software
development and deployment for this program.

[all]
