- SERVICE SHOULD NOT LEAD TO SUICIDE: ACCESS TO VA'S MENTAL HEALTH CARE

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SERVICE SHOULD NOT LEAD TO SUICIDE:

ACCESS TO VA'S MENTAL HEALTH CARE
=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JULY 10, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-79

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

89-378 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              DINA TITUS, Nevada
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
DAVID JOLLY, Florida
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Nancy Dolan, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Thursday, July 10, 2014

Service Should Not Lead To Suicide: Access to VA's Mental Health
Care...........................................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Jeff Miller, Chairman.......................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    77

Hon. Michael Michaud, Ranking Minority Member....................     2
Prepared Statement...........................................    77
Hon. Corrine Brown
Prepared Statement...........................................    78
Hon. Scott Peters
Prepared Statement...........................................    79

WITNESSES

Howard and Jean Somers, Parents of Daniel Somers, Deceased.......     4
Prepared Statement...........................................    81

Susan and Richard Selke, Parents of Clay Hunt, Deceased..........     6
Prepared Statement...........................................    83

Peggy Portwine, Mother of Brian Portwine, Deceased...............     8
Prepared Statement...........................................    85

Josh Renschler, Sergeant, U.S. Army (Ret.).......................     9
Prepared Statement...........................................    86

Maureen McCarthy M.D., Deputy Chief Patient Care Services
Officer, Veterans Health Administration U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................    48
Prepared Statement...........................................    93

Accompanied by:

Harold Kudler M.D., Acting Chief Consultant for Mental
Health Services, Veterans Health Administration U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

David Carroll Ph.D., Acting Chief Consultant for
Specialty Mental Health, Veterans Health
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Michael Fisher, Program Analyst, Readjustment Counseling
Service, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Alex Nicholson, Legislative Director, Iraq and Afghanistan
Veterans of America............................................    50
Prepared Statement...........................................   100

Lt. General Martin R. Steele (USMC, Ret.), Associate Vice
President for Veterans Research, Executive Director of Military
Partnerships, Co-Chair of the Veterans Reintegration Steering
Committee University of South Florida..........................    52
Prepared Statement...........................................   105

Warren Goldstein, Assistant Director for TBI and PTSD Program,
National Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation Commission, The
American Legion................................................    54
Prepared Statement...........................................   114

Jonathan Sherin M.D., Ph.D., Chief Executive Officer, Executive
Vice President for Military Communities, Volunteers of America.    56
Prepared Statement...........................................   120

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD

General Steele, Neurocognitive Perspectives on PTSD, mTBI and
Suicide in the Military........................................   124

American Foundation for Suicide Prevention.......................   130

CNS Response.....................................................   135

Swords to Plowshares.............................................   145

Vietnam Veterans of America......................................   158

Report by Citizens Commission on Human Rights International......   168

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

Letter and Questions From: Ranking Member Michael Michaud, To: VA   198
Questions From: Ranking Member Michael Michaud and Responses
From: VA.......................................................   200

SERVICE SHOULD NOT LEAD TO SUICIDE: ACCESS TO VA'S MENTAL HEALTH CARE

Thursday, July 10, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:15 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Runyan, Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Cook, Walorski,
Jolly, Michaud, Brown, Takano, Brownley, Titus, Kirkpatrick,
Ruiz, Negrete McLeod, Kuster, O'Rourke, and Walz.
Also Present: Representatives Peters, and Sinema.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JEFF MILLER, CHAIRMAN

The Chairman. This hearing will come to order. Before we
begin I would like to ask unanimous consent for our colleagues,
Representative Scott Peters from California and Representative
Kyrsten Sinema from Arizona to sit at the dais with us and
participate in the proceedings today. Without objection, so
ordered.
I would like to welcome everybody to today's full committee
oversight hearing entitled, ``Service Should Not Lead to
Suicide: Access to VA's Mental Health Care.''
Following a committee investigation which uncovered
widespread data manipulation and accompanying patient harm at
Department of Veterans Affairs medical facilities all across
this nation, this committee has held a series of full committee
oversight hearings over the last several weeks to evaluate the
systemic access and integrity failures that have consumed the
VA health care system. Perhaps none of these hearings have
presented the all too human face of VA's failures so much as
today's hearing will. A hearing that I believe will show the
horrible human costs of VA's dysfunction and I daresay
corruption.
At its heart access to care is not about numbers, it is
about people. Recently the committee heard from a veteran who
had attempted to receive mental health care at a VA community
based outpatient clinic in Pennsylvania. This veteran was told
repeatedly by the VA employee he spoke with that he would be
unable to get an appointment for six months. However, when that
employee left another VA employee leaned in to tell this
veteran that if he just told her that he was thinking of
killing himself she would be able to get him an appointment
much sooner, in just three months instead of six. Fortunately
that veteran was not considering suicide. But what about those
veterans who are? How many of the tens of thousands of veterans
that VA has now admitted have been left on waiting lists for
weeks, months, and even years for care were seeking mental
health care appointments? How many are suicidal, or edging
towards suicide as a result of the inability to get the care
that they have earned?
Despite significant increases in VA's mental health and
suicide prevention budget, programs, and staff in recent years,
the suicide rate among veteran patients has remained more or
less stable since 1999 with approximately 22 veterans
committing suicide every single day. However, the most recent
VA data has shown that over the last three years rates of
suicide have increased by nearly 40 percent among male veterans
under 30 who use VA health care services, and by more than 70
percent among male veterans between the ages of 18 and 24 who
use VA health care services.
This morning we are going to hear testimony from three
families: the Somers, the Selkes, and the Portwines, who will
tell us about their sons Daniel, Clay, and Brian. Three
Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom veterans
who sought VA mental health care following combat. Each of
these young men faced barrier after barrier in their struggle
to get help. Each of these young men eventually succumbed to
suicide. In the note he left behind Daniel Somers wrote that he
felt his government had abandoned him and referenced coming
home to face a system of dehumanization, neglect, and
indifference. VA owed Daniel, and Clay, and Brian so much more
than that.
With that, I yield to our Ranking Member Mr. Michaud for
his opening statement.

[The prepared statement of Jeff Miller appears in the
Appendix]

OPENING STATEMENT OF MICHAEL MICHAUD, RANKING MINORITY MEMBER

Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this very important hearing. We have had many discussions and
debates about how to deliver the best health care services to
our nation's veterans and how to ensure accountability within
the leadership ranks of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Over the course of these recent hearings and discussions we
have touched on a number of important issues. But one that we
have not zeroes in on too much yet has been access to mental
health care and suicide prevention services for our veterans.
That is why this hearing today is so important. And I would
like to thank all of the panelists for joining us today. But
particularly I want to thank the family members joining us who
have lost a loved one.
I know that speaking about a loss of a loved one,
particularly a child, can be an incredibly difficult and
exhausting experience. But in this case I think we have to
listen to your stories, identify what went wrong, and we can
take action to ensure that those failures are not repeated
again. So I want to thank you very, very much for joining us
today to share your stories.
Eighteen to 22 veterans commit suicide each day. In my
opinion that is 18 to 22 brave men and women each day who our
system has let down in some capacity. It is totally
unacceptable. When a veteran has experienced depression or
other early warning signs that may indicate mental health
issues or even suicide, that must be treated like an immediate
medical crisis. Because that is exactly what it is. Veterans in
that position should never be forced to wait months on end for
a medical consult. Because quite frankly that is time that they
may not have.
We have taken steps to help put in place programs and
initiatives aimed at early detection and we have significantly
increased our funding. The Department of Veterans Affairs
funding on mental health has doubled since 2007 but it is not
working as well as we had hoped. And we have to figure out why,
and how we can correct these problems.
Our veterans are the ones paying the price for this
dysfunction. A 2012 IG report found that VHA data on whether it
was providing timely access to mental health services is
totally unreliable. And a GAO report from that year not only
confirmed that disturbing finding, but also said that
inconsistent implementation of VHA scheduling policy made it
difficult, if not impossible, to get patients the help that
they need when they need it. That is why we have to look at
this situation. That is a problem that we have seen repeatedly
as we dig into the VA's dysfunctions, and enough is enough.
Our veterans and their families deserve a VA that delivers
timely mental health services that cover a spectrum of needs,
from PTSD, to counseling for family members, to veterans, to
urgent round the clock response to a veteran in need. A recent
VA OIG report found that in one facility patients waited up to
432 days, well over a year, for care.
For once again, we are finding that our veterans deserve
much better than the care that they are receiving in all of the
areas that we must address. We have to look at it
comprehensively. And I would argue that fixing mental health
services is among the most important area. And I look forward
to a productive discussion that will begin today as we look
forward to trying to solve some of the problems with a
dysfunctional department that we have seen over the last
several months.
And once again, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you very much
for having this very important hearing and for the panelists
for coming today to tell your stories. With that, I yield back
the balance of my time.

[The prepared statement of Michael Michaud appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much to the ranking member. We
are humbled and honored to be joined by our first panel of
witnesses this morning. Family members of the three veterans
who sadly and tragically lost their lives to suicide, and I am
sure that I speak for each of my colleagues when I say that
each of you have our deepest sympathies for your loss. I am
both grateful and at the same time angry that you have to be
here to share your stories of your sons with each of us. So if
you could approach the witness table, please?
Joining us is Dr. Howard and Jean Somers, the parents of
Daniel Somers; Susan and Richard Selke., the parents of Clay
Hunt; and Peggy Portwine, the mother of Brian Portwine. We are
also joined on our first panel by Josh Renschler, a veteran of
the United States Army who will share his very personal story
of attempting to seek mental health care through the Department
of Veterans Affairs. Thank you, sir, for your service, and for
being here today. Dr. and Mrs. Somers, please proceed with your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF HOWARD AND JEAN SOMERS

Mrs. Somers. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and
committee members, we are grateful for this opportunity to
testify today. We are especially pleased to see Arizona
Representative Ann Kirkpatrick; and Daniel's Representative
Kyrsten Sinema; and our own California Representative Scott
Peters; who have been great allies to us in our efforts to
advance reforms of the VA based on the experiences of our son.
Dr. Somers. As many of you know our journey started on June
10, 2013 when Daniel took his own life following his return
from a second deployment in Iraq. At that time he suffered from
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, Traumatic Brain Injury, and
Gulf War Syndrome. Daniel spent nearly six futile and tragic
years trying to access the VA health and benefits systems
before finally collapsing under the weight of his own despair.
We have attached the story of Daniel Somers to our testimony,
which provides the details of his efforts and we hope you will
read it if you have not already done so.
Today it is our objective to begin the process which will
ultimately provide hope and care to the 22 veterans today who
are presently ending their lives.
Mrs. Somers. Just over a year ago and four days after
Daniel's death, feeling fortunate that we at least had a letter
from him, Howard and I, Howard is a urologist and I spent 30
years in the business of health care, sat down with Daniel's
wife, who has a Bachelor of Science in nursing, and his mother-
in-law who is a psychiatrist. Together we felt uniquely
qualified to prepare a 19-page report that we titled Systemic
Issues at the VA. We have shared that document with several of
you over the last year and it is also attached to our
testimony.
The purpose of the report remains the same as when we wrote
it, to improve access to first rate health care at the VA; to
make the VA accountable to veterans it was created to serve;
and to make every VA employee an advocate for each veteran.
Dr. Somers. At the start Daniel was turned away from the VA
due to his National Guard Inactive Ready Reserve status. Upon
initially accessing the VA system he was essentially denied
therapy. He had innumerable problems with VA staff being
uncaring, insensitive, and adversarial. Literally no one at the
facility advocated for him. Administrators frequently cited
HIPAA as the reason for not involving family members and for
not being able to use modern technology.
Mrs. Somers. The VA's appointment system, know as VISTA, is
at best inadequate. It impedes access and lacks basic
documentation. The VA information technology infrastructure is
antiquated and prevents related agencies from sharing critical
information. There is a desperate need for compatibility
between computer systems within the VHA, the VBA, and the DoD.
Continuity of care was not a priority. There was not succession
planning.
Dr. Somers. No procedures in place for warm hand offs, no
contracts in place for locum tenens, and a fierce refusal to
outsource anyone or anything.
At the time Daniel was at the Phoenix VA, there was no pain
management clinic to help him with his chronic and acute
fibromyalgia pain. There were few coordinated interagency
goals, policies, and procedures. The fact that the formularies
of the DoD and VA are separate and different makes no sense
since many DoD patients who are stabilized on a particular
medication regimen must rejustify their needs when they
transfer to the VA. There were inadequate facilities and an
inefficient charting process.
Mrs. Somers. There was no way for Daniel to ascertain the
status of his benefits claim. There was no VHA/VBA appointments
system interfacing, nor prioritized proactive procedures. There
was no communication between disability determination and
vocational rehabilitation. This report is offered in the spirit
of a call to action and reflects the experiences of Daniel with
VA program services beginning in the Fall of 2007 until his
death last June through our eyes.
Dr. Somers. As seen through our eyes. Our concern then was
that the impediments and deficiencies which Daniel encountered
were symptomatic of deeper and broader issues in the VA,
potentially affecting the experiences of a much broader
population of servicemembers and veterans. Unfortunately this
has been proven true as dramatically evidenced by recent
revelations.
Many of the reforms outlined in our report will require
additional funding for the VA. But with that new funding should
come greater scrutiny and a demand for better measurable
results.
Mrs. Somers. There is, however, an alternative to
attempting to repair the existing, broken system. We believe
Congress should seriously consider fundamentally revamping the
mission of the VA health system. In the new model we envision
the VA would transition into a center of excellence,
specifically for war related injuries, while the more routine
care provided by the rest of the VA health care system would be
open to private sector service providers, much like Tricare.
That approach would compel the current model to self-improve
and compete for veterans' business. This would ultimately allow
all veterans to seek the best care available while allowing the
VA to focus its resources and expertise on the treatment of
complex injuries suffered in modern warfare. Dr. Somers. We
thank you for your time and would be happy to further discuss
our recommendations and suggestions. We sincerely hope that the
systemic issues raised here will provide a platform to bring
the new VA administration together with lawmakers, VSOs,
veterans, and private medical professionals and administrators
for a comprehensive review and reform of the entire VA process.
And if the VA Committee or Congress as a whole make the
decision to involve other stakeholders in a more formal reform
process, we would be honored to be among those chosen to
represent the views of affected families. Thank you.
Mrs. Somers. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Howard and Jean Somers appears
in the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you both for your testimony. Mr. and
Mrs. Selke, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF SUSAN AND RICHARD SELKE

Mrs. Selke. Thank you. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member
Michaud, and distinguished members of the committee, thank you
for the opportunity to speak with you today about this
critically important topic of mental health care access at the
VA, suicide among veterans, and especially about the story and
experience of our son, Clay. My name is Susan Selke, and I am
accompanied here by my husband Richard. I am here today as the
mother of Clay Hunt, a Marine Corps combat veteran who died by
suicide in March, 2011 at the age of 28.
Clay enlisted in the Marine Corps in May, 2005 and served
in the infantry. In January of 2007 Clay deployed to Iraq's
Anbar Province, close to Fallujah. Shortly after arriving in
Iraq Clay was shot through the wrist by a sniper's bullet that
barely missed his head. After he returned to Twenty nine Palms
in California to recuperate, Clay began experiencing symptoms
of Post Traumatic Stress, including panic attacks, and was
diagnosed with PTS later that year.
Following the recuperation from his gunshot wound, Clay
attended and graduated from the Marine Corps Scout Sniper
School in March of 2008. A few weeks after graduation Clay
deployed again, this time to Southern Afghanistan.
Much like his experience during his deployment to Iraq,
Clay witnessed and experienced the loss of several fellow
Marines during his second deployment.
Clay received a 30 percent disability rating from the VA
for his PTS. After discovering that his condition prevented him
from maintaining a steady job, Clay appealed the 30 percent
rating only to be met with significant bureaucratic barriers,
including the VA losing his files. Eighteen months later, and
five weeks after his death, Clay's appeal finally went through
and the VA rated Clay's PTS 100 percent.
Clay exclusively used the VA for his medical care after
separating from the Marine Corps. Immediately after his
separation, Clay lived in the Los Angeles area and received
care at the VA Medical Center there in L.A. Clay constantly
voiced concerns about the care he was receiving, both in terms
of the challenges he faced with scheduling appointments as well
as the treatment he received for PTS which consisted primarily
of medication. He received counseling only as far as a brief
discussion regarding whether the medication he was prescribed
was working or not. If not, he would be given a new medication.
Clay used to say, ``I am a guinea pig for drugs. They will put
me on one thing, I will have side effects, and they put me on
something else.''
In late 2010 Clay moved briefly to Grand Junction, Colorado
where he also used the VA there, and then finally home to
Houston to be closer to family. The Houston VA would not refill
the prescriptions that Clay had received from the Grand
Junction VA because they said that prescriptions were not
transferrable and a new assessment would have to be done before
this medications could be represcribed. Clay had only two
appointments in January and February of 2011 and neither was
with a psychiatrist. It was not until March 15th that Clay was
able to see a psychiatrist at the Houston VA Medical Center.
But after that appointment, Clay called me on his way home and
said, ``Mom, I cannot go back there. The VA is way too
stressful and not a place I can go. I will have to find a Vet
Center or something.''
Just two weeks after his appointment with the psychiatrist
at the Houston VA medical center, Clay took his life. After
Clay's death I personally went to the Houston VA Medical Center
to retrieve his medical records and I encountered an
environment that was highly stressful. There were large crowds.
No one was at the information desk. And I had to flag down a
nurse to ask directions to the medical records area. I cannot
imagine how anyone dealing with mental health injuries like PTS
could successfully access care in such a stressful setting
without exacerbating their symptoms.
Clay was consistently open about having PTS and survivor's
guilt and he tried to help others coping with similar issues.
He worked hard to move forward and found healing by helping
people, including participating in humanitarian work in Haiti
and Chile after the devastating earthquakes. He also starred in
a public service advertising campaign aimed at easing the
transition for his fellow veterans and he helped wounded
warriors in long distance road biking events. Clay fought for
veterans in the halls of Congress and participated in Iraq and
Afghanistan Veterans of America's Annual Storm the Hill in 2010
to advocate for legislation to improve the lives of veterans
and their families.
Clay's story details the urgency needed in addressing this
issue. Despite his proactive and open approach to seeking care
to address his injuries, the VA system did not adequately
address his needs. Even today we continue to hear about both
individual and systemic failures by the VA to provide adequate
care and address the needs of veterans. Not one more veteran
should have to go through what Clay went through with the VA
after returning home from War. Not one more parent should have
to testify before a congressional committee to compel the VA to
fulfill its responsibilities to those who have served and
sacrificed.
Mr. Chairman, I understand that today you are presented the
Suicide Prevention for American Veterans Act. The reforms,
evaluations, and programs directed by this legislation will be
critical to helping the VA better serve and treat veterans
suffering from mental injuries from War. Had the VA been doing
these thing all along, it very well may have saved Clay's life.
Mr. Chairman, Richard and I again appreciate the
opportunity to share Clay's story and our recommendations about
how we can help ensure the VA will uphold its responsibility to
properly care for America's veterans. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Susan and Richard Selke appears
in the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you both for your testimony this
morning. Ms. Portwine, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF PEGGY PORTWINE

Ms. Portwine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Michaud,
distinguished committee members. My son Brian Portwine gave 100
percent to every task he performed and his military service was
no exception. By the time he was 19 years old Brian was awarded
the Purple Heart and the Army Commendation Medal. I am before
you today to share Brian's story.
At 17 Brian enlisted in the Army. After his training in
infantry, he was deployed to Baghdad where he patrolled in Sadr
City on the Haifa Streets. It was an extremely daunting
serviced. This occurred before the surge of troops. During this
tour, Brian lost 11 brothers.
While serving in Iraq in 2006, Brian's Bradley tank was
struck by an RPG. The flames swiftly engulfed the tank. The
driver was knocked unconscious and the men fought for their
lives as the driver was unable to hydraulically lower the ramp.
The five soldiers scrambled through the flames, manually
lowered the ramp, and exited, all with injuries. Brian suffered
a blast concussion along with lacerations to his face and legs
due to shrapnel and bone fragments. This was his first
experience with traumatic brain injury.
On yet another mission Brian and his First Sergeant were
patrolling in Humvee when his Sergeant signaled for Brian to
switch seats with him. They switched seats so Brian was now in
the passenger seat. Twenty minutes later an IED hit the Humvee
on the driver's side, killing his First Sergeant, and throwing
Brian from the vehicle.
Besides these two incidents he experienced six other IED
explosions during his 15-month deployment. I would like to
pause here and ask is this not enough to warrant a thorough
evaluation and further testing? The powers that be apparently
thought of sending Brian to Walter Reed Hospital, but did not.
Are these experiences with the physical and mental injuries not
enough to possibly exempt him for another deployment?
Apparently the VA felt his care was iffy enough to stamp a no
go on his clearance form but then it was crossed out and
written go. How and why this decision was made is beyond me
After his first deployment Brian was ecstatic to be home
again. He enrolled in Daytona State College. He worked in the
admissions counseling office. He created videos to share
resources with students, hosted events, and linked students
with part-time employment around their school schedules. But
Brian suffered with short term memory loss. He would have to
write everything on his computer, his iPhone, or his calendar.
Many times his friends told me when he was out with them he
would say, ``Where are we going again? You know I have got
scrambled brains from Iraq.'' To help cope he posted all his
events on his computer, his calendar, and his phone.
In 2010 the military recalled Brian one month before the
college year ended. Brian immediately dropped his classes that
he excelled in. When I asked him why he said, ``Mom, there is
no point. You have to get your mind in a completely different
place. You have no idea what is coming.''
During the second deployment Brian did not email or call
home to any family or friends. Little did we know how he was
struggling with anxiety attacks, panic attacks, traveling the
same roads as the first tour. He knew the stigma of admitting
PTSD, as all soldiers do. So they just man up and move on.
Upon returning from the second deployment Brian was
evaluated. He was diagnosed with PTSD, TBI, depression, and
anxiety. At this time I would like you to refer to the
documents that you received, Brian's medical documents. It is
documented that Brian could not remember that questions asked
from the therapist during the interview. He had extensive back
pain. He could not sleep. He felt profound guilt. He suffered
from low self-esteem and as a result he was a risk for suicide.
Nonetheless he was just immediately discharged and told to
follow up. How in the world you can ask someone who cannot
remember the questions asked to follow up with the VA is beyond
me.
Brian deteriorated quickly from December, 2010 to May 27,
2011 when he took his life. He could not stand how he would be
angry, depressed, anxious. But he did not know how to cope. It
took a to1l on his relationships. If the DoD and VA assessed
Brian for suicide risk, it was their duty to treat him but he
received nothing. He applied for disability but was unable to
wait.
Brian's unit has lost three others besides himself to
suicide since the 2006 to 2008 tour. As you know, suicides
surpassed combat fatalities for the first time in history. It
is a very slippery slope from PTSD and TBI to death, something
our VA should realize.
Our soldiers never hesitated in their mission to protect,
serve, and sacrifice for our country. Now it is time for the VA
to prove their commitment to our soldiers. I never knew of
Brian's PTS, TBI, or suicide risk. I think he felt, ``If I can
survive two tours of Iraq, I can survive anything.'' I think it
is a life threatening situation like this and it should be
shared with the family so we are able to help. The VA needs to
work with the service organizations, including the families in
the plan for care.
I am requesting, I am begging this committee to pass Act
2182, the Suicide Prevention for Americans Act. This has been a
most devastating war in history in terms of suicide. Our whole
nation continues to suffer and everyday we continue to lose 22
Brians a day.
I promised my son at his funeral that I would stop this
injustice. These are quality young men who potentially had so
much to offer society. Please pass this Act 2182 and support
any legislation that gives our soldiers and timely and loving
care that they deserve. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Peggy Portwine appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman Thank you, Ms. Portwine. Sergeant Renschler,
you are recognized for your statement.

STATEMENT OF SERGEANT JOSH RENSCHLER

Sergeant Renschler. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member
Michaud, members of the committee, I appreciate the opportunity
to discuss VA mental health care. And I certainly want to
acknowledge the loss and the courage of these family members
ensuring that they were not in vain. And I struggle with the
similarities of the stories. As an infantryman who lost so many
in the Iraq War in injures, and struggled with thoughts of
suicide from overwhelming chronic pain and other injuries, I
just thank you all for being here.
My experience with the VA health care system began in 2008.
Sorry.
The Chairman. That is okay. You have got plenty of time.
Sergeant Renschler. After I was medically retired from the
Army due to severe injuries from a mortar blast in Iraq. Excuse
me. I have been a patient but I am also an advocate for other
warriors who are struggling with deployment related traumas.
For a period of about 12 months I did receive excellent mental
health care at a VA facility. It provided easy, one-stop access
through a deployment health model staffed by medical, mental
health, pharmacy, and social work providers. Unfortunately,
though, hospital administrators decided that this well-staffed
interdisciplinary care was too costly. Now veterans at the
facility go through an impersonal intake assessment process and
then have to find their way around a sprawling facility to
access the care that they need. For many warriors just
navigating around the facility is anxiety provoking in itself,
and for others it is so frustrating that they just drop out of
care altogether.
There is lessons to be learned here. First, veterans with
mental health issues will seldom open up and discuss painful,
private issues with a clinician that they have never met. They
are more likely to discuss surface level issues, like
difficulty sleeping. It takes time to build the trust to talk
about the deeper issues. And not every clinician is skilled at
winning the trust, or insightful enough to sense when there is
deeper problems. Working with a team increases the likelihood
of someone to see something that others may have missed.
This has implications for suicide prevention as well.
Veterans will rarely volunteer to clinicians that they are
contemplating suicide and there are not necessary obvious signs
that a veteran is a suicide risk. One thing is for sure, we
will not prevent suicides by doctors mechanically going down a
mandatory list asking questions like have you contemplated
suicidal thoughts lately, or harming others. Sometimes there is
red flags that an astute clinician can spot, like the break up
of a relationship or other major life events that could lead a
person to take a desperate act. But in a treatment system where
I get sent to Building 3 for a neurologist for chronic back
pain, Building 61 to see a psychiatrist for sleep problems, and
Building 81 to see a social worker for relationship issues, no
one is getting the full picture. So it is likely that no one is
going to see if my life is spinning recklessly out of control.
As an integrated health care system the VA can provide the
kind of care that I want to receive from an interdisciplinary
health team. There the team members shared observations and
could see potential problems before they became explosive. So I
think that the most important step that the VA can take to
prevent suicide is to dramatically improve its mental health
care delivery.
Access is certainly an issue but we have to ask ourselves,
access to what? Access to mental health care is not enough
unless that care is effective. For example, providers who work
with combat veterans need to understand the warrior mentality
and they may have to work hard to earn that veteran's trust. If
a clinician lacks that cultural awareness, or has too many
patients to give each enough time, veterans will get frustrated
and drop out of treatment.
Also, veterans who are not ready for intense exposure based
therapy will drop out of these multi-week treatment programs
even though they are hailed as evidence-based therapy. The
bottom line is that the VA care must be veteran centered. That
has to mean recognizing each veteran's unique situation and
individual treatment preferences and building a flexible system
to meet the veteran's needs and preferences, not the other way
around.
The warriors that I am describing do not come into
treatment for PTSD or anxiety when the textbooks say that they
should. Most do not come in to treatment until they have
reached a crisis point in their lives. Certainly a veteran in
distress who finally asks for help for a combat incurred mental
health condition needs to get into treatment immediately. But
we will not solve that problem by establishing an arbitrary
requirement like a 14-day rule. It does not help a warrior who
is at the end of his rope to get assessed within 14 days but
not actually begin treatment within three months. This is the
way that the VA has currently implemented such policies. They
have added additional steps to get into treatment so that you
can see someone within 14 days. They have added a second intake
process so now you intake-to-intake to finally get the
treatment that you need.
I know that some believe that the way to solve the veteran
problem is to expand veteran access to non-VA care. I really
personally doubt that that is any kind of silver bullet
solution. The two big concerns with that is first detailed in
my full statement. Many reports and studies point to a national
shortage of mental health providers within the community.
Secondly there is real quality of care issues here. VA could
certainly benefit from a greater use of purchased care where
and when it is available, and when it can be effective. But it
would not help veterans just to be seen by providers who are
not equipped to provide effective care, whether because of lack
of training in treating combat related PTSD, or cultural
competence, or any other reason. Again, it is not just a matter
of access, but access to what? It has to be effective
treatment. I do believe that there are VA facilities that are
providing veterans with timely access to effective patient
centered care but it is not systemwide.
From my perspective the starting point for VA leadership at
all levels is to adopt the principle that providing timely,
mental health care for those with service incurred mental
health conditions must be a top priority. The VA achieved that
with its efforts to combat veteran homelessness recently. That
tells me the VA can have a real impact when the direction and
priorities are clear. When artificial performance requirements
do not create distortions, and when clinicians have latitude to
provide good care.
Improving mental health care definitely requires a
comprehensive approach. One part of that approach in my view
should be to institute the kind of interdisciplinary team based
model I described earlier. But the core of any approach has to
center on the veteran and that patient's needs and preferences.
We need a system that serves the veteran, not one that requires
the veteran to accommodate the system.
I hope that this hearing brings us a step closer to that
kind of VA care system. And I thank you for the time, and I
would be happy to answer any further questions that you may
have.

[The prepared statement of Josh Renschler appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Sergeant. Thank you,
again, to all of the witnesses. Sergeant, if I could go back to
you since you were the most recent person to testify. You
talked about the interdisciplinary care team that you had for
12 months. And then after that you alluded to the fact that the
hospital director or somebody said that it cost too much to do
it that way. I think we would all benefit from you elaborating
a little bit about how that occurred and what did you transfer
to? What type of a care?
Sergeant Renschler. Yes, sir. In 2008 to 2009 the VA rolled
out I believe four different deployment health care models
nationwide. The deployment health care model that I speak of
was one that was rolled out in Washington State for the
American Lake VA Medical Center and it was put together by Dr.
Steve Hunt with the VA. And this model provided one wing of a
hospital floor in which an interdisciplinary care team for
deployment health, Post 9/11 veterans exclusively, that had a
pharmacist, social workers, psychiatrists, psychologists, and
primary care on one team and weekly they would meet to discuss
the caseload of that team. And the wait times were short for
care, the quality of care was up, the management of our
medications were the best that we had seen within the VA.
However, after 12 months the team began to dissipate. And
what I was told and have been told since by Dr. Steve Hunt and
others within the VA is that this was a temporarily funded
program and it was too costly to provide this level of care to
exclusively Post 9/11 veterans within the VA Center when a
facility director has to provide care for all veterans, to set
aside the amount of funding that it required to provide this
level of care for only one portion of that population was not
practical.
The Chairman. Mr. and Mrs. Somers, I would like for you to
elaborate if you would just a little bit on the fact that you
talked about Daniel having innumerable problems with VA staff
being uncaring, insensitive, and adversarial. Saying literally
no one at the facility advocated for him. Could you give us any
specific examples, or generic examples?
Mrs. Somers. Absolutely. Probably the most--if I do not
make it through this Howard will finish--probably the most
egregious event was when Daniel presented to their ER----
Dr. Somers. It took Daniel a lot to go to the VA facility
and some of the things that have been mentioned here were part
and parcel of the fact. I mean, even along the highway in
Phoenix there were speed traps on the highway. And when the
lights flashed, that would give him flashbacks. Even if he was
not the speeding, if he was going by on the highway at the
time. So it was very difficult for him to drive down to the VA.
It is busy. But he presented there in crisis. He presented to
one of the departments, to the Mental Health Department. He
said he needed to be admitted to the hospital. Now this is
something that we have been told by his wife, who as Jean
mentioned has a B.S.N. in Nursing, and his mother-in-law who is
a psychiatrist. And he told them this on multiple occasions. So
he was told that the Mental Health Department, they had no
beds. And he was told by the same department that there were no
beds in the Emergency Department.
So this brings up another few issues. But the fact is that
he went into the corner, he was, he laid down on the floor, he
was crying. There was no effort made to see if he could be
admitted to another facility. There are two major medical
centers within a mile and a half of the Phoenix VA. The VISN
issue is another issue that we need to discuss at some point.
But he was told that you can stay here, and when you feel
better you can drive yourself home. That is just an example of
the lack of advocacy, the lack of compassion that we know that
not only Daniel has encountered through the VA system. We have
met other veterans, specifically in Oklahoma City, who had
very, very similar circumstances at different VAs.
The Chairman. Do you know if he ever spoke to any VA
official about how he was treated?
Dr. Somers. We do not. The other problem, of course, is
that these visits are never, the appointment system is so
antiquated that things are not even documented. There is no way
to go back into the system and to document a contact in the
system. So no, as far as we are aware, Daniel did not speak to
anybody at the VA about this. It is just something he would not
do. He just would not do. It was a feeling of I tried, and this
is just another example of what the pressures that are brought
to bear. We brought not only the VHA but the VBA issues into
account. And these are just things that altogether just became
overwhelming.
Mrs. Somers. My believe is that he still had that military
mentality. You know, this is what somebody in authority told
you. I have to accept it. I cannot go above and beyond. I just
need to accept what they are telling me.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Michaud.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Once again,
I want to thank the panel for coming today to talk about your
stories and your family. And I really appreciate it. I know it
cannot be easy.
So Dr. Somers, my question is can you go into further
detail on about why you think it is important to encourage
every veteran suffering with PTS and other combat related
mental health issues to supply a list of points of contact and
get a HIPAA waiver?
Dr. Somers. Interesting that you say HIPAA. Because once
somebody says HIPAA that sort of stops the conversation. We
have been trying to deal with this issue because it takes a
village, a large village, to not only treat but to recognize
and to approach our veterans who might be in crisis. We feel it
is critically important to expand what we call the support
network. And actually at this point a HIPAA change would be
wonderful. We really, we ran a medical practice and Jean can
tell you that what we have come to learn is what HIPAA really
says is not what, is not how, well is not how it is practiced.
People are afraid of HIPAA. So they take the regulation that is
actually there and they take it to the nth degree. And really
you do have some options under HIPAA, especially if you feel
that somebody is a threat to himself or to his family or to the
community where you can reach out to family members or a
caregiver in a situation like that.
But we feel it is absolutely critical to identify prior to
deployment, certainly during deployment, and after deployment
what we call the support network so that these people can be
educated as to what experiences their loved one, or maybe it is
not even a loved one. Maybe it is a high school football coach,
or maybe it is your, you know, math teacher, or maybe it is
your best friend from the second grade. But so these people can
be educated as to what the experiences might have been, what
the signs and symptoms of crisis might be, and educated to the
fact that you do not take no for an answer. And if you see that
somebody is in trouble that you can direct them to the proper
treatment, to the proper authority, to the proper medical
facility. And that is not actually something that you have to
worry about with HIPAA. So that is one way that we feel that
HIPAA does not even come into the equation.
HIPAA would come into the equation when you are in
treatment. And we really feel that if you are treatment and
there is an issue, then the therapist should certainly take the
opportunity to contact the closest people to the patient.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you. My second question related to
HIPAA, because actually I heard a case where even though it is
the Department, the Veterans Administration, where VHA
employees could not talk to VBA employees and they used the
excuse of HIPAA. Have you heard that, have you had that problem
with your son?
Dr. Somers. Well we have not heard that that was a HIPAA
issue. We just felt that it was a total communication break
down issue, the fact that the computer systems were not
compatible within the VA system itself. And the fact that as
far as we know Phoenix still uses a postcard system for
appointments. And nobody could document the fact that postcards
were even sent. And we know for a fact that after Daniel died,
and the suicide prevention coordinator contacted his widow, and
they were talking, and they were going to send her some
information as to what kind of counseling facilities were
available for her, and she asked where are you going to send
it? They in their system had an address that was four years
old. And he had been involved with the VBA and with the VHA
over that entire period of time.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you. I guess my time is quickly running
out. For Mr. and Mrs. Selke, how long had Clay been taking
medication for his PTS and how long was he denied medication
through the VA?
Mrs. Selke. He began taking medication in 2007 when he was
back at Twenty nine Palms recuperating from the gunshot wound
in Iraq. My understanding is that he, again, received
medication that he needed when he was active duty. His care
seemed to be good and he felt comfortable with it. When he
transitioned to VA care he was never denied medication. What
happened when he moved to Houston he was told that they could
not refill his prescription that had, that followed him from
the L.A. VA and he had been in Grand Junction, Colorado for a
short time. He basically was having to start over as a new
patient. And I had this reinforced yesterday in a meeting, that
it was, that was one of his major frustrations and that I have
heard from fellow veterans of his. That when they go to another
facility they have to go back through everything. All the, you
know, just recounting everything. And it, that seems ridiculous
to have to have that type of redundant system.
When he was told in Houston that they could not refill his
prescription, he was told you need to call the VA that
prescribed it, wrote the prescription earlier, and see if they
will refill it for you. He was leaving the country. He was
going to Haiti for a couple of weeks and he needed to have
enough medication while he was gone. And Clay was proactive
enough and was able to do that. He just was determined, and he
said okay, and he took care of it. And he did get it from the
Grand Junction VA. When he came back from Haiti and went to his
appointment in February, that was with a psychologist, a
clinical psychologist. And my understanding was he was never,
he was not given a new prescription until he saw the
psychiatrist on March 15th. So his first appointment was
January 6th, second appointment February 10th or 11th, finally
March 15th, sees a psychiatrist.
Also part of that issue was when he was active duty Lexapro
was finally found to be the drug that worked best for him. Name
brand drug, no generic. But they, he had been on Paxil, he had
been on Zoloft, he had been on just a variety of drugs. Lexapro
seemed to work the best with the least side effects. When he
came out of active duty and into the VA system, apparently
generic drugs are the drugs of choice and he was given. I
believe it is the generic for Celexa, which is close but it is
not the same thing. At that time there was not a generic for
Lexapro. When he arrived at the Houston VA and asked for a
refill, and also somewhere in those first couple of
appointments he said that he would like to go back on Lexapro
as that worked better for him with less side effects, when he
met with the psychiatrist he said, okay, I understand from your
background that that has worked before. And he did give him a
prescription for Lexapro.
So Clay leaves on March 15th the psychiatrist's office,
goes downstairs to the pharmacy at the VA to fill his
prescriptions. He spent two hours in the pharmacy. He was
called up to the pharmacy desk to pick up his prescriptions and
given the Ambien for sleep. I have more on that that I want to
share with you. And then given, told that they cannot give him
Lexapro, they do not stock it because it is not a generic, that
it will have to be mailed to him. So it was mailed to him
sometime within the next week, I think they told him a week to
ten days that he would get this.
A couple of issues there. If you know about anti-
depressant, anti-anxiety medications, you cannot stop them
cold. You cannot wait for it to come in the mail and then
expect that it is going to work quickly. It takes a while for
these to work. They have to stay built up in your system. He
was extremely frustrated. He called me, as I said in my
testimony, on the way home and said, ``I just, I cannot go back
there.''
The doctor at the Houston VA, I have spoken with him
several times since Clay's death. He has been very forthcoming.
I appreciate very much the information that he has given me.
Something in our last conversation, which was just a couple of
weeks ago that I had not heard before, I had been concerned
about Ambien. There have been just a lot of conversations among
parents and spouses and family members of veterans who have
died of suicide and they have been on Ambien for sleep
problems. Whether there is a connection or not, I do not know.
But it is a high number that are given that when they have
sleep problems. And sleep problems are a common, huge problem
with Post Traumatic Stress. The doctor the other day in talking
about specifically Ambien and sleep medications, he said, well
actually Ambien would not be the best drug for the type of
sleep problems, and I believe the term is hyperarousal but I am
not 100 percent sure on that, for the type of sleep problems
that come from Post Traumatic Stress. The nightmares, and
flashbacks, and that sort of thing. There is another drug, it
starts with a P. I do not have it with me. It is like----
Sergeant Renschler Prazosin.
Mrs.  Selke. Prazosin. And he said that really is the drug
that actually works best for that type of sleep difficulty. And
I was so stunned that I could not ask the question, well why
did you not prescribe that drug for him as opposed to Ambien
that he had been given over and over different times before? So
that haunts, that has been something that has haunted us for
three years.
Because in that two-week window, something went wrong. Clay
had moved back home. He had just returned from Haiti doing
volunteer work, which gave him great, just great hope. That was
great therapy for him. He had started a job. He had bought a
truck. The Friday before he had called and asked me to meet him
and he bought a truck for work. And by Thursday the next week,
he was dead. We were with him over the weekend on that
Saturday. The whole family at various points during the day saw
him. He had lunch with his dad. We went to a movie, Richard and
I went to a movie with him that evening. I could, I just, I
just could not believe it, that within five days he was dead.
So we know he suffered Post Traumatic Stress, we know he
was treated for it. He was very open about it, sought help. And
that, that two-week window is just a mystery that haunts us.
And we have done everything we can to try to find out answers.
So----
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Lamborn for five minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. I want to thank you all for being here. You
have given so much. And I thank you, I know the committee
thanks you, and I know our country thanks you.
I would like to ask about the role of families in treatment
and therapy. I have a constituent who came to me and her
husband was stationed with the 10th Special Forces at Fort
Carson, Colorado, where I represent. And he took his life. And
she is an advocate for a program that has a holistic approach
involving families, whether it is parents or spouses. And I
would like to ask any one of you who has insight as to whether
there should be more of a role for families in the treatment
programs that are offered through the VA? Or is there a lack
there?
Mrs. Somers. We certainly during the time that Daniel was
with the VA, certainly feel that there was a lack. And again,
we feel it has a lot to do with fear of repercussions under the
HIPAA law and also a total misunderstanding of what the law
currently is. And I would like to take your point further and
say it should not just be family. I think we would all like to
say we did not have dysfunctional families, but we know that
there are dysfunctional families out there and that is why we
started using the term support network. A lot of young men and
women undoubtedly joined the service to get away from families,
but it does not mean that they do not have a support network.
So we would kind of like to get away from the whole blood,
kinship viewpoint and say it is a support network.
I think it goes without saying, I recently read a report by
National Association of Mental Illness. There is no question
that family involvement is beneficial. There is just no
question. It becomes more of an issue I believe, and it is why
Howard and I have actually been trying to work with the DoD to
get them to identify a support network. Because certainly in
Daniel's case, Daniel was a geek. But he was at his absolute
healthiest, mentally and physically, after he joined the Army.
And he went through basic training, he was in great shape. If
they could have identified right then, and said, Daniel, give
us a support network for you. Who would you write down? You
know, I mean, he had really, really good friends. We hope we
would have been on it. Certainly his wife would have been on
it. His mother-in-law probably would have been on it, his
brother-in-law. It would have been so helpful to have that list
then. Because when he got back home he was not capable of that
anymore. I like to say, you know, not from a legal standpoint,
but he had diminished capacity. He was not making correct
decisions.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, okay. Anyone else? Mr. Selke.
Mr. Selke. Thank you. Our experience, like most, probably a
lot of families is, we did not know what PTS was. We had no
idea. Clay was again very open about it, told us that he had
been diagnosed with it, told us that he was on medication,
seeking counseling. But we did not know the ramifications of
that. And like most of our warriors, they are strong. And so he
was, you know, put on a real good act. Had we known the extent
of even what he talked to his counselors about, the idea that
the Somers have broached about regardless of the HIPAA
legalities of that, for if in fact somebody has that
conversation with their, that counselor, somebody outside of
that counselor and the patient needs to know. The patient could
identify somebody who would then be able to be aware of what is
going on and to say, you know, this person needs help.
Clay, looking back, there was all kinds of things going on
in his life that were just red flags. And we did not know. And
there is a lot of literature out there, there is a lot of
information. I believe that any family who has an individual
involved in the military after they come back, or really kind
of anytime, they should probably just assume that there may be
some sort of PTS involved there.
The suicide deal, Clay actually had a conversation with
Susan. And said, ``Hey Mom, you know, I thought about it but I
would never do that to you all.'' You know, he actually
addressed the issue and then lied about it, you know, to us. So
the family plays a huge part in really being advocates for the
individual and being able to just watch, and watch for signs,
and then maybe be able to do something about it.
Mr. Lamborn. Well in conclusion I would just have to say
the VA needs to learn best practices and have programs
available that include families everywhere.
Mrs. Selke. If I could add something to that? Going back
through Clay's medical records, for whatever reason when he
died I immediately wanted his medical records. I just wanted to
read everything I could and try to grasp what was going on. He
had apparently as early as November or December of 2009 spoken
to someone in the VA in the L.A. VA about suicidal ideation,
suicidal thoughts. That is on one of his reports at the end of
2009. He had separated from the Marines at the end of April,
2009. I knew nothing of that. We did not learn until the Fall
of 2010 when he told us. He said, ``I have struggled with this
thought, but I could never do that to you all. I just cannot.''
And I do not think, I think in his mind he believed, ``I am
thinking these thoughts but I could never do that.'' As far as
we know there were two times during the Fall of 2010 that he
did have enough serious suicidal thoughts that he did reach
out. One time he called and talked with me. Another time he
spoke with a close friend. And then after that second time he
shared with me, you know, that, or with all of us.
So we knew, in 2010 at the end of the year we knew that he
had struggled with suicidal thoughts and we also knew that he
was on medication and were assuming that with Post Traumatic
Stress and suicidal thoughts and that the VA knew best how to
take care of him. I begged him, ``Please, let us go to private
care. We will pay for it. We know great psychiatrists,
counselors in Houston. Let us do that.'' He would not do that.
He was adamant. He said, ``I have served in the Marine Corps
for four years. My medical care is to come from the VA. They
owe that to me. I do not want to go to private care. I want to
talk to someone who has either been in War or knows about War
and Post Traumatic Stress and the things that I have seen and
done in War. I do not want to go to private care.'' And that
was just his personal feeling. We have heard that from other
veterans as well. That is, as difficult as the system is, that
is their comfort zone and they need to be, feel that they can
be taken care of.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you so much. Thank you. My hearts go out
to you.
The Chairman. Mr. Takano, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is very difficult
to listen to your stories and I am very touched by them. So I
definitely want to thank all of the families for being here
today.
So let me ask this, Ms. Selke, I believe a lot of veterans
have that same feeling. And therefore I do believe that we have
to, it is incumbent upon us to make sure that we get it right
at every facility. Because veterans are expecting that. They do
not want to see this be a burden to their families financially.
I am very much open to making it easier for non-VA care to be
available and with that I wanted to ask Dr. Somers, you are
also a medical doctor, Dr. Somers.?
Dr. Somers. I am a urologist.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Can you, can you tell me about the
state--you are from the Phoenix area?
Dr.Somers. Actually, I practiced in Phoenix. We currently
live in San Diego.
Mr. Takano. Oh, in San Diego. I am from Riverside, which is
north of San Diego, as you know. I went to visit my own VA in
Loma Linda. They are able to get veterans to see a family
practitioner in 24 hours if need be. I am not so sure about
mental health care or a psychiatrist. They indicated to me
there is a shortage of psychiatrists. And I recently visited a
new Kaiser facility and the director of that Kaiser facility
told me that, I asked him if there was a, what shortages he was
experiencing, and he identified behavioral health and
psychiatry. Can you tell me if there is, if there are general
shortages in your area of these kinds of practitioners?
Dr. Somers. There is a shortage of mental health
professionals nationwide. And there are many issues that go
into it. Certainly reimbursement is one. We know one of the
people that Daniel has been seeing because, and this is another
issue of continuity of care, he was forced to go outside the VA
system just because he could not be seen in Phoenix. There was
just no availability, no mental health available. And I think
you have to divide psychiatry and psychology. And I think with
these people who are suffering from PTSD, it is the
psychologists and the psychiatric social workers who are
providing most of the care as opposed to the psychiatrists
themselves. But psychiatry and psychology are incredibly
important and what happens is if we try to recruit into the VA
then the community is losing that mental health component. And
it is a huge issue. It is an issue that has to be addressed by
our medical schools, by society in general. But it is not just
an issue here and there.
Mr. Takano. Well here is the thing. Dina Titus and I,
Representative Titus and I, and O'Rourke have offered a bill
that would increase the number of residencies at VA hospitals.
And of course I expect a number of those residents, if we
approve it, a number of those residents would stay----
Dr. Somers. Right.
Mr. Takano [continuing]. And practice at the VA, but also
some of them would go into the community as well.
Dr. Somers. Right.
Mr. Takano. You know, my thing is if, even if we do approve
non-VA, make it more easy, easier for----
Dr. Somers. Right.
Mr. Takano [continuing]. Vets to use that areas like mine,
they are still going to have trouble finding that care, you
know, in the community.
Dr. Somers. They will. And they are going to have trouble,
even if you have people in the community you are going to have
trouble finding people in the community who are aware of
military culture, and who are aware of the issues that veterans
face. And again, that just brings up another whole issue, a
whole other series of issues.
Mr. Takano. Well, I wish I had more time. Maybe I could get
your information to my staff.
Dr. Somers. Absolutely.
Mr. Takano. Because I am trying to understand also your
criticisms of the Vista medical records. There is also an issue
of the interoperability with the VA and non-VA practitioners,
right? So----
Dr. Somers. Right. And then that is something that we
address also, especially if we are going to be trying to, with
the PC3 program, and with the other issues that are being
promulgated now, there has to be communication between the VA
and the providers who are seeing the veterans who are being
referred out. So huge, huge----
Mr. Takano. Huge issues.
Dr. Somers. [continuing]. Issues that have to be addressed.
Mr. Takano. Sergeant, I think I understand your point of
view as well about your doubts about, you know, radically
restructuring it. We have got to try to get it right in the VA
facilities because of that expectation that the Selkes' son
had, you know, that was their comfort zone. So we have got to,
I think, do both things at once. Make sure that every VA center
has, you know, excellent mental health care as well as try to
provide some options.
Sergeant Renschler. Yes, sir. My concern with a bill that
just increases the number of practitioners at a hospital, we
are not solving the issue with effectiveness of care. So it
really has to be a systematic approach to solve the efficacy of
what care is being provided as well as the numbers to
accommodate the sheer overwhelming amount of veterans that are
trying to access that already broken system. So I just wanted
to add that, sir.
Mr. Takano Thank you. Mr. Chairman?
The Chairman. Dr. Roe, you are recognized for five minutes.
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think as a father
of three and a veteran I appreciate your courage to come here
today and speak. It is really heartwarming. And I know that it
is very difficult for you to do, and it has been difficult to
sit and listen to the testimony. There are a good number of
veterans sitting up here. I am a veteran of the Vietnam era.
And I just want to thank you for that, and being here. And I
can tell you this past weekend I returned to something very
joyous for me. It was a reunion of a bunch of young boys
growing up in the sixties who were all Eagle Scouts. And all
but one was there that, of our friends, and he did not make it
out of Vietnam. So I can tell you that this loss that you have,
that you are sharing with us, is very, very helpful. But that
loss will go with you, as it does for my friend of almost 50
years. So thank you for your courage to be here. I know it is
very difficult.
And Sergeant Renschler, I think you bring up a great point,
all of you have today, in the coordinated effort that you
brought forward. That team approach I think was very good and I
certainly do understand what the VA was saying was that if this
works for the OEF veterans, it should work for all veterans.
And the majority of the suicides that are occurring are
veterans of my age. So I think that this needs to be expanded
if that method that you put forward, it looked like it worked
extremely well, should be looked at.
Dr. and Mrs. Somers. bring up an incredible point. I know
Dr. Somers you probably dealt with some, as I did, some primary
care in your practice when you were a urologist. You do not
just get to be a urologist. Your patients get to know you. And
they share a lot of things with you. And dealing with this is
very complicated. As you all point out, and Ms. Selke so
eloquently pointed out, is that this approach of caring for
people with PTS or chronic mental illness is extremely
difficult. Dr. Somers and I can go into the operating room and
remove a tumor. That is easy. This is much more difficult to
do. And those signs and symptoms are very difficult to spot.
Because Ms. Selke, you saw your son when he was actually, you
thought, doing very well that week before he passed. And I
think as a doctor that has been one of the things that troubled
me all of my career, was trying to figure out when you would
have a patient that would take their life was why did this
happen? And many times that week or two before things seemed to
be going well. You thought things were getting better.
I think, Dr. Somers, you and your wife brought up something
I think that is extremely important, that a good friend is
probably as important as a good doctor. A good person to lean
on. And I think you have to do what Sergeant Renschler was
talking about, to have this very sophisticated team together
for people in need. But you also just need someone. It may not
be a family member, like you pointed out, it could be a coach,
or a pastor, or whomever it might be in your life. It could be
a family member. And I think putting all that together is a
real challenge. And I know we will hear later from the VA about
what they plan to do. But any further thoughts along that line
would be helpful. If anybody would like to share just some of
your thoughts about what we could do.
Ms. Portwine. I think it is important for the transition
program. I know that before Brian went to Iraq, the first tour,
he went to California where they have a base where they teach
them, like they make it like a Iraqi town. So they learn how to
control crowds, take buildings, and all that. But when they
come back, it is just boom, you are there for a week and then
you are out in the community. There is no transition. Why
cannot they use those centers that they use to send them where
they could have psychiatrists, psychologists, and look at them,
give them assignments, see if anybody has poor concentration,
poor memory. You know, and use these resources that we have.
You know say, okay, now you need to go do laundry, give them a
list of things to do. See if they are able to do that and
observe them. We cannot just take them like cattle and put them
through a bunch of questions and then let them go in the
community where they do not have their brothers to confide in.
When they come back they have put their life on the line to
trust these other brothers. They would die for them. They come
home, they do not have anybody they are going to trust that
much. And nobody that has not been in war is going to
understand so they do not open up. The most people they open up
to is their brothers.
Michigan has a program called Buddy to Buddy that they put
together one veteran, you know, that has been home with the
veteran so that if they have any problems they are going to
open up to that person much more than they are a therapist. Or
have group therapy. Let the veterans talk among themselves.
They could, you know, have a group of eight, ten veterans and
then have group therapy. And maybe they could confide in each
other. Because it is going to take a while to build up trust
with a therapist, if you do.
Dr. Roe. I totally agree. Thank you very much for your
courage in being here today. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Brownley, you are recognized. I
apologize. Ms. Kirkpatrick, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
all of your for your courage in being here today. And I
appreciate what you said about once a diagnosis is made and
medication is prescribed, staying on that medication. And I
really want to know how often our veterans have to refill those
prescriptions. And I would just like to hear from each of you
what you have learned about that experience. Are they given a
30-day supply? They have to go constantly back? Sergeant, can
we start with you? And then we will just work our way down the
panel.
Sergeant Renschler. Yes, ma'am. So at our facility in
Washington State, medications are given on a 30-day supply.
There is an option for mail refills. The system is pretty
confusing and I normally mess it up pretty well so my wife has
to manage that for me for the most part. You have to be able to
put in a request three weeks before you need it and I usually
forget until I am about to run out. And so then I am off my
meds for a long period of time, which is never good.
As far as the other medication issues that have been
discussed, continuity of medications from one facility to the
next, I am in the southern part of Washington State. And people
who are coming up from Portland, Oregon, which is about an hour
away, are on medications that are not transferrable to the VA
facility where I am at. And so they have to start all over as a
guinea pig, as what was discussed earlier, trying medications
that they may have already tried in the past to get to the
point where they are able to approve a non-formulary medication
that they had at another facility, as well as the transition
from DoD to VA care. It took about four years for the DoD to
balance about nine medications for myself. And when we
transitioned to VA care many of those medications were not on
the formulary and we had to go back to the guinea pig phase
again, and we ended up on 14 in order to utilize medications
available through the VA. So it is, there are many issues as we
are talking about that.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. That is just unbelievable. Any other
families want to----
Ms. Portwine. Brian was never put on any medication. They
diagnosed that he had depression, Traumatic Brain Injury, PTS,
but he was never put on any medication. He was put on
medication for his back when he was thrown from the Humvee,
Naprosyn, and a muscle relaxer, and that was just temporary.
But they never even prescribed, screaming out three times a
week with nightmares and having your brothers wake you up, and
then telling the therapist how embarrassing that was, I think
you need to be on some medication.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Agreed.
Mr. Selke. These medications are so subtle and they are so
particular to the individual, it is just mind boggling that
there is not an easy way to identify and work with the
individual vet to determine exactly what the cocktail, if you
will, looks like, and then be able to without, you know, to
just seamlessly transfer that to wherever that vet is. These
people are young and they are on the move. And you know, they
are all over the place.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Right.
Mr. Selke. And so that, those barriers just need to be
taken down.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Dr. and Mrs. Somers?
Dr. Somers. Yes, thank you. And thank you, Representative
Kirkpatrick, for being such a support and a help for us. There
is multiple issues that have to do with the medications. Just
the fact that the formularies are not the same is a huge issue.
And it just does not affect veterans at the VA system. There
are veterans who are retired from the military who see
physicians both at the VA and the DoD. So they are seeing
people at both different medical centers and they cannot be on
similar medications from one to the other because the
formularies are not the same.
The problem is that not only does the VA use 99 percent
generics, but they use the cheapest generics. So Daniel, who
had not only PTSD and TBI, but full blown Gulf War Syndrome,
which included irritable bowel, had only certain medications
that he could tolerate. So maybe the chemical in the medication
is the same, but the bonding agent is different. Maybe he is on
a medication that he only has to take once or twice a day, but
the VA gets a better price, so now he has to take it three or
four times a day. And the change in the medication changes
everything. So I mean the issues, the issues are just huge. It
is not only that, and the other thing that we have heard, and
from unimpeachable sources, is that VAs vary, as we heard, with
their pharmacy policies. There are some VAs where you can go
and you can get a brand name medication with no problem. Other
VAs that essentially it is possible to get a brand name
medication. So, I mean, that just brings up this huge issue
that we have, is why there is so much variation in the entire
system, why we cannot have more uniformity within the VA system
as a whole.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Dr. Somers. My time is up. And
thank you.
Dr. Somers. Sorry.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. But let me just conclude by saying your
testimony is heartbreaking and I can barely hold back my tears,
and I thank you for being here. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Runyan, you are recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Chairman. And thank all of you for
sharing your stories and truly being great Americans and great
patriots because your stories are going to help people in the
future. And thank you for all that.
A couple of points, and I think Dr. Somers was just talking
about it. And I think we see it all day. And we talked about
this in the hearing the other night. It almost seems like the
VA is so fragmented that there is no overwhelming mission from
the top with flexibility below. That is, and I think we are
admitting there is a structural breakdown in how you are
actually going to conduct business. And that is really where we
are at, whether you are talking VHA or VBA. It is the same
issue. And we have yet to hear, I think next week we are
digging into some of the VBA issues, also. It is a culture.
And one other point and then I will ask one question. And I
know Mrs. Somers was talking about it, and Dr. Roe also
validated it. When you talk about community and you talk about
support networks, these men and women are spending more time
away from the health care facility than they are in the health
care facility. So friends, family members, you know,
classmates, buddies all have to be part of the healing process.
We are not doing that. And I know the term holistic has come up
a few times. I think Sergeant mentioned it a couple of times.
It is part of the healing process. There is no silver bullet to
cure somebody. You have got to be able to help them in many
different ways.
That being said, in the VA's testimony they mention suicide
prevention coordinators are supposedly placed at all VA medical
centers and the large clinics. They are supposed to follow up
with veterans that are at high risk. Were any of your sons ever
contacted in that first month after they were designated high
risk by a VA suicide prevention coordinator?
Mrs. Somers. We are not aware of that. I mean, the fact
that they did not even know where he lived would bear proof of
that.
Dr. Somers. And that is one of the issues that we are
dealing with also, and that goes into the whole support network
issue. Is that, and we have spoken to so many, so many families
in the same situation, is that Daniel was married. And that
basically shut us out of the equation. And that is where if we
had the opportunity, if we could do some changes in this
misinterpreted HIPAA regulation where we could have been more
in touch with his therapist and they would have felt free to
talk to us, where we feel that we could have been more help.
But since he was married it was as if we did not exist.
Ms. Portwine. I think that is an important point is like
when Brian was injured in the tank explosion, I was notified.
You know, it was three in the morning and they called me from
Fort Hood saying that he was injured, where they had taken him,
you know, he is back with his unit, you know. But yet you
diagnose somebody with PTSD and TBI, which are, can be life
threatening injuries, and nobody notifies you. I mean, that
just does not make sense to me.
Mr. Runyan. Anyone else?
Mrs. Selke. Your point or question of being flagged as a
high risk, this is something that came up that really baffled
us, I guess. When Clay was transitioning or moving to Houston
and starting to go the VA in Houston, his records apparently
from what I was told, those records were not seamlessly
electronically sent. They did not have his records from L.A.,
and that is where the bulk of his time was once he had gotten
out of the Marines. So as I looked back through those medical
records, as I said there were at least two or three times in
there that it is talked about, and he talks and admits to
having had suicidal thoughts. So I assume that he was flagged,
would have been flagged, as a high risk. I mean, it says on the
medical record high risk highlighted. When he comes to Houston
VA, nobody knows he is a high risk. The psychiatrist did not
have anything other than Clay saying this is what my past
history has been and this is the medication I have been on. So
that is a great point as to when are they flagged as a high
risk? Do any family members know that? The only way I ever knew
that anybody called him a high risk was when I got his medical
records and poured over them after he had died.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Brownley, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to join
my colleagues in thanking all of you for being here and sharing
your stories and certainly through your stories about your
sons, it certainly to me I feel their patriotism through your
stories, and their overall most sincerest commitment and
service to our country. So thank you for being here.
I wanted to ask Sergeant Renschler a question. And so in
your service when you were in theater, was there any support
system in place for you to go to get any kind of, you know,
mental health support while you were there? Hearing Brian's
story, it was very gut wrenching to hear it. And, you know,
just to wonder if Brian had a place to go to while he was in
theater, how helpful that might have been in terms of his time
there and his transition coming home?
Sergeant Renschler. Ma'am, thank you. When I deployed was
2003. It was right after the initial surge. It was a completely
different war theater. We really did not have anything set and
established at that time. So to answer the question, no there
was not anything. However, again, I work with many, many
veterans currently and active duty members. And I have been
told in recent deployments in Afghanistan that after major
events take place there is sometimes availability to have a
type of a crisis debrief. It is somewhat available. It is not
streamlined, it is not across the board, but it has been
implemented on some level.
Dr. Somers. If I may? The problem is that we know that
there is an effort in the DoD to destigmatize mental health
issues. But if you are in theater, I would venture to guess
that it is going to be incredibly rare for somebody to take
advantage of that, because all of a sudden they are going to be
taken off duty. And the whole idea to destigmatize it is to
say, okay, you come in for treatment, but then once you are
better then you will be able to rejoin your unit or you will be
able to regain your security clearance. But while you are under
treatment you are not with your unit and you have lost your
security clearance. So I mean, the issue is a huge issue. And
we know from people that we have spoken to that the people at
the top are aware of this and they are trying to deal with it.
But there is just so much you can do on a boots on the ground
level.
Sergeant Renschler. Well, if I may? So there is two
separate levels here. There is a crisis response, much like a
CISM team that can go out and basically say, hey, this is what
happened, these are the normal reactions to this type of a
situation, if you experience this find somebody to talk to. So
more of an education, immediate response. And that effort has
been available. As he stated, most military servicemembers and
veterans, as I stated earlier in my testimony, are not going to
go and say, gee, that was a horrible experience, I think I
should talk to somebody before I have issues. They are going to
wait until it becomes a crisis point in their life and
debilitating in nature before they seek treatment.
Ms. Brownley. I just feel like if it was part of the
culture being in theater that there is kind of constant
dialogue that is going on. That that would have to be helpful
to the men and women who are there. But----
Ms. Portwine. Brian did tell me one time when they were on
the 15-month tour there was one time that they lost four people
in one mission. And when he was out there the morale was very
low after that, because these were people that were high up,
First Sergeants, and the Lieutenant and that. So they sent
someone in and when the soldiers would go in and talk with
them, he asked the same question. Well, was it sort of like a
movie? And that just insulted them almost. As just like, why
would you ask such a silly question? So they all shut down. And
I think by not processing those thoughts then you are going to
internalize them so they are never dealt with. I think even
before they are in theater, I think in basic training, they
should be taught PTSD and while they are deployed, and to
report on each other for their own good, and in transitioning
home. I do not think we can say it enough. That is my opinion
on it.
Ms. Brownley. Yes, thank you, thank you. I think it just
confirms that, you know, we prepare our men and women to go and
serve, and to go to War. We do not prepare them very well to
transition back.
Dr. Somers, you talked about HIPAA and the barriers to
HIPAA, and we have talked about the family involvement piece.
You mentioned also modern technology--am I . . .? I yield back.
I apologize.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Dr. Huelskamp, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to say
thanks to the moms and dads and the Sergeant for your riveting
testimony. I look forward to asking the VA some follow-up
questions, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ms. Kuster, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Ms.  Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to all
the families for being with us today. I think for many of us
sitting here today the pain is to recognize your commitment to
give meaning to your sons' lives. I am a mother of two sons, 22
and 25. I cannot fathom what you are going through. But I want
you to know that we will do our part to give meaning to their
lives. And it just makes me feel that personally I am becoming
more and more anti-war, pro-veteran. And I think our country
has had those priorities misplaced, getting us into conflict
but not being focused on the cost, society costs to our country
and to the population. These extraordinary young men and the
promise that they held, going to Haiti, and making a difference
right here.
So I am going to focus in, because I think from your
experience you can really help the VA and the DoD to understand
what could make a difference, and I want to commend you all for
the specificity of your recommendations. But in particular I
have been trying to understand best practices and whether there
is any effort within the VA where there are practices that are
known, ground therapy for example, or the types of medications
that are helpful. Have any of you in any of your discussions,
whether within the VA or since then, the experience that you
have had meeting with people, have any of you come across any
effort to share best practices with the transition,
particularly around PTS and TBI, and just the trauma. How we
can help people coming back from this level of trauma. And I do
not know, maybe we could start with the Sergeant. If you are
aware of any types of programs that are effective?
Sergeant Renschler. Thank you, ma'am. There are great
things that are effective. But the problem is--even though we
can group veterans together in a large sum, and combat
veterans, and another category, it is hard to label one program
as effective for all. So many find group therapy programming
very successful. Many find combat veteran support groups very
helpful. Some find one-on-one peer mentoring very effective and
helpful. This is why when we are talking about evidence-based
therapies, best practices of the VA, pushing CBT, CPT, these
things can be deemed as best practices. But many veterans are
not ready to go through such intensive therapy. They would
rather pace themselves. And so while it can be very effective
at squashing the problem, I cannot really say that there is one
thing that is straight across the board going to work for
everybody. And that is why I stress the importance of a team
that works together to bring together what is best for each
individual veteran in a veteran centered care rather than a
systematic care that the veteran has to adhere to.
Ms. Kuster. So you are looking at a more individualized
approach, but a team approach. And I think, Ms. Portwine, you
mentioned that others on the team may see something in the
care.
Sergeant Renschler. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kuster. I also want to visit this issue of HIPAA.
Because I am an attorney. I have worked 25 years in health
care. There is definitely a waiver process. And this happens in
private sector medicine. Do you, are any of you aware of, and
through your review of the records after the fact, or have any
of you experienced the VA asking the patient at any point in
their service for a waiver to identify people that they would
be willing to have their medical records shared with?
Mrs. Somers. I know we had specific--Daniel ended up going
outside the VA because his psychiatrist retired and they said
we do not have anybody for you to see. And at the time he was
having suicidal ideation so his mother-in-law, who is a private
sector psychiatrist, referred him to somebody that she knew in
the community. As he was seeing that person we actually asked
him can we be a part of what is happening, he said he would ask
her, but my guess is that he never asked her. And we never got
the feedback. It was just embarrassing, is probably the closest
word we could come to for him to have to share that
information.
Ms. Kuster. Sure, I understand.
Mrs. Selke. I can speak to that a little bit as well. Going
through Clay's medical records from Houston, from the VA, there
was a form in that assessment and there is a question that says
do you want us to or will you allow us to, I think it just said
do you want your family to be contacted regarding your care,
and he had checked no. And as difficult as that was to read, I
know, you know, I know him. And it is, I cannot even imagine,
and I really, I just cannot even imagine. These people are so
strong in the first place to raise their hands and say I will
go, and they go to war. And they have these injuries. And
especially with the mental injuries, it is so difficult to feel
that you are a burden on other people. And I know Clay felt
that even though he knew how much he was loved,
unconditionally. Any of us would do anything to help him. But
he was 28 years old. He had been a Marine scout sniper. He, you
know, it was, you just want to be able to take care of
yourself. And get the medical care you need. So it did not
surprise me to see that. But there was a question of would you
allow your family.
Ms.  Kuster. Thank you. My time is up. So I am sorry to
interrupt you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Coffman, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think, first of
all thank you so much for the service of your sons, and
Sergeant, in your case, your own service. And my heart goes out
to you for your losses as a veteran myself.
A question that I have is, do you think, certainly Sergeant
in your case, and then for the parents, in the cases of your
sons, was VA overmedicating them in lieu of giving them
therapy? Sergeant, why don't I start with you? And then I will
work this way.
Sergeant Renschler. Sir, thank you for that question. This
is really a culture that begins with DoD and extends into the
VA. It is an issue that we battle with on a daily basis as we
provide support and service to veterans and active duty members
where I am at in my local area. Part of what I do through the
ministry that I am in is providing support groups through the
chaplain's channels. So I deal with this very closely on both
sides. Medication is no longer being used as a tool to subdue
the symptoms, but we work on the deeper issues.
Mr. Coffman. No, what does the VA do?
Sergeant Renschler. The VA specifically utilizes
medication----
Mr. Coffman. Okay, that is my question.
Sergeant Renschler [continuing]. To control it and keep
them, suppress the symptoms----
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Sergeant Renschler [continuing]. Without working on the
deeper issues, sir.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you. Please.
Ms. Portwine. Brian was never put on any medication, only
for his back when he had that problem.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Okay, yes.
Mrs. Selke. Yes, Clay was on quite a bit of medication. And
as I said, he termed that he felt like a guinea pig, just
constantly being given something different.
Mr. Coffman. Do you think that they chose medications then
in lieu of----
Mrs. Selke. Sure.
Mr. Coffman [continuing]. Therapy? One on one therapy?
Mrs. Selke. Yes. The only one on one therapy that he spoke
of that seemed to be effective, at a certain point in L.A. he
went to a Vet Center and had a counselor there that he really
liked, and felt that he finally found somebody he could talk
with.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Mrs. Somers. From Daniel's point of view, I think part of
his problem was that he also had Gulf War Syndrome, which
manifested with so many physical symptoms. So yes, he had a 24-
inch by 24-inch drawer full of pill bottles, but I think it was
because he was having such incredible interactions between the
different drugs that he was taking for PTS and the Gulf War
Syndrome.
Dr. Somers. And Daniel was not being seen by----
Mrs. Somers. VA----
Dr. Somers [continuing]. VA psychiatrist after six months
after he was home, just because he never got the postcard that
he was supposed to get to assign him another provider.
Mr. Coffman. How much of the stress or the factors leading
to suicide do you think might have been related to the fact
that, I mean, I can tell you having been to Iraq, I mean, first
Iraq War, and then the second, that when you come home there is
a huge sort of, I guess maybe separation anxiety. That you were
with, that you develop these interdependent bonds and this team
around you, and all of a sudden it is just gone. It is just
gone. And people fall into very dark and deep depressions
sometimes. And I think it is easier for those that come back
and then they have a long period of active duty with the same
people that they served with. And I am wondering if you might
comment? We will start with this side of the table.
Mrs. Somers. This is a problem certainly with National
Guard. Daniel was a member of California National Guard with
the military intelligence.
Mr. Coffman. Mm-hmm.
Mrs. Somers. They are routinely separated from their main
unit and assigned to other units. Daniel went to Iraq with an
M.P. unit out of Texas, so he was already not with the unit
that he trained with. He went to Iraq. When he came back his
wife had moved to Arizona to be with her parents, so he is
California National Guard, deployed through Texas, and then
ended up in Arizona. So he had no support group whatsoever
close by. It would have been phone call and email.
Mr. Coffman. Yes.
Dr. Somers. And this is a known issue. I mean, Reserves and
National Guard, it is a huge issue. And not to take away, of
course, from regular servicemembers, and in all branches of the
service. But it is a much bigger issue for those who do not
have the opportunity to come back to a defined facility and
spend time like you said with the people they were deployed
with.
Mr. Selke. Great question. The bonds that these men and
women form in combat are just incredible. And so it is very
difficult for them to leave service and come back to their
communities. Clay probably stayed in, he really struggled about
going home to Texas or staying in California. I think the
reason, one of the reasons he stayed there for a while was
because his close friends, Marines, were staying there, and
continuing in his life.
One of the tragedies in Clay was he moved back to Texas and
he really wanted to consider going into working for the fire
department, a paramedic, that sort of thing, and was having
some struggles with that. After he died we found out that I
think three, three of his group were actually in the greater
Houston area. And one of them particularly had actually gone
through all the steps, he was like a year ahead of him, going
into the fire department. And it really could have helped. Just
the knowledge that those people are there would have helped. So
there is a big break there in leaving service and going back
into the community.
Ms. Portwine. When Brian went first he was with 1st Cav,
and that was a deployment that was supposed to be 12 months,
and then they extended it to 15. Of course he was very, very
tight with all those brothers, and they still are very, very
connected online and text and everything. When he was in
college then for the year, then when he was called back the
second time his unit was already home for the year. So he was
put with Louisiana National Guard. And he had no idea, those
were completely new people. So you can imagine then when you
are already damaged, and you wake up screaming three times a
night, and have anxiety and panic attacks, that, you know, very
difficult. I think he did bond with the people, he was very
social. But it was not the same type of fun he had with the
first group.
Sergeant Renschler. I think it has been stated well. And
just to highlight on that, the Battle Buddies system is so
culturally ingrained in the military community and you really
become a family unit with those around you that you serve with.
And separating from that, and especially our wounded as they
are shuffled from their units into a warrior transition
battalion they are separated from that family unit. Even though
they are with other servicemembers, it is different. And then
they transition out and they lose connection all together for
the most part and begin to isolate themselves after that loss.
And that is a very difficult thing. And I think that is why
programs such as the VA's Peer Mentor Navigator Program are so
essential, is we should look at that and look at the way it is
being implemented, and improve upon that. Because
servicemembers and veterans connect best with other veterans,
especially those who have shared experiences and that can help
each other navigate through the difficulties that they
experience within the system.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. O'Rourke for five minutes.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
join my colleagues in thanking you, and just telling you that
what you have shared with us today is so powerful. Sergeant
Renschler, your story, the story of Brian and Clay and Daniel,
I hope will force us and the administration and this country to
treat this issue with the respect that it deserves, with the
attention that it deserves. And to get the results that our
veterans deserve. And beyond the power of the stories, which
are just, it is just hard to put into words the effect that
they are having on me and I think my colleagues on this
committee, you have also come to the table with solutions and
proposals to improve the system.
I love the idea that we think about the VA restricting its
responsibilities to becoming a center of excellence for war
related injuries. I have not thought about that before. And I
do not know what the effect would be. And I would love to hear
from other veterans and veteran service organizations. But I
love that you are thinking about a big idea to transform a
system that is obviously not working today but has not worked
for a very long time, from everything that I have learned so
far. This idea of an interdisciplinary approach to taking care
of veterans when they return, I would like to know more about
that. And I think it makes a lot of sense given your earlier
testimony. The buddy to buddy system that you brought up,
identifying a support network when these servicemembers are
still enlisted, are all excellent ideas.
So what I would like to ask you is, I have received so much
more value from this testimony today than I ever have from a
representative of the VA, including the reasons why we should
be focused on this, the ideas and suggestions on how to fix it.
So I would like to ask each of you, if there was some formal
process to involve you in fixing the VA, would you like to
participate? And then secondly if you have any other ideas,
because there have been so many good ones that have come
through so far that we have not raised today. I would love to
give you an opportunity to share that. And maybe we can start
with Dr. Somers and work down.
Dr. Somers. Well you know we want to be part of, if we can,
whatever efforts. And we submitted as part of our testimony 15
pages of problems and potential solutions. So there are a lot
of really good people who can be very beneficial to try to help
the system. You know, we just do not have the time to get into
specifics right now. But to answer your question, for sure we
would like to be involved if at all possible.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Mrs. Selke. Absolutely. We would be happy to do whatever we
can to help. I want to kind of shift the focus a little bit off
of us as parents who have lost sons and lost children. Words
cannot describe that. But I sit here and look at Sergeant
Renschler and listen to his story and we are surrounded by
veterans behind us, a lot of them from the IAVA group. If there
is any blessing or silver lining in Clay's death, we have
become friends with so many of these young veterans that have
enriched our lives. I do not know where I would be without
them. I mean that sincerely. They just have enriched our lives
so much. So whatever we can do. We cannot do anything to bring
back Clay or Brian or Daniel. But what we can do is do
something, whatever it is, to make life better for Sergeant
Renschler and for all these veterans behind us and all of them
all across the country. All veterans, not just the Iraq and
Afghanistan, but all of them. We should not have to be reminded
of that. And yet we seem to have to be reminded that we need to
do a better job. So we are happy to do whatever we can to help.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Mr. Selke. Anytime, anyplace, we are available. Part of the
process for us to heal and I think for everybody at this table
is to have the opportunity to go beyond our personal losses and
to address the veteran community as a whole. And to do whatever
we can to take care of those fine men and women. And so that,
the opportunity to be in this community here, and be able to
talk, and be able to be heard by people who hopefully have the,
I believe certainly have the heart and hopefully have the
ability to make some things happen.
The VA is very, very complicated. It is a huge animal. I
know there is a lot of things that need to be dealt with. There
is a lot of really, really good stuff, and there are some big
problems. I think if we can just focus on the individuals, just
focus on them as people in need, as patients, on their care.
What do they need today? And then build the system and modify
the system, do whatever based on that. I think that will take
us a long way. The focus needs to be these veterans, totally.
Mr. O'Rourke Thank you. My time is expired, but Ms.
Portwine and Sergeant Renschler, would you like to just briefly
indicate whether you would like to continue to be involved and
perhaps in a more formal way to include your ideas and
experiences in this process of reforming it?
Ms. Portwine. It would be an honor. It would be an honor
for me to help make a change for the veterans to be. It would
be like paying it forward.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Sergeant Renschler. Certainly I echo the anytime, anyplace.
I not only bring my own battlefield perspective but that of all
the veterans that I work with, and I can only offer that much.
But thank you.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Cook, you are recognized for
five minutes, sir.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank the group
for being here. I know this is really, really tough. Sergeant,
for your input, this is tough to listen to. And it is even
tougher for you guys.
The comment about the parents not knowing. I am not
surprised. A lot of people the worst thing in the world, when,
after my second Purple Heart I did not want my parents to know
what was going on. And this is going to be the problem that I
think all of you are sharing, that common denominator. You
know, everybody that goes through these experiences are going
to have huge psychological problems. But who are they going to
share it with? Are they going to share with a psychiatrist or a
psychologist that does not understand the military culture, the
veteran culture? They are not going to open up. You know, you
need that connection. I think the Sergeant made a great point.
And your comments about the Wounded Warrior Program, where they
have that. The actual battalion where when somebody has got a
problem they go into that system there. And I just want to get
your feelings. And maybe I am going down the wrong road.
Because I think they need it, as somebody that has a problem
they need an ombudsman. Somebody that is going to look out for
their interests. That if they are at a particular hospital,
they can go to the administrator. They can go to anybody and
say, hey, wait a minute, this is an immediate situation. This
is general quarters and we have to have a meeting right now or
somebody is going to die on your watch. And can you comment a
little bit more on that? It is pretty much what you were
talking about, Buddy to Buddy, the same things over and over
and over again. But to cut through the red tape right then and
there with individuals that understand the severity of the
problem.
Sergeant Renschler. Yes, sir. This is a crucial element, is
to have somebody to come alongside of the severely injured, cut
through that red tape, and get treatment now. This is something
that we have experienced first hand. I have experienced, I
shared it with some of the folks from the Wounded Warrior
Project recently. I had a veteran that we did a crisis
intervention on attempted suicide, and we had to remove him
from his primary residence. We got him to a position of
stability and I found out that he had never accessed care at
the VA facility. So I told him that that is the next step. He
went down and he was actually denied treatment and told that he
would be able to be seen in three months after telling somebody
he had attempted suicide the night before. And I went down
there and met with that veteran and we walked in, and I said
this is an unacceptable answer. And we got the department head
to come out and say I will intake him today. We have a program
we can start him in next week. And that saved that veteran's
life that day. But there are thousands more a day that are
getting the no and not getting that extra answer because they
do not have somebody to advocate for them. And I am not saying
that to toot my own horn. I am saying that if we had more
people out there advocating for these veterans we would be able
to save a lot of lives and get better care.
Mr. Cook. Yes. I just got back from, I went down to Camp
Lejeune, where I was, I spent a lot of time down there. And I
saw some of the folks, including my platoon sergeant, who was
my platoon sergeant 47 years ago. And we talked about the
infantry unit, and you never forget the Marines that you lost.
13 May, 1967, horrible, horrible day. You never forget their
names, the occasion. Just like you are never going to forget
this. But what you have to do is try and make the system
better. And right now I think it is broken in terms of not
capturing those individuals and those thoughts, their morale is
just down to the point where they are going to do something
bad. And if we do not correct it now, it is our fault. So----
Dr. Somers. Yes, it is a systems issue within the VA. And
our feeling that everybody who works in the VA should have only
one purpose in mind, and that is to advocate for the veteran.
And it is the person who sits in the corporate office to the
person who cleans and empties the wastebaskets at night. That
is the only, only thought that they should ever have.
Mr. Cook. Doctor, that concept of the ombudsman, or for
lack of a better term, somebody that is ultimately responsible
or somebody that is that advocate for that person in trouble--
--
Dr. Somers. And we agree that there needs to be an
ombudsman. We know about the Navigator program and that is a
great program. We know that they are doing a much better job of
that out in San Diego. But it is not only the ombudsman, it is
not only the Navigator, it is every single person----
Mr. Cook. But it should be an SOP, totally----
Dr. Somers [continuing]. Totally, totally, totally----
Mr. Cook. Standard operating procedure for every hospital.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Colonel. Ms. Brown for five
minutes.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, let me
thank each and every one of you. Let me just tell you recently
I did some work with the Marines and they would just be very
proud of you, your sons. So thank you very much for your
service.
You know, I have to say that we are talking about the VA,
but this is not just the VA. It is DoD. And this hearing should
be VA/DoD. Because it is DoD that sends people over and over
and over again to combat, and there is no transition as far as
when they come back. So it is a bigger problem. And to sit here
and just say, well it is the VA. That is just not true. It is
just not true. And we need to deal with the problem.
The fact is we have been fighting a War with the reservists
and we have sent them over and over again, and they did not
have the support that they need. I have gone out when they are
deployed and they just, they do not have all of the other
resources that the other military branches have. So we are not
doing the Wars the way that we need to, and the system is
fragmented. And so as we develop a comprehensive system, let us
get everybody in the room. Let us deal with the system the way
we need to deal with it.
Now you mentioned the formulary. Now the VA and DoD, we
insist that they negotiate the prices of the drugs to keep the
costs down. Now what is wrong with the way we are doing that?
Because in the regular market it is illegal for the Secretary
to negotiate the price of the drugs, which I think is dumb.
Dr. Somers. Well there is no problem negotiating the price
of the drugs. The problem is the drugs are not the same. So
that for example Lexapro, which is, you would definitely want
the DoD formulary as opposed to the VA formulary.
Ms. Brown. Mm-hmm.
Dr. Somers. No doubt about it. And I know firsthand that
you can basically get anything you need with relatively little
hassle through----
Ms. Brown. But I thought the VA was the one that was doing
a lot of the research, not the DoD----
Dr. Somers. The research has nothing to do with anything.
The only thing that has to do with it is the actual drug that
you are being prescribed by your provider. You can do research,
and actually that was one of Daniel's issues, is that there is
a problem doing research because of the fear of the FDA and the
DEA and Schedule 1 medications and things like that. So that is
a totally different issue. The problem is the formularies are
not the same. And as I said, you have got patients, not only
veterans who are being discharged, but you have retired
military who are being seen at a DoD hospital and at a VA
medical center, and they are eligible to seen at both.
Ms. Brown. Mm-hmm.
Dr. Somers. And they are under medication restrictions
because the formularies are different. So that is the big
issue. We need to make it a single formulary, bottom line.
Ms. Brown. Okay----
Mrs. Somers. Excuse me, and just in addition to that----
Ms. Brown. Mm-hmm.
Mrs. Somers [continuing]. It is like if a person is doing
really, really well on a drug, they should be able to stay on
that drug.
Ms. Brown. And the doctor can override that.
Mrs. Somers. Just because you can get it for ten cents
cheaper, and it can have major effects on their body.
Ms. Brown. Absolutely. But the doctor can override that.
Mrs. Somers. Right, and----
Dr. Somers. Ma'am, not, no but what Jean is saying is
different. It is still a generic, but as I said before it is a
different formulation of the generic.
Ms. Brown. Right, but----
Dr. Somers. So and especially as was said, I mean that is
what is so important to have these groups of the multispecialty
groups that are, the interdisciplinary committees, or whatever
they are, that are going to community amongst themselves.
Ms.  Brown. Well I definitely think that is something we
could work on. Ms. Portwine, I think you made a very important
point. Your son you realized was having serious problems, and
yet he was redeployed.
Ms. Portwine. yes.
Ms. Brown. And he was not given the medication. I mean, it
should have been a time out at that point.
Ms. Portwine. Well even on the form you can see it said no
go, that was crossed through, and somebody stamped, the
coordinator that sends the people, I forget what they call
them, put go.
Ms. Brown. Well, now that is DoD.
Ms. Portwine. So that tells me they had hesitation in
sending him to begin with.
Ms. Brown. That was DoD.
Ms. Portwine. That was DoD.
Ms. Brown. Yes, ma'am. Well thank you very much.
Ms. Portwine. You are welcome.
Ms. Brown. And what I am saying is it is a lot of work that
needs to go on, and it is not just VA. Thank you again for your
service.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ms. Walorski for five
minutes.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
the panel for being here. I can assure you that this is how
things change in this country, it is when brave men and women
step forward and say to a concerned body like this of
Republicans and Democrats, sitting here listening to your
story, I cannot even imagine, I cannot pretend to imagine how
tough it is to sit here and relive this. And I think I can, I
think I can safely say that we are committed to bringing right
to all of this wrong. And every one of you have hit the nail on
the head by saying, every one of you have said the story is
about the individual veteran. And you know, I have only been on
this committee for 18 months but the last three months the
chairman and the ranking member have led an intense
investigation into what the heck happened to the VA. From the
day that it started to the mission today. And every layer of
this onion that we have peeled back comes down to the same core
issue: nobody is advocating for the veteran. And the culture
itself, and when we talk about systemic problems and the
culture itself and we, and the Secretary is removed, and a
bunch of people are removed, and we are sitting here trying to
be able to help America reset a button. Because Americans
believe in our veterans. They sent us here to fight for our
veterans. And I want to just applaud your effort.
You have made such a huge difference here today. This is
how laws change. This is how policy becomes correct, and this
is how we move forward in this country. We do it together.
Unfortunately sometimes it takes the disaster that we have had
in a bureaucratic system of the VA. But you know, the
frustrating thing for me is I have 54,000 veterans in my
district and every time I describe my veterans I talk about I
have 54,000 veterans and their families in my district. And I
want to applaud your effort on two huge issues that I think
that we can address in this Congress and we can help move
forward on this issue of mental health. The one is the support
network. I cannot even tell you, and I know you know, how many
constituents have called our office in Indiana, and the wife or
the husband is in tears, and they are begging and they are
advocating for the spouse that the VA says HIPAA prohibits me
from allowing you to get involved in this. I have gotten
personally involved in some of these mental health cases in my
district, calling the directors and regional directors, and
trying to advocate for my constituent on behalf of a spouse.
And the answer is still no, HIPAA overrides. And I even asked
the question, do you have a different law of HIPAA? Do you
subscribe to a different definition than we do? And the answer
was no. HIPAA overrides. And so just having a support network.
To be able to come in and be that bridge between somebody who
is dying and the system. And I applaud that effort. And I
think, I mean, I am going to make sure that we do everything we
can to get that part of the law changed. Because we can bring
advocates into the lives of these struggling men and women. And
for the spouses that are trying to hold the families together,
we can do that, too.
And I want to just thank you for your commitment as well on
the issue of keeping this focus where it belongs. And, you
know, I think someday, I do not think this is a quick
turnaround. But I think you have brought light, transparency,
and accountability to another layer of what America needed to
hear. And while you are sitting here today talking to us, and
while we are trying to relate and share your brief, and we are
trying to find solutions to move forward, you have had an
opportunity to talk to the American people today. And I
guarantee you that every single person that you are an
influence to, that has followed your story in the states that
you are from, I am going to hear from my constituents today and
say I am just, I relate to that mom and I relate to that father
and I relate to my fellow serviceman. And I just think it is a
tribute today. This is how government works. And we have a
commitment to make sure we restore not your sons, but certainly
the America that they have been fighting for. Certainly our
trust and their trust in us as a government who asks them to go
fight for freedom and fight for liberty, our finest heroes in
this nation, and to be able to reinstitute to them by
continuing to root out the bad actors and the bad policy in the
VA, and together set a reset button.
So I just want to applaud your efforts and thank you so
very much for helping us reset an organization that started out
as a great noble effort and really has run into a bureaucracy
that has just run amok. But you have our commitment today and
my commitment certainly that none of what you have experienced
will be in vain. So thank you so much for being here. I
appreciate it. I yield back my time. The Chairman Thank you.
Mr. Walz, for five minutes. Mr. Walz I would like to yield the
first minute to my colleague Mr. Peters, who represents the
Somers.
The Chairman. One minute to Mr. Peters.
Mr. Peters. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Walz. I
want to start by thanking the chairman and the committee for
allowing me to be a guest. We are not members of this
committee, Ms. Sinema and I, but I do not think there is
anyplace we would rather be this morning.
It takes a lot of courage to do what you are doing, and I
just want to say thank you for that. And also to let you know
beyond the power of your stories it is the education you
provide that only you can provide. These are insights that only
you have and so it has been very valuable to us. And while we
are new here I can tell you that from time to time you see
testimony that is going to make a difference, and that is
certainly what has happened today. I think you can feel very
confident that those brothers that you talked about, and
sisters, will be heavily affected and helped by the time you
put in and the effort you put in today.
And I also just wanted to thank in particular Howard and
Jean Somers for your leadership, for the time you put in on
behalf of Daniel, and for the education you have given me. I
look forward to continuing to work with you to make these
issues, to resolve these issues and to make things right with
the veterans that the VA sees. Thank you.
Mrs. Somers. Thank you.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Chairman. And again, thank you all for
being here. I am sorry I never got the chance to know Daniel or
Brian. I did have the privilege and the honor to know Clay, and
not only know him, to work with him on veterans issues. And the
profound loss is felt by everyone who came in contact with him.
And it shook me to the core because of someone so strong and to
your point on we do not, you are not going to notice it, you
are not going to see it. And these are very special
individuals. And Josh, you and I have become friends over the
years. We were in St. Paul a few weeks ago working with the
Wounded Warrior Project. So I do, too, applaud you. It is, you
hear it from the colleagues. And this is a committee of
heartfelt folks that want to get this right.
I would just mention, and I think all of you get this, at
this point, and I think the frustration we all feel, solutions
and results are all that matter. I am done with it as you all
are. I am done with the talk. I am done with the pilot
programs, if you will. I understand we need to do some of that,
but there are suggestions that are concrete that can be put
into this. But I want to read you something.
I came here on the 3rd of January of `07, the honor of
being elected to Congress. On the 9th of January I started
working on a bill. And one of our colleagues, a Vietnam Veteran
pilot Leonard Boswell put in, it was the Joshua Omvig Suicide
Prevention Act. And here is a couple of things that it said.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs should develop and carry out
a comprehensive program designed to reduce the incidences of
suicide among veterans. The program shall incorporate the
components shown below. Staff educations for compassion amongst
and recognizing risk factors, proper protocols for responding
to crisis situations, best practices, screening of veterans
receiving medical care, tracking of veterans in a timely
manner, counseling and treatment of veterans, and designation
of suicide prevention counselors throughout that, and on, and
on, and on.
They did not do it. It was in law. We passed it. We gave
the speeches. We had the signing ceremonies. And we went back
home and said, gee, we made a difference. And it is the very
same things. And here you sit, just like Joshua Omvig's parents
sat, come up from Iowa to testify on this.
So I guess the thing I would ask of all of you is that this
is the second, the VA is the second largest government agency,
behind DoD. Yet we have one of the smallest committees. We have
committees that I do not even know what they do, they have got
like 80 staff on them, and they do it. So we can give lip
services or we can get serious about how we are going to do it.
We can have this. Or we can allow, if this crisis passes, and
the American public's attention focuses elsewhere, or whatever.
Our veterans will be coming back. There is veterans sitting
behind you from Vietnam and others. They have seen this movie.
They have seen it before.
Here is what I think is different. I think there is no
doubt in my mind, the American public wants to get this right.
And they are entrusting us as their representatives to get this
right. And the commitment I have seen from this chairman and
ranking member as a member of this committee, this is
different. It is different than the seven years that I have
been here. It is different in how we are focusing. It is
different amongst the advocacy, and we cannot let this pass.
So what I would tell you, Ms. Portwine and some of you
asked on this, you mentioned, and thank you for this, Chairman
Miller and Representative Duckworth and myself, along with
IAVA, Paul, VFW, a bunch of folks, are going to be out there
this afternoon. We are going to introduce Act 2182. And here is
what I would say is different. And this was a well-intentioned
bill and well-written, except look to your right, these are the
folks that helped write the bill. So Susan was in the office
and making the suggestions. Look to your left, Josh was there.
The Somers' suggestions are incorporated into this. And we are
going out because what we have got here is, and this is I guess
the silver lining. And you get tired of hearing that. There is
no silver lining when your son is not coming home. But what you
have done is ask for a solution. I would ask each of you as Act
2182 starts to move and Senator Walsh does it in the Senate,
let us together make sure it does not end up as the Joshua
Omvig Act. The Secretary had all this authority. He had it. The
American people through us said do this, and they did not do
it.
So I would only just state to each of you, as my colleague
Mr. O'Rourke said, this is how democracy can work best. This is
how we can incorporate people in it. And this idea of wringing
our hands at who could have anticipated this, really? This bill
was started in 2007. It was anticipated before and here we sit
in 2014.
So keep the faith, we have to. But again, I would say this.
The cameras, the TV, the stuff that is there, whatever, none of
it means a damn thing. If we do not get results this time then
shame on us. Because here is the thing. I am not going to get
to meet Daniel. I am not going to get to meet Brian. I am not
going to see Clay again. But I dang sure want to see Josh. I
want to see him here and forward. I want to see the rest of
them. That is our calling.
So you have got the right guys up here. You have go the
right commitment from the public. You have got the right folks
sitting behind you writing good legislation. Now it is going to
be can we do it? With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Dr. Benishek, five minutes. Dr.
Benishek Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I too would like to
thank you for your courage to be here today. And please know
that your efforts today will make a difference at the VA. I
just really want to thank you.
Mr. and Mrs. Somers, I want to thank you too for that 15-
page primer there. That had some really good ideas. And I
really appreciate you all taking the effort to put together a
document like that.
Mr. and Mrs. Selke, you mentioned, and I was disturbed by
the comments that you found that the environment of the Houston
VA was stressful. So could you elaborate on that? What
specifically led to that conclusion? Have you been there since?
Has it changed? Can you tell me a little bit more about that,
when you described----
Mrs. Selke. I went by myself that day and have not been
back there since. For whatever reason I just compelled to go
and quickly get his medical records. And I wanted to see them.
And it was just, again, for ten weeks worth of care there, so
there were not a lot.
You drive up to the facility. It is huge, as they all are
huge. There were so many people milling around out front, big
crowds, lots of people that I do not know if they were there
waiting for appointments or if they, you know, just do not have
anywhere else to go and hang out there. You go inside and it
is, I likened it to an airport terminal, in a way. You go in
and it is just a hub. Very busy, lots of people milling around,
lines, the cashier lines look like in an airport where you
would line up to get your tickets or something. Just, it was
very stressful for me. And of course I was in a grief mode but
not a Post Traumatic Stress mode. I just could not imagine. I
could visualize Clay going in and I could understand why when
he left that day and he called and he said, ``I cannot go back
there.''
No one was at the information desk. You walk in the front
door and they were on a break or something. But no one was
there. And I looked around and finally found somebody that
could direct me to where the medical records are and went and
retrieved those. Before I left I just remember standing there
for a few minutes and just imagining----
Dr. Benishek. Right.
Mrs. Selke [continuing]. If I were a veteran, if this were
Clay, how----
Dr. Benishek. How do you negotiate this? You mentioned
another thing and that was your son had voiced concerns about
the care he was receiving. Was there specific concerns that he
raised?
Mrs. Selke. I am not sure I am remembering what you are
referring to.
Dr. Benishek. All right. Okay. Well let me ask Sergeant
Renschler a question. You wrote that the combat veterans in
particular often approach mental health care as hesitantly or
distrustfully. How would you suggest that we change the dynamic
to ensure that veterans who need mental health care feel more
comfortable accessing the care?
Sergeant Renschler. Yes, sir. Thank you. It kind of starts
with what she was just sharing. Even at our facility we have
two, Seattle, and then we also have American Lakes. Seattle is
a large hospital building, not laid out very user friendly. And
myself, I have a Traumatic Brain Injury that I have overcome
fairly well but I get lost and confused in that place real bad
and there is not a lot of friendly people there to direct me. I
get better customer service at Best Buy, quite frankly. A
little bit of care training would go a long way within the VA
medical centers.
My other medical center closest to me is a campus with
many, many buildings. And the building numbers do not even make
sense, so I will be in 81 and I am told to go to Building 3,
which is right next door, and Building 61 is across the campus.
And the numbers make so sense, and the facility is confusing,
overwhelmingly packed in and not a lot of people to help guide
and navigate a very confusing situation. So for one, just
recognizing who the audience of a veteran is and making an
environment that is conducive to healing would be a start.
Another one would be as I discussed earlier and I keep
bringing back to that interdisciplinary team, it takes rapport.
It takes developing a relationship and rapport with the veteran
to get him to go beyond surface level issues with a physician.
I am going to go and I am going to triage myself. On active
duty, especially in the infantry culture, sick call was very
discouraged. And if we went to sick call you were a wuss, and
you pretty much got crap for it for the rest of the day. And so
we do not go to sick call unless something is debilitating in
nature. And that just kind of sticks with you for the rest of
your life. And so as I am muscling through ridiculous pain my
wife will eventually stop and say when are you going to go see
a chiropractor or get some help? And it is just that mentality
of just suck it up and drive on. And that is what these guys
are doing with mental health issues. And that is why when they
get there it is a crisis and needs to be treated as such. And
so there is a two-fold answer here. Number one, the VA needs to
recognize that there is going to be a lot of crises and come
back in three months is not acceptable, or come back in 14 days
to intake so that you can intake in another 14 days to get
treated in three months. Still not acceptable. But instead to
have a team to say, hey, welcome here. This is your place. This
is your team. These are the people caring for you. This is what
we are going to do for you, and provide better customer service
for one. But for two, develop a relationship with trust and
rapport so that I can know that I can confide in these people
to provide the quality care that I know that they should.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you.
Sergeant Renschler. I hope that answers it, sir.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you very much. I am out of time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Titus you are recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here. Your stories are just tragic and heart wrenching. But I
hope you can take some comfort in knowing what powerful
advocates you are. I mean, you have told your stories so
eloquently, so orderly, so thoroughly, that it really, it will
help us to move forward.
I have just been noting down some things that we need to
address. And I think we are at a point where we really can make
a difference. So in addition to the things that you have
suggested I want this committee and the people in the room, and
I ask you for your help on this, for us to address some other
things that I think are also related to the problem.
First, you are obviously very loving families. You were
there for your children. But many of your veterans do not have
families like that. There are many homeless veterans, they are
sleeping on the streets, they do not know where to go. They do
not have somebody they can turn to. And so we need to figure
out a way how we can address the problem for those veterans as
well as for those like your children. So I want us to not
overlook that.
A second thing is the VSOs are there to provide services to
veterans and when they do not have that ability to bond like
they do while they are in the military the VSO is there. They
cannot be there 24/7 like your band of brothers and sisters
can, but they are there. And maybe we need to look at some ways
that we can help them to do more outreach and better fill that
gap for when people come out.
Also we have heard some horror stories about the medicine
and all the different drugs. I think we begin to hear that
medical marijuana is a possible way to address PTSD. Let us do
not leave that off the table as we move forward.
Even something as simple as the notion of companion dogs.
That is something that you hear, too, that many vets, if they
have a pet that helps them get through some of these troubled
times. So let us keep that on the agenda. And you mentioned
about being a firefighter. Let us also remember that when
veterans come back they do not just need health care, both
mental and physical, but they need to be able to transition
into civilian life with easy access to education so some of
their training counts towards college credits or employment to
retrain and have jobs so they have something to look forward to
that takes a little of that burden off.
So those are all things we need to look at the big picture.
And I just thank you very much for committing to continue to go
down this path with us. And I would ask you, too, do not leave
anything off the table. Anything you can think of, no matter
what it might be, now is the time for us to address it. So I do
not know if you want to comment. I do not want to put you
through more questions but I want you to know that that door is
open.
Ms. Portwine. I have one more comment. I know that the VA
has the emergency crisis line, 1-800-273-TALK. But I work for
an insurance company and we have what we call Nurse Line. And
anytime a member can call 24/7, 365 days a year. Why do we have
to wait until it is a crisis for anybody to talk? When they are
starting to feel depressed would be a great time for a nurse to
be able to assess and triage what care this person needs. Do
they need to go immediately now? Can it wait until tomorrow?
Can it wait the routine three days? What do they need? I think
by waiting until it is a crisis line, you are more down that
slippery slope.
Mrs. Somers. And if I might add, we are fairly new at this
whole political thing. But I came across something called the
independent budget, which if I am interpreting correctly the
VSOs actually put together for Congress. And I would ask that
next time that comes to you, that you really look at that
really, really closely. Because these are your veterans talking
to you. Thank you.
Mrs. Selke. I would like to just add quickly one of the
things that Clay said over the years that sticks with me, and
it just is wrong. He would say over and over, ``I have to
grovel for my benefits.'' And I just think we need to wake up
as a country. Our veterans should not have to grovel for
anything. And it just should not be so difficult to get the
care they need, at all.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Wenstrup you are recognized for five
minutes.
Dr. Wenstrup Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I cannot thank
you enough for being here today, and the sacrifices that you
have made. And I pray that the sacrifices that you and your
entire family have made will make us a better nation at the end
of the day. I think most that sign up to serve have that
intention, that they will make this a better nation at the end
of the day.
I am a physician and also a Reservist, and I served in Iraq
for a year. That has led me to want to be here today. And one
of the things that I know as a doctor, and I am sure Dr. Somers
you can relate, that when you have patients with, and
regardless of their problems, there is a level of anxiety
because they have something wrong. Whether it is
musculoskeletal or mental, it does not really matter. Something
is wrong and there is anxiety. And it makes it even more
difficult and it heightens the anxiety when you have all these
administrative problems. And I know you started to deal with
that in private practice, more so maybe than when you first
started, where you, the prescription you think is best they are
not allowed to have, those types of things just increase the
patient problem and actually trying to take care of the
patient. And we really are here, I will say on this committee,
not just to complain but to come up with solutions. And so your
input today is extremely valuable.
And one of the things I see is if a doctor is credentialed
at one VA, he should be credentialed at every VA. That allows
him to go from one VA to the other if there is a deficit
sometime. And if your prescription is good at one VA it should
be good at another VA. You can do that if your patient is out
of town. You can call another state and get the prescription
filled. And when you cannot, think of the anxiety that comes
with that. These are things that we can fix, and these are
things we have got to fix.
And I will also contend that it is a big difference, too,
being in uniform and out of uniform as far as care. As a
Reservist, you know, I can just remember, you know, being with
that family for 15 months. And then all of a sudden I am the
last one left at the airport and going home. And when I get
home they say, well, you have got 90 days to go back to work.
Well, I said, that is not going to work. I am going back in two
weeks. You know, I am getting my house in order and go back to
work because you have to have something to go to. And so when
you are just wallowing out there, and I think we need to
engage, now this is the DoD side, engage on what you are doing
when you go home. And have the VA be part of that as well. And
we have got to blend these two systems together. We have to
engage in the post-deployment activity. And so when I have been
in uniform I have had the opportunity to serve in preventative
medicine, and particular suicide prevention. And you know, we
learn a lot, and we get a lot of training, I think, in uniform
of what to look for, and have that battle buddy, and the types
of symptoms you are looking for. And sometimes when the
decision is made that you are going to take your life that
there is a calmness. And you look for somebody giving away
their stamp collection or coin collection because they have
made up their mind. And they spend more time with family
because they have made this decision that their problems are
going away.
Those are the types of things we get. We get those in
uniform but we do not get them afterwards. And for Guard and
Reserve in particular, you just go home. And I did see, I have
seen at Fort Lewis, for example, families being engaged with
programs but that does not happen the same way with Guard and
Reserve, and it is a different animal.
But I guess more than anything else what I want to do, when
you want to talk about solutions, we can all be trained to look
for symptoms and look for signs, but how do we go about
preventing the very ideation of taking one's life? What are we
doing that creates a situation where someone comes up with that
ideation, that this is the best way to go? And that is the type
of input we need. And that to me is really preventative
medicine more than anything else. And I hope that through this
we find our way. Because our suicide rate is going up in our
civilian population as well. So we have a national problem
here, not just a military problem.
Again, I applaud all your input. It is extremely helpful to
us. And as you have seen, this is a determined group here that
wants to make a difference in the history of our nation as we
move forward. And we are glad to have you as a part of it. So
your input is always welcome, and thank you for commitment. And
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, doctor. Ms. Sinema you are
recognized for five minutes. Check your microphone, there you
go.
Ms. Sinema. Thank you, Mr. Miller and Mr. Michaud, for
allowing me to participate in today's hearing. And a special
thanks to my colleague from Arizona, Ms. Kirkpatrick, who
represents our state's veterans so well on this committee.
I want to thank all of today's panelists for joining us. In
particular, thank you to Daniel's parents, Howard and Jean for
being here. We worked together quite closely since learning of
Daniel's suicide and it is an honor and a privilege to be here
with you again today.
Unfortunately Daniel's story and the story of the other
young men who committed suicide is just all too familiar in our
country, and 22 veterans a day are still committing suicide
even after we have heard the tragedies of the young men who
lost their lives here, and their brothers all across this
country. And as we heard from Mr. Walz, Congress has addressed
this issue before, has passed legislation before, has said they
were going to fix it before. And yet the problem has not only
not gotten better, it has gotten worse.
I have heard a lot of testimony today about ideas to
actually reform the system and make it better. The HIPAA issue
I think is one that the committee would agree needs to be
addressed. I am particularly interested in the pilot program
that Sergeant Renschler participated in. And my question to Dr.
and Jean Somers would be about Daniel. Daniel's experience at
the Phoenix VA, like many, many veterans' experience at the
Phoenix VA, was one of lack of concern, lack of care, lack of
follow through, and a discombobulated system that did not allow
veterans to get the care they needed. In particular one of the
struggles Daniel faced was as an individual who had served in
classified service, he was unable to participate in group
therapy because he was not able to share the experiences he
experienced while in service. And yet at the Phoenix VA he was
unceremoniously put into group therapy. And when requested
private therapy was not able to get that care. And of course,
as we know, he took his own life as a result of being unable to
get that care.
The medical home model I believe in the private community
has provided an opportunity to create patient centered care and
allow civilians to get the care they need in one home, easily,
that is centered directly on their needs. While the pilot
program in Washington was ended because of, well I do not
understand why. They said they did not have enough money for
it, which I think is outrageous and a horrible, horrible reason
to stop providing care that we know is effective and
appropriate. My question for Dr. and Jean Somers is whether you
believe a medical home model would work or could be helpful to
veterans like Daniel? We know that many of our Post-9/11
veterans face co-occurring disorders, PTS, TBI, anxiety,
depression, physical maladies. Would a medical home model have
been a model that may have worked better for Daniel than what
he faced?
Mrs. Somers. Absolutely. As Daniel's irritable bowel
syndrome worsened, he did not feel he could physically leave
the house. I cannot imagine that embarrassment. And then as
Howard mentioned at the time Phoenix has the speed traps set up
on the major highway to get from his home to the Phoenix VA so
he actually had to find a way to get off of the highway so that
the flashing lights would not affect him. So absolutely. I can
see that it would have been very helpful to him just to have
the privacy capability.
Dr. Somers. I completely agree. I think not only the
medical home model but what we talked about, the ability within
the facility for the different people. Because of his IBS and
his TBI and his PTSD, you are being treated, as we learned
here, the term being in silos. And what you have to do is you
have to get out of the silos and you have to combine resources,
combine knowledge. And we have heard of programs such as was
mentioned that are very successful where people can have
problems and for whatever reason have an optometrist or an
ophthalmologist in there. And they say, well, you know, it
sounds like it is not this, but it is this, and something that
you might not have thought of. So the medical home model, the
ability to create these panels of care, I think anything like
that would be overwhelmingly positive.
Ms.  Sinema. Thank you. And Mr. Chair, while Dr. Benishek
has already left I do want to take a moment just to thank him
for cosponsoring legislation that we drafted with the Somers
specifically to address the issue of servicemembers who served
in classified settings and who need appropriate care when they
return to the VA. And I want to thank the subcommittee and the
committee for supporting just a part of the solution to this
issue. Thank you. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Bilirakis, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
it. And I appreciate the panel testifying, and I appreciate
your courage.
I want to ask about alternatives to medication and I want
to ask the entire panel. Which alternatives do you believe the
VA could consider in addressing the mental health issue? I
realize that you have to have some medication in most cases
prescribed, but I am familiar with the recreational therapy.
The chairman and myself participated in a field hearing not too
long ago on recreational therapy, the equine therapy. In my
district they have Quantum Leap Farms, I know they are all
over, they travel from all over the country to go to Quantum
Leaps. The service dogs do wonders, I understand, from talking
to veterans, just to name a few. But can you maybe elaborate a
little bit, whoever would like to, with regard to the
alternatives to the medication for mental health therapy, PTSD,
TBI, what have you? Please, thank you.
Ms. Portwine. Yes. Brian had a brother that came back and
he had PTSD and he had a friend that was doing some gardening.
So he started just working in gardening with him. Pretty soon
they realized they really liked it and their garden was pretty
good, so they decided to make it bigger. Then they thought,
well let us take these vegetables and take it to market and see
if we can sell them. And so now they have this huge area and
they do this. I have also heard of veterans going on farms,
because there is not loud noises and flashing lights and the,
you know, the sound issues that they have with PTSD. So those
are two others.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Anyone else, please?
Sergeant Renschler. We, I mean, we could just put together
an extensive list of what veterans use to cope with these
things outside of medications. Motorcycle riding, bike riding,
equine therapy, service animals. I mean, it just, the list
could go on and one. And that is, I would rather stress the
importance of the fact that there is no one solution. And until
the VA can get to implementing best practices systemwide and
tailor fitting to each individual veteran's needs, and using
these known best practices that exist out there, until they can
do that we are not going to be able to fix anything. I mean, we
can put policy in place saying that you have to provide access
to these individual treatments that exist. But it is the
implementation of that policy that is the major issue here. And
yes, I mean there is, the list is extensive.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. And definitely, one
size does not fit all. Anyone else?
Mrs. Somers. I would like to weigh in on that. That we hear
a lot, a lot of the excuses that we heard at Phoenix was it has
to be evidenced-based treatment. And how do you get innovative
therapy if everything has to be evidence-based before they will
use it? I think they need to open up their minds a little bit
and think outside the box. As you have heard, not every therapy
works for every person. Everything does have to be
individualized. And you know, I have heard of gardening before,
too. You know, as being very therapeutic for people. I think it
just, they need to get out of the mentality that this is all we
can do, we have these blinders on.
Mr.  Bilirakis. Thank you very much. The bottom line is, we
need to listen to the vets, just like you said. Anyone else,
please?
Mr. Selke. I think it is, again to use the word holistic,
it is a community, it is a lifestyle sort of approach. I mean,
the VA needs to do what the VA needs to do the best way the VA
can do it, but the VA cannot do everything. So there is a lot
of, I mean, Clay kind of put together his own kind of therapy
program. He got involved in service. That was helping him. He
got involved with IAVA, you know, Storming the Hill, and their
community. He got involved with Team Rubicon doing disaster
relief programs. He got involved with Ride to Recovery riding
bikes, and that was great for him to be able to heal but it was
also great for him to be there to help his brothers and sisters
heal. The problem, you know, for whatever reason when a person
decides to take their life, they have given up hope. So what do
you do about that? And Clay could do everything. He could go on
these, you know, on these missions, and he could do one-week
bike rides. But what got him was being alone, in his apartment,
by himself, hopeless. And there is questions and matters of
faith there, but it is a community approach. People need to
come to government and volunteer organizations. Partner. No one
organization, not even the government, can do it all. And
everybody needs to realize that and come together and take care
of these folks.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you so very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Jolly, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Jolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to associate
myself with the comments of Mr. Bilirakis and Ms. Titus about
alternative therapies. I think we know they work. Clearly they
do. And Mrs. Somers, I appreciate your comment about evidence-
based. I am not a doctor but I have seen evidence that non-drug
therapies work. And to me that is good enough, and if it is
good enough for the veteran, it should be good enough for the
VA.
I want to talk a little bit about the VA acknowledgment of
non-drug therapies and your experience with that, understanding
every case is going to be different. I hosted a VA intake day
recently. We had about 300 people come through my congressional
office in the district. One man brought a backpack that he
turned upside down on my desk and he dumped out surplus
medications, dozens and dozens and dozens of bottles of them.
Sergeant, you referred to your cocktail going from 11 drugs to
14. Mrs. Selke, I think you expressed some concerns about
Ambien. The Somers have expressed concerns about the use of
generics and otherwise. Just on its face, do you lack
confidence in the way that VA administers pharmaceuticals? Not
on the merits of pharmaceuticals, but in the experience of
pharmaceutical use as administered and directed by the VA?
Mrs. Selke. I mean, I will speak to that. I spoke earlier
about the difficulty of Clay getting a prescription refilled.
But what has been said before, in the private world if I go to
a doctor and they determine I need Synthroid for my low thyroid
issue, I got and I get Synthroid and I stay on Synthroid as
long as I am retested and that is shown to be effective. I do
not understand why the DoD and the VA have two different
pharmaceutical programs and the veteran has to suffer the
consequences when you separate from the service and move to VA,
especially on mental health drugs. You cannot swap them out and
stop cold and all of that. Or even on anything physical. It
makes no sense to me. I do not understand why one system would
not work for both. Why not whatever works for DoD as far as
pharmaceutical medications or anything, why does the VA have to
be different? It sounds to me like it is a cost factor.
Mr. Jolly. And I----
Mrs. Selke. We have to shift to the cheaper route. Well we
have people dying everyday because we have switched to the
cheaper route.
Mr. Jolly. And I ask, and I realize very much this is just
a matter of personal impression and not clinical. But my
concern having heard each of your stories is that simply
because of the volume of patients, that million-plus volume of
mental health patients, the 21,000 employees, you have raised
concern about personalized care. And it would seem to me there
is, that is clearly lacking. I do not know what your
impressions would be? If you could speak to that? And also,
simply whether or not alternative therapies have ever, did your
sons have that discussed perhaps? Or Sergeant, in your
counseling the ability to get alternative therapy? And I say
that based on a personal experience as well. At VA intake day I
had a man in my office who said, ``Equine therapy works.'' Well
that was good enough for me. But it was not good enough for the
VA. So can you speak to any discussions about alternative
therapies, availability of, your opinions to that?
Sergeant Renschler. Yes, sir. So again within the VA
medical center they had at one point in time available to
polytrauma patients or those who suffered from comorbid
conditions, we were able to access recreational therapy and I
was put on a six-month waiting list. And when the six months
came up they lost the recreational therapist, so that was my
only experience there. I never had a chance to engage in that
because I was downgraded from polytrauma care when the VA
determined that my Traumatic Brain Injury had reached a plateau
of recovery and it probably would get better. That is a
completely separate hearing day. But as far as the efficacy of
alternative therapies, I mean we could, again, it is, it really
helps. And the VA currently----
Mr. Jolly. The availability?
Sergeant Renschler. The availability is not there through
VA channels. It is private community, is where you have to go.
Mr. Jolly. All right. Dr. and Mrs. Somers., do you----
Mrs. Somers. Yes, I would agree with that, that it is.
Daniel himself was a musician so it was easy for him. He got a
piano and a guitar and that was his therapy. But I would
totally agree with that. At the San Diego VA I know they have
pottery classes, which we were thrilled to hear about, and a
guitar program.
Dr. Somers. And when you talk about evidence-based it is
certainly not just medications. I mean, there are these
psychological treatments that are out there but they are only
using two of them at this time when there are so many other
potentials out there. And the other thing that we had mentioned
was the MDMA ecstasy and LSD for pain, the MDMA for PTSD and
LSD for pain. And because of our national phobias against these
particular chemicals, we are making it very difficult to do
trials with these potential, potential benefits.
Mr. Jolly. All right. Thank you very much. Thank you to
each of you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, members. We thank the
witnesses for participating. Whether or not you know it, you
have been at that table for three hours. And we are very
thankful that you have been willing to share your stories with
us. So with that, thank you very much, and you are excused.
Members, what we have done is we have asked the second and
third panels to combine together. So we will have them appear
at the witness table together instead of having a second and
third separate panel. So I would like to invite the witnesses
to please come forward.
Joining us at the table will be from VA Dr. Maureen
McCarthy, Deputy Chief Patient Care Service Officer. She will
have Dr. David Carroll, the Acting Deputy Chief Consultant for
Specialty Mental Health with her at the table. Our third panel
includes Alex Nicholson, the Legislative Director for the Iraq
and Afghanistan Veterans of America; Lieutenant General Martin
Steele, the Associate Vice President for the Veterans Research,
the Executive Director of Military Partnerships and the Co-
Chair of the Veterans Reintegration Steering Committee for the
University of South Florida; also Warren Goldstein, the
Assistant Director for TBI and PTSD programs for the American
Legion's National Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation
Commission; and Dr. Jonathan Sherin, the Chief Executive
Officer and Executive Vice President for Military Communities
for Volunteers of America. Thank you all for being here. And
Dr. McCarthy, you are recognized for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. MAUREEN MCCARTHY

Dr. McCarthy. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Miller,
Ranking Member Michaud, and members of the committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Department of
Veterans Affairs mental health care and services for our
nation's veterans. I am accompanied today by Dr. David Carroll,
Acting Deputy Chief Consultant, as you mentioned; and Dr.
Harold Kudler, our Acting Chief Consultant for Mental Health;
and Mr. Michael Fisher, from the Readjustment Counseling
Services have joined us as well.
Let me begin by expressing my sorrow and regret to the
families of Daniel, Clay and Brian. I want to thank you for
coming forward and telling your story and their stories. We
truly believe that one death by suicide is one too many. Thank
you, Joshua, as well for sharing your experiences. Veterans who
reach out for help deserve to receive that help. A veteran in
emotional distress deserves to find there are no wrong doors in
seeking help. In VA we must ensure those doors are swiftly
opened, calls are returned, messages are responded to promptly,
efficiently, and compassionately.
Over one million veterans, servicemembers, and their family
members have called our crisis line and received help. Suicide
rates among those who are VA users who have a mental health
diagnosis have decreased. The rates of suicide following a
suicide attempt have likewise decreased. We invite veterans to
entrust their care to us and we want to ensure them that we can
provide them the care they need or connect them with someone
else who can.
Tragically it is true that about 22 veterans per day die of
suicide. But another tragedy is five of those 22 veterans are
veterans who have been in our care. We acknowledge that we have
more work to do and we are fully committed to fixing the
problems we face in order to better serve veterans.
Our actions include the deployment of mobile Vet Centers
with locations with the greatest challenges in providing timely
mental health care. Examples include El Paso and Phoenix. We
have begun a program to ensure veterans waiting more than 30
days for care may receive mental health care in the community
from providers who are not VA employees. We have removed access
measures but not expectations about access and are focusing on
veteran satisfaction with the timeliness of care they have
received. We have initiated Operation SAVE, a training program
for suicide prevention delivered by our suicide prevention
coordinators to VHA and VBA staff. We have provided suicide
risk management training to clinicians. This is a VA-mandated
training for all VA clinical staff which teaches about
assessment, warning signs, risks, means restriction, and safety
plans. And we have developed a web based training for
clinicians specifically focusing on women veterans who are
struggling with suicidal thoughts about how to recognize their
distress and bring them into treatment.
Our actions taken to meet the increasing demands for mental
health care include the addition of over 2,400 mental health
professionals and 915 peer support providers since March of
2012. We have expanded the Veteran Crisis Line services,
renamed it from a suicide line to a crisis line to reach out
specifically to those in crisis or not quite yet in crisis, and
offer both text messaging and an online chat service in
addition to receiving phone calls. We have partnered with the
Vet Center Combat Call Center to respond to veterans in
distress. We have greatly expanded opportunities to access
mental health, including in rural areas, by telemedicine. We
have developed mobile apps to assist veterans with their
symptoms. We have developed an addition focus on improving and
coordinating with care in the community for those who may not
seek our help. We have trained community providers on military
culture and partnered in community engagement. We have
partnered with the Department of Defense in developing clinical
practice guidelines for suicide risk assessments and
intervention, and for the care of PTSD, depression, and
substance abuse. We also reach out to Guard and Reserves at
demobilization events to bridge the gaps in understanding about
benefits and services. We have greatly expanded the provision
of evidence-based treatments, including psychotherapies for
mental health conditions. VA is committed to working with
families and friends of veterans.
We know mental health outcomes improve when families are
involved in care. We now have a family services continuum that
includes family education, consultation, psychoeducation and
marriage and family counseling, and research remains underway
to address improvement of mental health care and prevention of
suicide. To maximize what we can provide, we have developed
measures of provider productivity, integrated mental health
care into primary care settings and initiated several campaigns
to break down any barriers or stigmas that may be associated
with seeking help.
We have developed a program on college campuses where
student veterans may receive needed mental health care without
leaving the campus.
Mr. Chairman, we are fully committed to ensuring accessible
mental health care of the highest quality for our
servicemembers and veterans who have sacrificed so much on our
behalf. We are committed in our efforts to decrease suicide by
decreasing risks we can identify and focusing meanwhile on
improving the quality of life for these veterans. VA will
continue to provide care in a veteran-centered manner,
expanding access and breaking down barriers associated with
seeking help. We are compassionately committed to serve who
have served making it easier for them to ask for and receive
the help they need.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. My colleagues
and I are prepared to answer your questions as the panel
proceeds.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Maureen McCarthy appears in
the Appendix]

The Chairman. Mr. Nicholson, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF ALEX NICHOLSON

Mr. Nicholson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Michaud, and Members of the Committee. On behalf of the Iraq
and Afghanistan Veterans of America, we really appreciate the
opportunity to share with you our views and recommendations
recommending mental health access at the VA and suicide
prevention efforts.
Combatting veteran suicide is IAVA's top priority for 2014
and it is a critically important issue that affects the lives
of tens of thousands of servicemembers and veterans, especially
of the wars of Iraq and Afghanistan. In IAVA's 2014 member
survey, our members listed suicide prevention and mental health
care as the number one issue facing our generation of veterans.
In that same survey that was just conducted in February and
March of this year, 47 percent of respondents reported that
they knew an Iraq or Afghanistan veteran who had attempted
suicide and over 40 percent knew and Iraq and Afghanistan
veteran who had died by suicide. We have over 270,000 members.
Forty percent of them know someone who is a fellow veteran of
Iraq and Afghanistan who has died already by suicide.
In response to the overwhelming need for action, IAVA
launched the campaign to combat suicide this year which
includes a call to pass comprehensive legislation that can
serve as a cornerstone for additional efforts across government
and across the country. In addition to legislation, IAVA is
calling on President Obama to issue an Executive Order to
address additional aspects of suicide prevention efforts and
IAVA is working to connect more than one million veterans this
year with mental health services across the country.
The need to examine mental health services and suicide
prevention efforts provided to veterans is even more critical
in light of the recent VA scheduling crisis. In addition to the
general delayed access to care that veterans are experiencing,
as I am sure all of you know, investigations have also
uncovered cases of significantly delayed access specifically to
mental health care. While no veteran should have to wait months
for a medical appointment of any kind, veterans utilizing
mental health care services and especially those who are in
crisis should never had to wait an unreasonable amount of time
to be seen by a mental health care provider. Providing timely
and efficient mental health care must be a much greater
priority for the VA moving forward.
Increasing the accessibility of mental health services must
also be coupled with increasing access to care for vulnerable
populations of veterans currently excluded from VA care.
Between 2001 and 2011, an estimated 30,000 servicemembers may
have received a downgraded discharge characterization due to a
misdiagnosis of personality disorder. Even more troubling, an
unknown number of servicemembers were punitively discharged for
disciplinary actions that may have been connected to an
undiagnosed mental health injury. It is imperative that the
thousands of individuals with such experiences are identified
and their records are properly re-evaluated and rectified in
order to provide access to earned VA mental health services and
benefits.
Examining access to care should also include a review of
the current five-year special combat eligibility for VA health
care provided to recently transitioned veterans. The five-year
time period may not be enough time for veterans who present
with mental health injuries symptoms later or who might delay
care due to concerns with stigma of seeking care. Extending
special combat eligibility, though it may be costly, will
provide access to care for veterans when they are ready to seek
it. It is important to recognize the efforts the VA has put
into mental health services and suicide prevention programs in
recent years, and especially, as has been mentioned already,
the Veterans Crisis Line has been an enormous resource for our
community and the VA has done a terrific job of promoting that
and we have been happy to partner with them in helping them
promote that, disseminate that, and we refer veterans in crisis
to the Veterans Crisis Line through our Rapid Response Referral
Program every single day. It has been a fantastic resource, but
more, of course, needs to be done. Increasing access to care,
meeting the demand of that care, and providing high-quality
care with continuity and responding to veterans in crisis
requires a comprehensive approach, and while there is no
illusion that veteran suicide will be completely eradicated,
implementing better approaches to mental health care and
suicide prevention can and does save lives.
Again, we appreciate the opportunity to share our views on
this topic and we look forward to continuing to work with each
of you and your staff and the Committee to improve the lives of
veterans and their families. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Alex Nicholson appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Nicholson.
Now, General Steele, who is the co-chair of the Veterans
Reintegration Steering Committee at the University of South
Florida, you are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL MARTIN R. STEELE

Lieutenant General Steele. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, distinguished
Members of the Committee, on behalf of the University of South
Florida, thank you for holding today's oversight hearing. By
way of a brief background, the University of South Florida is a
global research university with over 47,000 students, including
over 2,200 veterans and their families. Military Times EDGE
magazine recently ranked USF the fifth best college for being
veteran-friendly in the United States out of 4,000 colleges and
universities.
Under the leadership of our president, Dr. Judy Genshaft
and our Senior Vice President for Research and Innovation, Dr.
Paul Sandberg, numerous USF researchers are currently involved
in funded studies related to such topics as: suicide
prevention, traumatic brain injury, post-traumatic stress,
robotics and prosthetics, speech pathology and audiology, gait
and balance, and age-related disorders. We have numerous
research and health care partnerships through affiliation
agreements to include the James A. Haley Veterans Hospital, the
largest polytrauma center in the VA system, along with the C.W.
Bill Young VA Medical Center, number four in the system,
located in St. Petersburg. We have memorandums of understanding
with United States Central Command, U.S. Special Operations
Command, and work closely with MacDill Air Force Base and the
Pentagon.
Our Veterans Research Reintegration Steering Committee
consists of scientists from throughout USF's faculty, staff,
and students who work with veterans, along with representatives
from the Veterans Administration, the Care Coalition of Special
Operations Command and Draper Laboratories. We have a holistic
approach in regards to education to provide services to our
veterans and their families.
In order to address the mental health needs of our veterans
and our diverse population of at-risk students, we have
embarked on a Collaborative Suicide Prevention Project. This is
a three-year initiative funded by a $306,000 grant from the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration,
SAMHSA. Some of the goals and measurable objectives of this
project are to increase the number of persons involved in
suicide-prevention efforts, reduce the stigma associated with
it and the barriers, and increase family involvement in suicide
prevention.
As you are aware, the Blue Ribbon Panel of the VA Mecical
School Affiliations was established in 2006 to look at quote,
``A comprehensive philosophical framework to enhance VA's
partnerships with medical schools and affiliated
institutions,'' unquote. The panel believed that the crisis in
the U.S. Health Care System offered a unique opportunity to
explore fundamentally new and better models of patient care,
education and research. As the panel revealed, currently
available mechanisms for meaningful dialogue between the VA and
academic community were inadequate. Some of the major
challenges include credentialing, as was mentioned earlier,
which requires considerable time, along with the research
approval process, which is cumbersome, very time-consuming for
both parties. The process takes months, and in some cases can
take over a year just for approval.
There are also many barriers to innovation. One of our
professors, has an innovative approach for the treatment of
post-traumatic stress and is highly unlikely, we believe, to
receive approval by the VA health care facility. The protocol
known as Accelerated Resolution Therapy, or ART for post-
traumatic stress, has been shown to be effective in published
research from the University of South Florida, yet the VA has
not accepted invitations to collaborate on a pilot study for
patients diagnosed with PTS. We do work with the Department of
Defense. I have been at Fort Belvoir in Virginia and Fort
Benning in Georgia and also Special Operations Command in Tampa
to work with this protocol which has been proven very
successful.
We recommend streamlining the credential process and
creating fast track approvals for collaborative pilot studies
between VA and University research studies that involve minimal
risk to the patients, but could provide significant benefits to
treatment of mental disorders. We also are recommending
developing agreements between the VA system at the national
level and academic communities throughout the country. We also
believe the very definition of academic affiliates needs to be
re-examined to move beyond the limited focus on health care to
a much more encompassing venue which would include employment,
education, business development, enhanced use/lease
relationships, and increased researched funding.
In 2012, a VA research scientist from USF, along with a
research scientist from the medical research service at James
Haley, conducted a pre-clinical animal research linking post-
traumatic stress, mild TBI, and the potential for suicides in
the military. We believe their research needs to be extended to
learn more about how the brain is affected by physical and
emotional trauma. More importantly, we believe this type of
animal research will lead to more effective treatments for
post-traumatic stress and TBI, which will potentially reduce
the risk of suicide in our military and veteran population and
could be influential in alternative drug protocols.
The 2006 blue ribbon panel also noted, with concern, the
aging VA's research infrastructure. The panel recommended that
VA enhance its research facilities by fully exploiting
opportunities to share core resources with its academic
affiliates. To that end, the University of South Florida
recommends strong consideration of the development of a
singular, unique, one-of-a-kind research and clinical
outpatient treatment facility. This initiative is intended to
be a collaborative venture between the Department of Defense,
the Veterans Administration and USF in order to meet the health
and welfare needs of our veterans and their families.
USF remains committed to providing the nexus to foster
research collaborations in pursuit of excellence in the
rehabilitation, adjustment, resilience, and reintegration of
wounded warriors and their families into civilian life. Our
nation's dedicated heroes, from all wars, deserve to have the
benefit of the best research and services available in order to
return to productive lives and members of our society with jobs
and homes for the sacrifices that they and their families have
made for our country.
Thank you, again, for holding this hearing and the
opportunity that I have to submit this testimony, sir.

[The prepared statement of General Martin R. Steele appears
in the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, General.
Mr. Goldstein, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF WARREN GOLDSTEIN

Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Every day in America 82 people take their own life. That is
one every 17 and a half minutes. Since this hearing began over
three hours ago, statistically, 12 people have chosen to end
their life with suicide. One in four suicides is a veteran.
Twenty-six percent of suicides are veterans and veterans only
make up seven percent of the population.
The stakes could not be higher. We must find a solution to
this problem. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and
Members of the Committee, on behalf of our National Commander,
Dan Dellinger, and the 2.4 million members of The American
Legion, I thank you for taking one of the most serious
challenges facing America's veterans: finding solutions for
this mental health crisis.
The mental health of veterans is something that The
American Legion takes very seriously. The American Legion
established a committee on TBI and PTSD in 2010 because of
growing concerns of the unprecedented numbers of veterans
returning home with what has come to be called the signature
wounds of the war on terror. Since then, Legion staff, alone
with senior leadership has met regularly with academia, medical
consultants, experts in the field of mental health and brain
science. We published the findings of our comprehensive three-
year study of veterans, their treatments and therapies, in a
report called The War Within, which is also available on our
American Legion website.
Following up on that report, we recently conducted an on
line survey to evaluate the efficacy and availability of
treatments and what we found was somewhat disturbing. The
result of the survey, conducted in coordination with the Data
Recognition Corporation, showed that nearly a third of veterans
surveyed had terminated their treatment plans before completion
and that almost 60 percent of veterans reported no improvement
or feeling worse after having undergone treatment.
Clearly, there are problems with the current practice in
place. The American Legion convened a symposium last month to
discuss these findings and highlight other areas where
complimentary and alternative treatments could prove helpful.
We listened and saw firsthand the encouraging results for
veterans who had benefitted from animal therapies with service
dogs, art therapies, acupuncture, and a host of other non-
traditional treatments. The American Legion believes that by
exploring options such as these, we can all work together to
help veterans get the effective treatments they need.
It is devastating when a veteran cannot get timely
appointments, but 60 percent of veterans reporting no change or
worsening symptoms after treatment means that what care they
are getting is just as important as whether or not they can
access the care in the first place. This is not to say that
access does not matter. Indeed, over the past several months.
The difficulties veterans face, access to care, have been front
page news and have been a major focus for this committee.
For The American Legion, it wasn't enough to sit and watch
idly as veterans struggled to get help; we had to go do
something about it. That is why The American Legion developed
Veterans Crisis Command Centers that have been deployed across
the country, and specifically where it had been reported that
veterans were being stonewalled while trying to seek care. By
utilizing American Legion posts already located in every
community in America, The American Legion has combined town
hall meetings and coordination of care for veterans so they can
get the immediate counseling and medical help they have earned
and desperately need without getting in the way of VA's on-
going efforts.
We are there to assist VA's efforts and to be a force
multiplier. So far, Phoenix, Arizona; El Paso, Texas; and
Fayetteville, North Carolina, we have been able to reach nearly
2,000 veterans and next week we will expand operations to two
new locations in St. Louis, Missouri and Fort Collins,
Colorado, with more locations to follow as we try to get help
to veterans.
Yes, there are things VA should be doing to ensure veterans
in crisis get the help they need, but we now see that our
veterans can't just depend on VA to fix the problem, that is
why The American Legion has full-time staff and a leadership
committee dedicated to studying the challenges of mental health
treatments to ensure the way America treats veterans is a way
that will bring real improvements to their lives. And that is
why legionnaires, veterans, VA, and local businesses across the
country are supporting our Veterans Crisis Command Centers and
donating their time and efforts to link the veterans with the
resources they need.
By the time this panel finishes our opening remarks,
America will have lost another person to suicide. That is a
terrible tragedy. We all have to work together to ensure that
this rate cannot and will not continue. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Warren Goldstein appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Sherin, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DR. JONATHAN SHERIN

Dr. Sherin. Thank you. Thank you Chairman Miller, thank you
Mr. Michaud, and Committee for convening today and for inviting
me to today.
My name is John Sherin. I am a psychiatrist and
neurobiologist by trade and currently serve as the executive
vice president for military communities and chief medical
officer at Volunteers of America. While I am not a veteran, my
life's calling has been to serve veterans. Having worked for a
decade at VA as a psychiatrist and chief of mental health prior
to joining VOA, I have been able to observe the VA from both
the inside and out. This experience has given me a unique
perspective as to the nature of access problems facing veterans
and possible solutions.
In general, I contend that the most immediate solutions
reside in growing capacity through more robust partnerships
between VA and local communities. Working alongside VA last
year, VOA supported and housed more than 10,000 homeless
veterans, a number that will increase this year. Though
significant, the opportunity for impact in partnership with VA
is much larger and can include helping veterans at risk of
watching their unmet needs become urgent problems that evolve
into health crises due to inadequate access. The VA has a
golden opportunity to lead this effort right now by leveraging
organizations like VOA to grow capacity and improve access.
In contemplating partnership strategies, it is important to
recognize that access barriers go way beyond wait times. Red
flags in isolation and inadequate knowledge of available
resources and unwillingness to engage in the help-seeking
process, difficulty navigating complex systems and lack of care
coordination all impact access. Recognizing this array of
access barriers, VOA has developed the Battle-Buddy-Bridge
program, a program rooted in trust and designed to mitigate
access barriers through real time, peer-to-peer engagement and
local resource navigation.
Peer approaches, which are used by other organizations,
including the Augusta Warrior Project, Team Red, White & Blue,
IAVA, The Mission Continues, Team Rubicon, and others,
transform the access dynamic in many cases. As such, it is my
first recommendation that community-based peer-engagement and
navigation programs be brought to scale with federal support as
part of all out assault on access barriers at the VA and
beyond. Leveraging this model further, my second recommendation
is for the VA and the private sector to set up rally points in
communities, as well as on VA campuses that are endowed with
trained peers, vehicles, resource maps, and tightly linked to
VA's Suicide Prevention Program, the national crisis hotline,
2-1-1 exchanges, tech-based veteran community portals such as
POS REP, and any other referral sources of relevance. Rally
point networks could have a profound impact on access in any
geography.
As a final point, I want to highlight a major partnership
success story, the Supportive Services for Veteran Families
Program of the VA. This program administered by VA's National
Center for Homelessness Among Veterans has fostered
relationships between VA and communities that are
unprecedented. In the opinion of many experts in both the
community and the VA, the streamlined structure of SSVF offers
the best means for managing partnerships going forward.
As such, my third and final recommendation for resolving
mental health access issues and improving suicide prevention
going forward is for the VA to adopt an SSVF-like mechanism as
the basic template for VA to use in developing more robust
relationships. By using this mechanism, VA can most effectively
leverage partners to create community-driven programs that
improve access to the vast array of resources which address
mental health conditions.
To close, more robust partnership between the VA and
community will not only help veterans enrolled in VA to get
better access, it may also help veterans--it may also help
provide access to veterans who refuse to enroll in the VA, as
well as veterans who are located in remote areas. Let's all
take advantage of recent findings at VA and recognize that
while inadequate access to care in the veteran population
reflects the shortcomings of a federal agency, it also reflects
the fundamental failure of the American community and process.
It is time to roll out a new era of public, private
partnership that grows capacity and ensures veterans have
access to the resources they need for successful community
reintegration.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Jonathan Sherin appears in
the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Doctor.
Dr. McCarthy., On Tuesday evening this committee heard from
a whistleblower that was a former chief of psychiatry at the
St. Louis VA Medical Center. Are you aware of his testimony?
Dr. McCarthy. I am aware of it, yes, sir.
The Chairman. Okay. He stated he could not identify, within
his clinic, the average number of patients that are seen by
provider per day or the time a provider spends on direct
patient care per day. When he asked other psychiatry chiefs to
estimate similar data at their facilities, he received answers
that ranged from 8 to 16 veterans per psychiatrist per day.
When he worked with a VA database administrator and his
outpatient psychiatry director, he said he was shocked to find
that outpatient psychiatrists at the St. Louis VA were only
seeing on average six veterans within eight hours for 30 minute
appointments. There were only three 60 minute appointments of
those each week and he could only account for three and one
half hours of work during an eight-hour day.
So, as we have already heard people talk about a nationwide
shortage of mental health providers, do you feel that the
utilization of staff at VA is appropriate?
Dr. McCarthy. Sir, that is why we have what is called the
SPARQ tool. This is something that has been developed as part
of our physician productivity model. We can look at
psychiatrists----
The Chairman. I am sorry, my question is: Do you think that
utilization of staff at this level is appropriate?
Dr. McCarthy. I do not believe that what you said is an
appropriate way to use staff; however, I have data that
supports that that may not be the full story.
The Chairman. Do you know what the mental health staffing
is and productivity requirements throughout the system?
Dr. McCarthy. I know the model, which is in terms of the
number of psychiatrists and given population of veterans----
The Chairman. Whose model?
Dr. McCarthy. It is our model, sir.
The Chairman. VA's model?
Dr. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Should we be using what VA wants now or
should we be looking outside of VA?
Dr. McCarthy. It seems like there may not be a right answer
to your question, but I can tell you why the model developed.
It is a team-based model of care----
The Chairman. From VA?
Dr. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Okay.
Dr. McCarthy. And----
The Chairman. Do you know what the health staffing and
productivity requirements are throughout the system?
Dr. McCarthy. We have a quadrant-type model which looks at
productivity and other measures to determine if we are staffing
appropriately.
The Chairman. Do you know what the standard is?
Dr. McCarthy. Okay. Help me understand.
Are you asking how many work RVUs per physician, per day--
is that the kind of question that you would like me to answer?
The Chairman. I guess that is good enough.
Dr. McCarthy. Okay.
The Chairman. Do you?
Dr. McCarthy. I don't have the exact expectations of the--
--
The Chairman. The other question is: Is VA meeting the
standards?
Dr. McCarthy. Sir, I can answer that question. If we look
at our work value units compared to the national average for
physicians who are psychiatrists, as well as psychologists, we
are meeting the national average for productivity according to
that standard.
The Chairman. According to whose numbers? Are those numbers
that VA establishes or----
Dr. McCarthy. No, they are external.
The Chairman. No, no, I am talking about internal numbers.
Dr. McCarthy. Okay.
The Chairman. Are your folks reporting the truthful number?
Dr. McCarthy. Sir, what that model is based on is the
actual encounters that occur.
The Chairman. No, no. Are your folks telling the truth?
Dr. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Everywhere?
Dr. McCarthy. I can't answer a question like that, sir. But
about the model, I can tell you that the numbers are driven
from a system that couldn't be manipulated.
The Chairman. Based on what we have seen over the past
three or four months, do you trust the numbers that people are
giving?
Dr. McCarthy. If you ask me about access numbers, I don't,
and I think there has been evidence before this committee that
shows that access numbers are not reliable.
The Chairman. And so--but you think the other numbers are
reliable?
Dr. McCarthy. There are some numbers that are reliable,
yes, sir. I have been looking for numbers that we can try and
understand measures of our access and timeliness of care and we
have, for instance, numbers of consults that----
The Chairman. Let me ask you a better question: Would you
bet your life that the numbers that people give you are
truthful?
Dr. McCarthy. I am sorry, sir. Are you talking about
numbers related to productivity?
The Chairman. I don't care what the number is. Would you
bet your life on any number that somebody gives you as a
truthful number because we just had a panel of witnesses who
have lost their children. They lost their lives.
Now I am asking you: Would you bet your life that the
information that people are telling you is truthful?
Dr. McCarthy. Sir, I would not. I would not bet my life----
The Chairman. That is all I need to hear.
Dr. McCarthy. [continuing]. That the access numbers that
you received are truthful.
The Chairman. That is all I need to hear. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Michaud.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. McCarthy., we heard an earlier panel issue dealing with
HIPAA. My question as it relates to HIPAA is in the department
and I actually did find the OIG report and I heard that the
Veterans Health Administration and the Veterans Benefit
Administration could not exchange information because of HIPAA
problems. I mean they both work for the same department, so I
am not sure why there would be any HIPAA problems with VHA
talking to VBA.
My question is--is the recommendation from the OIG back in
2011 was that the VA medical center directors and VBA directors
will meet monthly; they meet monthly and they will discuss this
issue--had that issue about any HIPAA problems been resolved
between VHA and VBA, do you know what would the outcome of that
is; if not, could you get back to the Committee?
Dr. McCarthy. I would be happy to take that one for the
record, sir. I can give you an example.
For instance, if I were to do a C&P (compensation &
pension) exam on a patient, that is considered--it is not
considered a VHA document; it is concerned owned by the veteran
or by the VBA, so that is not something that VHA releases.
There are some separations that are aimed at protecting
veterans.
Mr. Michaud. But if both VBA and VHA works for the
Department of Veterans Affairs----
Dr. McCarthy. Yes, sir?
Mr. Michaud [continuing]. So I am not sure why there would
be any HIPAA problems between VBA and VHA. So, yeah, if you
could get back on that, I would appreciate it.
Dr. Sherin. I agree with you that VA can't do it alone.
What has been your experience with trying to partner with the
VA to provide the service to, you know, in the communities, and
have there been different, you know, outcomes depending on what
region VOA has been around the country--involved in?
Dr. Sherin. That is a great question. I do believe there is
variability, and getting back to my final point, I think that
it is important that we look to the VA to develop a consistent
mechanism that is responsive and that program that I have
described, which I am sure you are familiar with, SSVF, is one
that is very responsive and very effective.
The bigger question, as I see it: What is VHA's mission? Is
VHA's mission to deal with all reintegration problems? And I
would say probably not, because so much is trying to stream
through VHA to deal with reintegration issues outside of health
care, it has created a strain on the system and has diluted its
primary mission of providing outstanding health care, including
mental health services.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you.
Getting back to the VA, as you--I noted in your opening
remarks that VA's spending on mental health is approaching $7
billion dollars, double the amount in 2007. What is the VA's--
what is VA using as a measure of success of this investment in
mental health services?
Mr. Carroll. Thank you, Congressman.
There is no single measure that we point to that is going
to satisfactorily answer that question and certainly what we
have heard today, what we have heard over the past few weeks
points to the fact that VA has a lot more to do. At the end of
the day, what matters most is whether or not we have met the
needs to the individual veteran who presented himself or
herself for VA mental health care, whether we have addressed
those needs at the time they came in today and whether they
left better off or with a clear plan of things that they could
do to move forward. That is the ultimate outcome of our care
and it has to be addressed and assessed for each individual at
each time of care.
I think we can point to some things in our system. We know
that over the last seven years, there have been 37,000 rescues
or saves that have been facilitated through the Veterans Crisis
Line. On the one hand, that is a remarkable number and on the
other hand, it is not enough and we know that. We can look to
veterans with serious mental illness and we can look to our
Mental Health Intensive Case Management Program and we know
that they are able to live in the community of their choice, to
find employment, and to stay out of the hospital. We know that
when veterans drop out of care with serious mental illness, we
can successfully re-engage them in care. There are multiple
other examples, but I think at the end of the day, it is the
individual veteran and whether or not we have addressed their
needs today is the ultimate test.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you. I yield.
The Chairman. Dr. Roe.
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the panel for
being here. I want to go ahead and continue along the line for
just a moment the chairman did.
Dr. Matthews, in the St. Louis VA, six percent of the
veterans did not return for care and then we hear in other
testimony today that a third of other veterans dropped out of
care and 60 percent showed no improvement. This is difficult to
treat and I understand that. It is a very difficult issue and
it is very individualized with each patient that you see. But
how can you explain that kind of drop out when these people are
lost to follow-up and you don't know what happens to them?
Those are the folks that may be needing a hotline or the ones
that are committing suicide at this astounding rate. When you
have more veterans committing suicide that are diagnose in
combat we have a true crisis, so is it--and we have added
several thousand more providers to the VA during the last, I
guess, couple of three years.
Dr. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
Dr. Roe. So how, exactly, in the metric that he was talking
about, productivity, I don't really agree with that, that it is
meeting the same metric because what we found out with these
oversight and investigation hearings is that time after time
after time, the VA's self-analysis is not true. It turns out
that when it is investigated by an outside party--what we have
been hearing now--now, let me tell you how frustrating that is
for me to sit up here.
I expect people, when they come to that dais up there,
whether they are sworn in or not, to tell the truth, not just
to make themselves look good, and that is what we have done.
And let me know what VA has done, and as a surgeon, you have to
have a lot of trust to have a patient lie down and let you open
them up and operate on them. The VA has lost a tremendous
amount of credibility and trust and it is going to be very
difficult to put that humpty dumpty back together again.
So how can you--what can we do now? That is all in the
rear-view mirror. How do we go forward, that is what I am
asking.
Dr. McCarthy. We do have a lot of work to re-build that
trust. We absolutely do, and our department is focused on that.
Our acting secretary has laid out clear expectations about ways
to restore that trust. What we can tell you are things like for
the veterans who seek our care and who have entrusted their
mental health care to us, for those veterans who are receiving
our services, the suicide rate is actually going down. For all
veterans who seek VA care and are enrolled in our care, for all
of them, not just the mental health veterans, their rate of
suicide is going down.
We do have some successes and I guess what I want to do is
not discourage the veterans from reaching out to us who need
us.
Dr. Roe. We don't want to do that at all.
Dr. McCarthy. We want to get----
Dr. Roe. I don't mean to cut you off, but my time is
limited.
Dr. Sherin, a couple of things that have interested me is
that there are a lot of programs around, both outside, Not
Alone and others you have heard of in what you do, how do you
make--how does the VA help coordinate, because you are right,
some veterans don't want to go through and see this--go through
this big maze of things at the VA, walk into this big building
and wind their way around and follow a dotted line to some
place. How do you coordinate all of that?
Dr. Sherin. That is a great question. There are a number of
efforts around the country. One where I live in LA, the Los
Angeles Veterans Collaborative, which actually brings together
roughly 250 organizations per month, including the VA, with the
aim of developing coordinated systems.
The idea that I share with you, recommendation number two,
to create rally points, is to get proactive by creating
navigation--a navigation network that is operated by veterans
who can function as a surrogate family. We heard the families
that were here in the first panel talk about the need for a
support system, that special relationship between the brothers
and sisters in the military community. We need to leverage
that. That is a way to get information from people that are
suffering. It is a way to introduce a process and content
expertise into communities with navigators who engage and then
advocate.
Dr. Roe. One of the things that is in my local community
that my wife is involved in is The Humane Society. We are
finding out that veterans sometimes won't go to the hospital
because they leave their animal, their dog at home, and they
don't have anyone to take care of them because they are alone.
And so The Humane Society are now taking care of those animals
so the veterans can go to the VA. It is something that I never
thought of. I had no idea that that was even going on, that
people would not get care because their companion, which is
their animal, didn't have anyone to care for them if they went
in to seek care. So that is another thing that I think one of
the great challenges--and I applaud your effort for doing
that--is that there are a lot of people trying to help and
there is no question about that, and you will see a renewed
effort here--is how do we coordinate that?
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Brownley, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, Dr. McCarthy, I wanted to follow up on I think Dr.
Roe's line of questioning and you were talking about some of
the successes that you feel improvements that have been made,
and, Dr. Roe was talking a lot about trust. I think, you know,
one of the issues I think for me and the rest of us here is of
what data are you working--you know, when you state these
successes, what data are you looking at and is it, you know, we
have heard a lot about bad information and people not telling
the truth and so it is hard to believe that there are
successes, if there are, because I don't know--I am not feeling
good about the data of which you would make those conclusions.
Dr. McCarthy. Thank you for asking that.
We have, in the last few years, been able to obtain data
from the states, some with the help of the members of this
committee. We now have suicide data from 48 states that is not
VA data that we are using to analyze rates of suicide for
veterans, including veterans who may not be seeking our care,
and so the data that we are using include the data that we are
getting from the states about actual suicides. We often did not
hear about veterans even in our care who completed suicides,
and so now we have data about them, but also other veterans.
That data doesn't go back to 2001, but if you start kind of
counting in 2001 after 9/11, then that is the data that we are
following the trends for, ma'am.
Ms. Brownley. So do you believe that there is a crisis
going on in the VA and certainly in terms of access to mental
health care?
Dr. McCarthy. Absolutely.
Ms. Brownley. And so what are some of your--what are your
top three things that you are planning on doing to resolve this
crisis?
Dr. McCarthy. Among them are extending hours, partnering
with care in the community. There has been an increase in
funding for what we call fee-basis care and our vet center
partners have expanded their services and their hours to also
provide for care. Those are the three major crisis kind of
interventions and some of that extra hour care has included
partnership with The American Legion and we are grateful for
that.
Ms. Brownley. So with partnerships, public/private
partnerships, I mean I hear over and over and over again that
it is very difficult to work with the VA and establish those
partnerships with the community to expand services to our
veterans in their communities. So what are you doing to
alleviate some of those barriers to make it easier to create
those partnerships?
Dr. McCarthy. Last year we started these community summits
which included partnerships with various--they were run locally
and in the various medical centers. We have reached out to all
kinds of people of goodwill in the community, people that would
like to partner with us and they are site-specific.
Ms. Brownley. Well, reaching out, we have done that in my
district where I represent and that is a good first step
because quite frankly in my area, the VA didn't even know about
all of the services that the communities are providing for our
veterans. I think now they do, but how are we going to
eliminate the barriers, if you will, and just in terms of
contracts and so forth to actually create good public/private
partnerships to increase services to veterans?
Dr. McCarthy. So after the summits, there are a series of
action plans that we have engaged in to address some of the
barriers that were identified. As far as the access to fee-
basis care, we are using models of payment for fee-basis care
that are traditional models, but we are also expanding kind of
contracting services that would be available. El Paso, for
example, has reached out and formed a relationship with the
practice that provides their inpatient mental health care to
provide more outpatient mental health care, and that is just
one example nationwide.
Ms. Brownley. And what about alternative therapies? We
talked about that earlier today. Are you looking at
partnerships with alternative therapies? Equine therapy, I have
a great program in my district, Reins of Hope, that is a very
successful program. Veterans are coming from all over the
region to utilize this program. It would be great if the VA
could partner with programs like that.
Dr. McCarthy. And there are programs like that that VA has
research partnerships in and there are others where there are
community partnerships and the veterans are engaged as part as
the goodwill of the community involved in helping them.
Are you asking if every VA should have equine therapy?
Ms. Brownley. Well, I want to know how we can increase
these partnerships. I will just use my own exactly--I am really
watching the clock here; my time has just run out, but I will
follow up with you on my question.
The Chairman. I am glad that you saw that red light.
Ms. Brownley. I am learning, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Huelskamp, you are recognized.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A question for Dr. McCarthy, following up closely on a few
others: What are the waiting times for access to mental health
care?
Dr. McCarthy. It is hard to give an actual number, given
that both the members of this committee and I have said that we
are not sure that we trust the actual numbers. What we now
have, though, right on the VA Web site, very transparently,
information about access. I printed and brought some of that
information, but what is posted is for every VA medical center,
what the new patient mental health average wait time is, the
established mental health wait time, and then a running average
over the last month for what that particular wait time has
been.
When we look over the last month, certainly for those,
there are significant improvements over what they had been
before, but----
Dr. Huelskamp. Ma'am, are those reliable data?
Dr. McCarthy. I believe these are reliable. I would not
stake my life on it, as Chairman Miller has said, but to my
knowledge----
Dr. Huelskamp. Have they ever been audited by independent
entities outside the VA?
Dr. McCarthy. I do not know the answer to that question. I
would be happy to take that for the record.
Dr. Huelskamp. Well, yeah, I would appreciate that because
we have heard testimony, the Office of Inspector General on
June 9th, clearly, data has been manipulated and data has been
falsified and actually, I think on June 23rd, the VA admitted
that their data was not reliable and a few minutes later they
talked about their data and what they could draw from that.
I agree with most of my colleagues that we don't know what
the data is. I mean the epistemological question is: What do we
know that we know? And right now it is clear, especially the
investigations, you know, 70 investigations going on--going
after or investigating retaliation against folks that are
saying that this data is falsified. In particular, I had just
one whistleblower in one hospital and I had asked the VA what
is the range of the workload for doctors across the nation and
the total range--the bottom range, I found out, according to
one whistleblower in only one hospital was lower than supposed
the national range. And so one independent source verified that
all the data was inaccurate there.
So can you tell me what the VA is doing to actually assess
and verify and authenticate the data so folks on this committee
and the 341,000 employees at the VA can actually say, this is
where we are heading; this is where we have been; this is how
we have improved the system. Give me a sense of how the VA is
going to actually answer that basic question of how we are
going to independently assess the data.
Dr. McCarthy. Our Acting Secretary has talked about not
looking at the same kinds of access measures, but instead,
looking at patient satisfaction with the timeliness of the care
that they have received as a measure of access and timeliness.
As far as these----
Dr. Huelskamp. And that will all be done--internally
handled by the VA? I mean who is coming in independently and
saying--ma'am, I don't trust the data. You apparently don't
trust your own data unless it serves the purpose and I am
looking at an IG report for 2012 and said the average of 50
days--the average is 50 days to receive a full mental health
evaluation.
I would say today that the Office of Inspector General
probably says, well, we don't know; we use the data from the
VA, and now they are telling us today that it is all made up
and it could be falsified. And all we are going--and I am like
many here, you are hearing from constituents is saying well,
what you are being told, and I heard from a whistleblower who
called my office yesterday, just wanted to say that what you
are being told by the VA is whitewashing the situation in this
particular vision because they are falsifying the data and
punishing those that make that point.
So, again, quickly, if you could tell me how you are going
to prove to me and members of the Committee and the American
public that this is our data and this is how we can prove that
we are improving our performance to meet the needs of our
veterans?
Dr. McCarthy. Sir, I believe that there are audits planned,
I am just not personally familiar with those particular audits,
but I do invite you or anyone to go to the VA Web site and look
at the data because you can see it and it is part of our effort
at increased transparency. I think that looking at how long it
took people in the last month to get care is----
Dr. Huelskamp. I can't believe the data.
Dr. McCarthy. Okay. I----
Dr. Huelskamp. Because it is not independently verified. It
is not authenticated. There is no one on the outside. I mean my
district is in four different VIZNs and some reports have come
out in the last couple days of how they double checked.
Everything is going fine, but I don't think that they talked to
a single veteran, and it is not matching up with what the
whistleblowers are saying. So every time someone from the VA
comes to our committee and says, Hey, we have got data--it
might not be good data, but we have got data, I mean it is the
old GIGO, garbage in/garbage out, and that is what is happening
here and we can't trust that.
I would suggest that you look at independent
authentication, get an outside assessment of what is going on
at the VA. I know that the chairman has been pushing that. I
believe that is what needs to happen to re-establish trust, and
more importantly, to re-establish to make certain that we are
getting the care that we claim that we are giving to our
veterans.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Kirkpatrick you are recognized for five minutes
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I recently attended a veterans stand down in Phoenix which
is a one-stop shop for services that our veterans need and they
had all kinds of things going on--thousands of people there--
and off to a side was a room and I looked in and there were
veterans sitting there with needles in their ears and maybe in
the back of their neck and they were receiving acupuncture. So
I was curious about it. The person delivering the acupuncture
is actually a constituent in my district who is volunteering
her time to be there.
And to a person, every veteran that I talked to said that
they benefitted from acupuncture. It helped relieve stress,
anxiety, and asked me to advocate that it be an approved
treatment in the VA system, so I am doing that. But my
question--and I didn't ask them if they had a PTS diagnosis,
but clearly some of them in the room did--every one of them
benefitting from this treatment.
So my first question for every panelist is simply this: Do
you think that acupuncture should be an option within the VA
for medical treatment for every veteran, starting with Dr.
Sherin?
Dr. Sherin. Yeah, I believe strongly in alternative
approaches for mental health issues and pain and substance
abuse. I think that acupuncture is a very powerful technique,
so is meditation, so are many other, you know, well-established
treatments. The question, though, that I go back to is: Is that
something that you build into the VA or is it something that
the VA supports in the community where there are already
functioning systems?
Ms. Kirkpatrick. And my question is simply: Does the VA
cover it? Offer it as a treatment? And because I want to hear
from everyone, I need to hear quickly.
Dr. Sherin. Yeah.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Should it be a regularly offered treatment
to veterans regardless of where it is provided?
Dr. Sherin. I would say absolutely.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein.
Mr. Goldstein. Congresswoman, yes, The American Legion
believes that all treatments should be made available. If it is
helping veterans, then yes it should be made available for
treatment. Thank you.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Lieutenant General.
Lieutenant General Steele. I fully support it, also. I
think alternative treatments need to be investigated. It is
part of the cultural shift that we have been talking about and
what this panel is all about. We have to get to alternative
treatments. If they work for one person, just as you
experienced, Congresswoman, hyperbaric chamber is the only
thing that works for them. It is the same thing. It is not
evidence-based. It is not approved right now. We have to fix
this by bringing the opportunities in to get alternative
therapies to take care of this population.
I would just like to make one amplifying comment. I am a
Vietnam era vet. I have people who are contemporaries of mine,
just like the congressman earlier today, who are just now
coming forward with their issues about post-traumatic stress 47
years ago. We don't believe that this population is really
going to come forward until the year 2030, so that is why I am
talking about research here to be able to get this fixed so we
don't have the same thing that has happened to the Vietnam-era
population.
I am going to say one other thing. Personally, again, not
USF, my father is a prisoner of war of World War II. He
suffered his entire life from post-traumatic stress--never
recovered from it. He was an alcoholic. It is all part of what
are we doing here to be able to include all of these things
together, all of these opportunities that we have to be able to
bring it together to make it better to take care of the
patient? To take care of the veteran? Thank you.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
Mr. Nicholson. IAVA has been a big proponent and advocate
for alternative and complementary medicine, so absolutely.
Especially for the younger generation of vets who are perhaps
more open to alternative forms of treatment, it absolutely
would be beneficial. They are already doing it. A lot of them
are already doing it and covering the costs out of pocket.
Having help with that would definitely be a big deal to them,
especially since some of them, especially the younger vets are
still transitioning, you know, they have lower incomes as they
are in area earlier career trajectories, so definitely.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Dr. McCarthy.
Dr. McCarthy. Yes, it is part of our clinical practice
guideline the joint DoD/VA clinical practice guideline for the
treatment of PTSD that we have been rolling out. So we are
hoping to have----
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Does the VA pay for it? That is my
question.
Dr. McCarthy. The VA is providing it at some medical
centers, but----
Ms. Kirkpatrick. But not across the board?
Dr. McCarthy. Not yet.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. So my follow-up question is--quickly--what
would it take for the VA to have this be part of the standard
treatment offered to our veterans?
Mr. Carroll. We need to ensure that there are credentialed
providers available either on staff in the VA or in the
community that we could partner with.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. And just very quickly, would they be
credentialed by the VA? Do you have a process for that?
Mr. Carroll. If they were working for the VA, they would
need to be credentialed for providing that service within VA,
otherwise we would need to recognize that expertise in the
community.
Ms. Kirkpatrick. Thank you. My time is out, but I would
like to explore at some point in a little more detail.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Kirkpatrick.
Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. McCarthy., when you talked about RVUs, relative value
units, as a measure of productivity, would it be correct that
those RVUs are based predominately on time spent with a patient
in mental health?
Dr. McCarthy. Primarily.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. And do you feel that that is a good
measure of productivity?
Dr. McCarthy. We use the WRVUs and take out the part of the
RVU that covers malpractice and overhead costs, so it is a part
of the RVU that we call the WRVU, and it is not ideal, but it
is the best we have.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. But it is the measure of productivity
that you are using?
Dr. McCarthy. For mental health.
Dr. Wenstrup. Do you go and check to see if those RVUs
match up with the number of patients seen? In other words, if
somebody has RVUs that would add up to what would equal eight
hours of patient care, are you checking to see if they really
match that? In other words, if they have only seen three
patients but they have RVUs that match an eight-hour day, eight
hours of patient interaction, are you checking that?
Dr. McCarthy. I can't say that I personally am. I can say
that I would hope that folks are matching that up.
Dr. Wenstrup. So formally, that is not being done at this
point?
Dr. McCarthy. It's a relatively new model for us and it has
been rolled out since 2011, increasing the numbers of
specialties per year. Mental health has just been added, so we
just have the data, but we certainly have to refine it and make
sure that it is validated.
Mr. Wenstrup. Because that would authenticate things pretty
well, which isn't being done.
And the other thing that we found that is not really being
done is, what is the cost per RVU within the VA system--not
just in mental health, but in anything--what are we actually
spending per every RVU that we put out in care? And that is a
key number as far as productivity and efficiency, and I think
that we really have to go that way.
The next question is: Do our doctors in mental health claim
responsibility for their patients? In other words, do you look
back and say, well, Dr. X had 10 patients that attempted
suicide and he had six that actually committed suicide.
Do you look at those numbers? Do doctors actually have
patients that are their responsibility?
Dr. McCarthy. Absolutely. We have a very active peer-review
program where cases are reviewed and typically all suicides are
reviewed in that particular format. In addition, we go through
what we call psychological autopsies and root cause analyses
when those kinds of events occur, so a very thoughtful approach
to each one so no death was in vain.
Dr. Wenstrup. What happens if one provide had an abnormally
high number? I mean is it bad luck or are you actually looking
and saying, what are you doing as far as the type of care that
you are administering or how much attention to detail are you
paying to this patient?
Dr. McCarthy. So a typical peer-review committee would take
looking at the chart that the doctor--that the documentation
and all the other factors around the patient actually
projecting up on a screen, the peer-review committee reviews
all of the components of the care, looks at the follow-up,
looks at what appointments were scheduled and so forth and then
an assessment of did the doctor do the right thing.
Dr. Wenstrup. And then action is taken, that part you
didn't mention.
Dr. McCarthy. Oh, let me keep going then. People are rated
on a peer-review scale of one, two, or three. Three is if the
case should have been handled differently. Two if it might have
been handled differently. One if people felt like it was--the
standard of care.
If a provider has a level three, the provider is counseled
about that and if there is more than one level three, certainly
there is an intervention program followed and there is an FPPE
often put in place.
Dr. Wenstrup. Any firings ever? You ever let a provider go?
Dr. McCarthy. I can't say that I have personal experience
with the letting of a provider who had issues with mental
health suicides go, because I can say that there are situations
in which we have let people go.
Dr. Wenstrup. Just performance in general was my question.
Dr. McCarthy. Yes, sir.
Mr.  Wenstrup. Thank you very much.
You know, Dr. Sherin, when I deployed, I was also concerned
about those who received no mail during an entire year, and I
always tried to encourage people at home to send this soldier
something and I wondered what happened to them when they went
home. You know, which leads me to--I just want your opinion
real quick on the idea of when you are getting a garden reserve
go home, you know, active duty, go back to a base or post, an
opportunity for consultation for the garden reserve of what are
you doing when you go home? What activity are you engaging?
Because to me, the worst week was the first week home when
I did nothing and then I went back and saw patients against.
And so do you think that would be beneficial because you are
not coming home to parades and there is not a lot of jobs?
Dr. Sherin. Yeah. I think I may have missed the question.
What we try to do in the community is actually to try to
generate lots of opportunities and one of the key features of
opportunities involves, you know, kinship, support
relationships, community. We look at individuals in terms of
their well-being, and in order to have well-being, yeah, you
need to have emotional health; you need physical health; you
need intellectual health; need family; need a community and you
need spiritual health. Those are the targets that we look at,
at Volunteers of America and one of the things that we are
actually trying to push out is a lot more recreational-
occupational activities that bring people together and help
them knit that community fabric together for the reasons that
you are pointing out.
Dr. Wenstrup. That answers my question. I really just was
questioning if you see the great value in that, and I
appreciate that. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. O'Rourke, you are recognized for five minutes
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also like to
thank all the panelists for their testimony today and their
service to our veterans throughout the country and as I
represent the veterans in El Paso, I would also like to thank
Mr. Goldstein.
The American Legion worked with the local commander, Mr.
Briton, to set up a command center to connect veterans there
with health services like the ones that we are talking about
today, as well as benefits, and by every measure, most
importantly, in talking directly with veterans, it was very
successful, so I want to thank you.
I want to thank Dr. McCarthy. She mentioned the mobile vet
center and other resources that are being directed to El Paso,
all of which should tell us that we had a problem in El Paso
that we are now belatedly trying to correct and to fix. And
during that time when, especially access to mental health care
was so problematic, I had an opportunity to meet a young
veteran named Nick D'Amico and his mom Bonnie, who came to a
town hall meeting of mine and Nick was having a hard time
accessing mental health care services at the El Paso VA and
shared that with me and my team, but was also there to hear
veterans who served as far back as Korea and Vietnam and the
Gulf War share frustration with not being able to get into the
VA.
As he was driving home with his mom Bonnie from our town
hall that night in September, he said, you know, I am having a
hard time getting in and I am a young, new veteran. Some of
these guys have been trying for years and can't get in and for
our five days later, Nick D'Amico killed himself, and I have
got to connect the lack of access, the delay in care, which
turns into denial of care into Nick D'Amico's death. It is at
least partially responsible.
And yet in that time, the El Paso VHA and the national VHA
was telling me that things were under control, and as recently
as May 9th of this year, the director of VHA told me that there
was zero days wait time on average for a veteran seeking mental
health care access in El Paso, and what I take that to mean is
that no veteran waited no more than 14 days to do that.
The discrepancies between what we are hearing from people
like Mr. D'Amico and the VA were so great that, as I have told
this committee before, we initiated our own survey of mental
health care wait times and found that the average wait time was
71 days. Found at that like, Dr. Matthews told us earlier this
week, more than 40 percent of veterans stopped trying to seek
mental health care because it was too frustrating and fully 36
percent, one-third, could not get an appointment at all.
And so I want to ask you, if you had known that the average
wait time was 71 days, or as your own VHA audit found last
month, 60 days, but certainly much longer than 14 days, if you
knew that as we know now, we are--we have the worst wait times
in the country for access to mental health care for veterans,
the worst as of June, what would you have done differently? You
said in your opening testimony that we are fully committed to
providing accessible care. You obviously did not have that in
El Paso. If you had known all this, what would you have done
differently?
Dr. McCarthy. Congressman O'Rourke, I had the opportunity
to visit El Paso. I had a visit there in June, the 16th and
17th, and I know that at some point we are going to talk to you
about that visit. What has happened in El Paso is tragic. There
were five psychiatrists that left all at once. That left a huge
hole in the ability for them to continue to provide mental
health care.
Mr.  O'Rourke. Here is what I am trying to ask, because I
have limited time: What the VA was telling me and perhaps you
and the veterans in El Paso was one thing which turned out to
be untrue and was very different from what reality was, which
was that there was terrible, terrible access to care for
veterans who could get it and one-third could not get into
mental health care at all. So if you had known that in
September of 2013, what would you have done differently?
Dr. McCarthy. I would have assisted you with a huge
infiltration of kind of resources, but also telemental health
services. I continue to provide care, even while I work at VA's
central office, by telemedicine, and that is the kind of thing
that we can help for places that are having a hard time
recruiting. So deploying a system of being able to help----
Mr. O'Rourke. You would have expanded capacity. We would
have had greater access.
Dr. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. O'Rourke. People like Nick would have been able to get
in to see somebody.
So given the fact that we were not told what the real
conditions were and certainly the VA in El Paso and the VA in
Washington, D.C., director of VHA reported different numbers to
me to the veterans in our community, who is accountable for
that and what are the consequences? Who is responsible?
Dr. McCarthy. I am not prepared to answer that question. I
am sorry. I would be happy to take that one for the record.
Mr. O'Rourke. That is my case in point. You can't tell me
who is accountable. There are no consequences for veterans
dying. Nothing is going to change as long as we still have the
same mentality and culture at the VA, which you exemplify today
in your testimony. The fact that you cannot tell me who is
accountable for this, that there are no consequences, that you
agree that if you had known the truth, you would have done
something different and arguably people would have survived who
are now dead, and yet there are no consequences.
I appreciate the surge in resources, the additional
providers, your flight to El Paso in mid-June, but unless we
change the culture at VA, this is going to be a temporary fix
that will not last.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Jolly, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Jolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and General Steele,
thank you for being here today.
Why are you pessimistic about the VA embracing art as a----
Lieutenant General Steele. That is a great question.
Mr. Jolly. It was your statement, not mine, by the way.
Lieutenant General Steele. That was a great question that
you asked me.
I just think from the experiences, sir, that we have had in
regards to trying to bring it in as an alternative therapy,
along with these other issues that we are talking about,
alternative therapies, I believe, because I am an eternal
optimist, that the pessimism that I have about the VA, they
will be pulled into it because of what is happening here and
what we are being able to be successful with in the Department
of Defense and the military right now because they are
clamoring for art therapy because it works, particularly in the
early stages of the Special Operations Command, those warriors
who are having multiple deployments that are going back, they
have come, they have sought art therapy and it has been very
successful, returns them to the fight for Admiral McRaven and
the special operators, and I believe that whole mechanism
within DoD will result and it eventually being main streamed
into VA if we pull all of these together, alternative
therapies. So that is the reasons for that.
Mr. Jolly. Thank you.
Dr. McCarthy, is there something that stands in the way--
you know, you have a major research university partner ready to
collaborate with a peer-review alternative therapy, what stands
in the way of the VA from embracing that generally? I mean is
it bureaucracy? Is it procedure? Is it regulation? Is it
funding? Is it institutional bias? Is it not admitted here?
Dr. McCarthy. I am sorry, I don't have an exact answer to
that. I would really be happy to review the program and
understand it and then understand what the barriers might be in
order to make those particular--make the implementation. I
personally don't know.
Mr. Jolly. Sure. And I guess I am just asking the general
conceptual. We hear about all of these alternative therapies
that are available, these non-pharmaceutical therapies that are
available that work. In my previous profession, I tried to work
with the VA research department on a regenerative proposal that
was discovered at a non-VA center and I came up against a bias
of extramural research not wanting to be, you know, be too tied
to extramural research and therapies.
I am just asking an assessment, not why not art, but is
there an institutional bias against extramural research and
solutions?
Dr. McCarthy. I would not say that there is an
institutional bias. What I can say is that VA funds in
particular intramural research and some of our providers are
certainly funded externally, but we don't tend to fund
extramural research. The way to fund that is to partner with
someone in the VA and then it would become intramural and that
would be what would allow the funding.
Mr. Jolly. On non-drug therapies, are there any pertinent
regulations that control how a VA physician counsels a patient
on pharmaceutical therapies versus non-pharmaceutical
therapies? Are those dictated by other medical standards or are
there VA regulations that address that.
Mr. Carroll. Congressman, that is an important question. I
think the standard within mental health care for VA treatment
is to provide the care that makes sense for the veteran at the
veteran's point in life. We offer a recovery model which would
include a range of evidence-based psychotherapies, evidence-
based psychopharmacologies, certainly supported by
complementary and alternative medicine approaches, but it is to
be an integrated package of care that makes sense for the
veteran at that particular point in their life. So it doesn't
bias against anyone one of those or towards any one of those.
Mr. Jolly. Then I have a capacity question, which is when
it does come to some of the pharmaceuticals, the first 30 or 60
days--again, I am not a doctor, but I know it is kind of
critical when you begin a regiment or frankly the testimony we
heard earlier when you switch medications because DoD to VA, is
there more precise oversight or care provided to the patient or
is there a different follow-up with patients in those first 30
days or 60 days that they begin a pharmaceutical regiment?
Dr. McCarthy. I can speak to this. It is clearly the
expectation that people are monitored more carefully as you are
making changes, either initiating a therapy or making increases
in doses, yes.
Mr. Jolly. Okay, thank you.
One last question: Dr. Steele, quickly, you have a
distinguished DoD career and now working within VA, are there
areas where DoD/VA, the transition, all of this together, given
your career of experience and now with the research university,
one or two things, quickly, that you would say could be game
changers?
Lieutenant General Steele. The first is that accountability
and acceptance of responsibility are the game changers, that
the separation from active duty to the VA system is such that
it needs to have all this cohesiveness to be able to ensure
that everything is transferred over--all the HIPAA discussions
we have had--it is all transferred over. If we could get
legislation that does that and to ensure that there is
transparency and openness, I think that we have got a great
chance to be able to have a major game change in all of this.
Mr. Jolly. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Walz, you are recognized.
Mr. Walz. Well, thank you, Chairman for holding the hearing
and to each of you.
And I was going to say, Dr. McCarthy I was thinking, and I
was going to say that it is not personal, but then I got to
thinking that that is not true; there is nothing more personal
than this. We had Daniel and Brian and Clay and this is pretty
personal stuff.
And so I guess the thing I am most amazed about is that I
am amazed at the lack of anticipating what is going to be asked
of you when you come here, and it shows me that it is a lack of
self-reflection on this. I could have anticipated the question
that the chairman was going to ask where you didn't have an
answer. I could have anticipated what Mr. O'Rourke was going to
say. You probably could anticipate maybe what I am going to ask
because I ask it to every one of you who sits here and yet it
might be symptomatic of that why would we go to that trouble--
why would we look?
And my answer to you is, is because we are reflecting what
the public is telling us. We are a reflection--if this place is
working correctly, we should be mirroring and channeling that,
and so I guess that is most disillusioned.
Again, General Steele, I am, along with you, the eternal
optimist, because on the matter of now--what the point now is
nothing matters but results. Nothing matters that we get this
fixed, right? The American public is fully behind getting this
right and we just have to figure out how to do that.
Again, here is what I caution all of you is that people
have sat there and offered up good suggestions. We even got so
far as getting things into play, so Dr. Carroll You get to
answer a few questions now. Here's what the law said that was
required of you. In carrying out the comprehensive program, the
secretary shall provide for research on best practices and
prevention. Research shall be conducted under this subsection
in consultation with the heads of the following entities: The
Department of Health and Human Services--what have you done
with them?
Mr. Carroll. Sir, we are in partnership with Department of
Health and Human Services and DoD regarding--and through The
National Action Alliance on Suicide Prevention.
Mr. Walz. What has come out of that in concrete results and
implementation that went forward?
Mr. Carroll. We have--education of the suicide prevention
coordinators provide at every VA medical center. They provide
at the veterans service organizations to veterans groups, to
veteran providers, as well as all VA and VHA and VBA----
Mr. Walz. How do you measure that, because I am going to go
to this--you are responsible for doing this: In carrying out
the plan, the secretary shall provide for outreach to and
education of veterans and families for veterans with special
emphasis on providing information to veterans of Operation
Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom of these veterans. Educate
to promote mental health shall include the following: removing
the stigma associated with, encouraging veterans to seek
treatment, promote skills for coping with mental illness, help
families with veterans understanding issues arising,
identifying signs, and encouraging veterans.
You just saw a family here that said they didn't hear a
damn thing from you. Would that not be the measure?
Mr. Carroll. We have failed these families, sir. There is
no question about that. Our suicide prevention campaign last
year was called Stand By Them. It was specifically aimed
towards veterans and people aimed in the community to stand by
veterans and to reach out and to support them to look for the
signs of suicide and to encourage to get them into care.
Our suicide prevention coordinators at every VA medical
center do at least five outreach events to community
organizations, veterans service organizations every month.
Mr. Walz. What does the peer-support counseling program
look like? How much training are you doing and how much
encouraging--are you encouraging outside people to come in and
peer support?
Mr. Carroll. Absolutely. Peer support is one of the most
transformative things that we have done in VA mental health
care. We have hired 915 peer support providers over the last
year. They are veterans. They are veterans who are in recovery
from a situation in their own lives. We have them either
trained or certified as peer-support providers or we will pay
for that training. They are deployed across VA medical centers.
We need more of them. We want them to be in primary care, as
well as in mental health programs. They are a very
transformative force in our organization, sir.
Mr. Walz. So we have some things out there, and I bring
these up because we are going to have to see how this
implements moving forward as we start to do things. I fall into
this camp, and I think it was Dr. Sherin who made the case, we
certainly aren't going to do it all alone. There are 40,000
non-profits out there to help veterans; they simply aren't very
well coordinated.
So, Dr. Sherin, I would ask you, what level of confidence
do you have in this time we will get there? Because--just a
quick anecdote from me is I am a provider in the community who
was fee-based. He mostly treats Vietnam veterans. This guy is a
local legend and beloved in that group there, and so in the
midst of all of this, of course, with perfect--ear, he
cancelled his contract in the middle of this after 30 years
from the VA on this. And so now I have got 24 Vietnam veterans
who are like, why the heck did you cancel this, this one was
working? Now I got to go up to the VA and start again.
So, Dr. Sherin, what do you think, is there a chance that
this new model, in which you are advocating, which I think most
of us intuitively know is the right way to go?
Dr. Sherin. I think there is. I think there is. The VA has
led the way in the effort, but the VA is doing this internally,
so this is happening within the walls of the VA and the
concepts that we are pushing are actually to go beyond the
walls. If we want to promote recovery and reintegration, we
need veterans working with each other in the community.
Mr. Walz. So some of the things that I read out of the Josh
Omvig Act that the VA is doing, those could be applied the same
way and already are?
Dr. Sherin. Absolutely. That is right.
Mr. Walz. Well, I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Walz.
Very quickly, and thank you Members for being here.
Under threat of subpoena we finally got from VA the 2013
mental health employee survey, and if I can, I want to read
just a few excerpts and ask if you will comment.
Leadership is disrespectful, autocratic and uncaring. They
are clear that getting bonuses is the top priority if we want
to keep our jobs. This is the worst leadership from Senator
Richter on down that I have ever heard of.
The next one, poor leadership and administrative skills
causing more confusion and disorganization at times when my
superior does not fully find out all aspects of the issues
before issuing a decree.
And the third one, no effective leadership in mental health
for psych nurses, abusive management practices such as control,
self-selecting, choosing staff, performance roles, no
transparency.
Comments? I mean it took a long time for this committee to
get this information.
Dr. McCarthy. And I apologize for that delay. I don't know
what held it up.
The Chairman. Oh, I do. Continue.
Dr. McCarthy. I have had a chance to review some of the
aggregated data from that particular----
The Chairman. You have not had a chance to review it?
Dr. McCarthy. I have, sorry.
The Chairman. Okay.
Dr. McCarthy. And that survey consisted of items that could
be rated, as well as the free text comments, and what you
shared were some of the free text comments, but the other side
of it is there are some aggregated results that are significant
from 2012 to 2013. As we hired more individuals to be part of
the team, people did focus on a real sense of teamwork and be
able to provide for the veterans.
Could I also add that--I would just like to respond to Mr.
O'Rourke that I would like to restate my answer to your
question about accountability and who is responsible. I think
we at VA are all responsible and that includes me, and I
apologize for not saying that beforehand, but when you reframed
that question to me, it became clear that I answered that wrong
and I am sorry.
The Chairman. And one other--Dr. Carroll, you made this
comment just a second ago talking about peer support was one of
the greatest things that you did. Did VA support that?
Mr. Carroll. Support it financially, sir?
The Chairman. No, the concept.
Mr. Carroll. Yes.
The Chairman. You did?
Mr. Carroll. Yes, we had----
The Chairman. You fought it every step of the way. You
fought it every step of the way. This committee and other
people said you need to bring these folks who have experienced
this in their own lives forward and VA fought tooth and nail
against it.
Mr. Carroll. I regret that, sir. Since I have been part of
the central office team since 2007, we have been looking for
ways to move this forward.
The Chairman. I don't believe--if you ask any member who
has been sitting here for an extended period of time, they will
tell you that VA has, in fact, fought bringing them in because
they claim they didn't have the right credentials, they were
not specific to the treatment, and, in fact, you just
highlighted it as one of your best successes.
Dr. McCarthy. So thank you for your partnership in that.
The Chairman. With that, if there are no further comments
or questions, we thank everybody. We thank the witnesses for
being here today.
I would ask unanimous consent that all members would have
five legislative days with which to revise and extend and add
extraneous material.
Without objection, so ordered.
Once again, thanks to the witnesses and thanks to the
members. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:38 p.m. the committee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of Jeff Miller, Chairman
Welcome to today's Full Committee oversight hearing entitled,
``Service should not lead to Suicide: Access to VA's Mental Health
Care.''
Following a Committee investigation which uncovered widespread data
manipulation and accompanying patient harm at the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) medical facilities nationwide, this Committee has
held a series of Full Committee oversight hearings over the last
several weeks to evaluate the systemic access and integrity failures
that have consumed the VA health care system.
Perhaps none of these hearings have presented the all-too-human
face of VA's failures so much as today's hearing will--a hearing that I
believe will show the horrible human cost of VA's dysfunction and, dare
I say, corruption.
At its heart, access to care is not about numbers; it's about
people.
Recently, the Committee heard from a veteran who had attempted to
receive mental health care at a VA Community Based Outpatient Clinic in
Pennsylvania.
This veteran was told repeatedly by the VA employee he spoke with
that he would be unable to get an appointment for six months.
However, when that employee left, another VA employee leaned in to
tell this veteran that if he just told her that he was thinking of
killing himself, she would be able to get him an appointment much
sooner--in just three months instead of six.
Fortunately, that veteran was not considering suicide.
But what about those veterans who are?
How many of the tens of thousands of veterans that VA has now
admitted have been left waiting weeks, months, and even years for care
were seeking mental health care appointments?
How many are suicidal or are edging towards suicide as a result of
the inability to get the care they have earned?
Despite significant increases in VA's mental health and suicide
prevention budget, programs, and staffing in recent years, the suicide
rate among veteran patients has remained more or less stable since
1999, with approximately twenty-two veteran suicide deaths per day.
However, the most recent VA data has shown that over the last three
years, rates of suicide have increased by nearly forty percent among
male veterans under thirty who use VA health care services and by more
than seventy percent among male veterans between the ages of eighteen
and twenty-four years of age who use VA health care services.
This morning, we will hear testimony from three families--the
Somers, the Selkes [SELL-KEYS], and the Portwines--who will tell us
about their sons--Daniel, Clay, and Brian--three Operation Enduring
Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom veterans who sought VA mental health
care following combat.
Each of these young men faced barrier after barrier in their
struggle to get help.
Each of these young men eventually succumbed to suicide.
In a note he left behind, Daniel Somers wrote that he felt his
government had ``abandoned'' him and referenced coming home to face a
``system of dehumanization, neglect, and indifference.''
VA owed Daniel--and Clay and Brian--so much more than that.

Prepared Statement of Michael H. Michaud, Ranking Minority Member
Good morning, and thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this hearing
today.
We have had many discussions and debates about how to deliver the
best health care services to our Nation's veterans, and how to ensure
accountability within the leadership ranks of the VA.
Over the course of these recent hearings and discussions, we have
touched on a number of important issues. But one that we haven't zeroed
in on too much yet has been access to mental health care and suicide
prevention services for our veterans. That's why this hearing today is
so important.
I'd like to thank all of our panelists for joining us today, but in
particular I want to thank the family members joining us who have lost
loved ones--Howard and Jean Somers, Susan Selke and Peggy Portwine.
I know that speaking about the loss of a loved one--particularly a
child--can be an incredibly difficult and exhausting experience. But,
in this case, I believe we can and must honor the memories of the
children of Howard and Jean, Susan, and Peggy.
We can listen to their stories, identify what went wrong, and we
can take action to ensure those failures aren't repeated. So thank you
very, very much for joining us today and sharing your stories.
Eighteen to 22 veterans commit suicide each day. In my opinion,
that is 18 to 22 brave men and women each day who our system has let
down in some capacity. It is a totally unacceptable figure.
When a veteran is experiencing depression or other early warning
signs that may indicate mental health issues or even suicide, that must
be treated like an immediate medical crisis, because that is exactly
what it is. Veterans in that position should never be forced to wait
months on end for a medical consult because quite frankly, that is time
they may not have.
We have taken steps to help put in place programs and initiatives
aimed at early detection, and we have significantly increased our
funding. VA spending on mental health has doubled since 2007. But it's
not working as well as we would hope, and we have to figure out why--
and how we can correct these problems.
Our veterans are the ones paying the price for this dysfunction. A
2012 IG report found that VHA's data on whether it was providing timely
access to mental health services is totally unreliable.
And a GAO report from that year not only confirmed that disturbing
finding, but also said that inconsistent implementation of VHA's
scheduling policies made it difficult--if not near impossible--to get
patients the help they need when they need it. That is a problem we
have seen repeatedly as we dig into the VA's dysfunctions, and enough
is enough.
Our veterans and their families deserve a VA that delivers
timely mental health services that cover a spectrum of needs, from
PTSD, to counseling for family members of veterans, to urgent, round-
the-clock responses to a veteran in need. A recent VA OIG report found
that in one facility patients waited up to 432 days--well over a year--
for care.
So once again, we are finding that our veterans deserve much better
than the care they are receiving.
And of all the areas we must address, I would argue that fixing
mental health services is among the most urgent. I look forward to a
productive discussion that we will only begin today, but certainly
continue over the coming days, weeks and months.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Corrine Brown

Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for calling
this hearing today.
A veteran's mental health has been called many names
through too many wars. From ``soldier's heart'' in the Civil
War, to ``shell shock'' in World War I and ``combat'' or
``battle fatigue'' in World War II and now Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder.
Other terms used to describe military-related mood
disturbances include ``nostalgia'', ``not yet diagnosed
nervous'', ``irritable heart'', ``effort syndrome'', ``war
neurosis'', and ``operational exhaustion.''
Yet the name is not important for the disease, but how
those affected are treated.
The men and women in our military are risking their lives
to defend the freedom of this country and for them to be
discarded after their operational usefulness has ended is
inhuman and un-American.
I cannot think of anything more important to the returning
members of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan than knowing their
health, and especially their mental health, is uppermost in our
minds. It has been said that TBI is the signature injury of
these wars. It is our responsibility to make sure they are
treated properly when they get back.
Suicide is epidemic among our active duty servicemembers
and the veterans who have served this country in the past.
More reservists and national guardsmen are serving in
active duty now than in any other war. These men and women
don't necessarily live near a military base to get the proper
and timely treatment they need.
I do not think that VA and veterans mental health should be
contracted out to the lowest bidder in an effort to rush any
kind of care to our veterans. The VA has shown time and time
again that they are the worldwide experts in treating PTSD and
other mental illnesses, and that other mental health
professionals, no matter how knowledgeable, cannot know the
full range of PTSD symptoms unless they work regularly with
veterans.
I am reminded of the words of the first President of the
United States, George Washington, whose words are worth
repeating at this time:
``The willingness with which our young people are likely to
serve in any war, no matter how justified, shall be directly
proportional as to how they perceive the veterans of earlier
wars were treated and appreciated by their country.''
I look forward to hearing the testimony of those panelists
here today and learn how to best help those who have bravely
served our nation in war.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Scott Peters

I want to thank Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud,
and the Committee for tackling an issue that touches entirely
too many veterans and their families in my district, and
districts throughout the country.
Improving access to mental health services in the VA is
something I have a deep and committed interest in and while I
am not a member of this Committee there is no place I'd rather
be this morning.
I also want to thank the panelists for agreeing to be here
today to share their experiences and expertise--it takes a lot
of courage to do what you're doing and I want to thank you for
that.
Beyond the power of your stories, you are providing us an
invaluable education. These are insights that only you have and
I know we are all thankful to have the opportunity to learn
from you, and to use the knowledge we gain to work toward
eliminating the barriers our veterans face in receiving the
care they need.
I especially want to thank you, Howard and Jean Somers--not
only for your participation today, but for your continued
leadership and advocacy on behalf of Daniel, the education
you've given me, and for fighting for our nation's veterans and
their families. Your work in the face of such a tragedy is an
inspiration to all of us. As the father of a 20-year-old son, I
can't even imagine such as loss.
Sadly, the report you have shared with us today highlights
the struggles faced by not only your son, but the struggle
faced by veterans and their families throughout the country.
The number of veterans who found themselves in a position
similar to Daniel's is unacceptably high.
Like many, Daniel returned from his service with invisible
wounds including Post-Traumatic Stress and Traumatic Brain
Injury. He was also afflicted with Gulf War Syndrome.
Like many, he suffered in silence because his attempts to
reach out for help through the Department of Veterans Affairs
were met with roadblocks and inefficiencies that left him with
the feeling that no one cared.
Like many, Daniel tragically took his life rather than
continue to struggle with his wounds, his constant pain, and
the burdens of his service.
The truth is Daniel wasn't and isn't alone. Every day, 22
veterans find themselves with the same horrible choices and
make the same decision he did.
As a country, we have failed these men and women who
sacrificed so much to serve. The Somers' experience is evidence
that there were steps that should have been taken and
highlights systemic problems with the way the VA delivers care.
The House and the Senate have taken the initial steps
toward fixing these problems. We will continue to work toward
achieving much-needed reforms. However, these reforms will take
time, and our veterans who are suffering from the very real
pain of post-war mental anguish, shouldn't have to wait.
While Congress acts, and the VA implements reforms, our
veterans and their families should take advantage of the many
community resources available to them.
There are an estimated 44,000 volunteer organizations
dedicated to helping servicemembers and their families:
providing resources, information, and outlets for those who
have kept us safe.
Too often, servicemembers and their families are not aware
of the services available to them. That is why the Somers
initiated Operation Engage America. With greater visibility,
the programs offered by extraordinary Americans can reach
veterans and their families in time to make a difference.
I had the opportunity to attend the inaugural event at
American Legion Post 731 in June of this year.
I have never met a family more dedicated to sharing their
story, raising awareness for the invisible wounds our
servicemembers suffer, and committed to making a major impact
on the way we care for our veterans.
Your determination and resolve in the face of sacrifice and
severe adversity is truly inspiring. I thank you, Howard and
Jean, for everything you have done, and everything you will
continue to do to ensure that we in Congress remain committed
to fixing the flaws in the way we treat our veterans.
From time to time in Congress, you see testimony that you
know is going to right away make a difference and that is
certainly what's happened today. You can feel very confident
that our nation's heroes will be helped by the time and effort
you've put in today.
I look forward to continuing to work with you to resolve
these issues and to make things right with the veterans the VA
treats.

Prepared Statement of Howard and Jean Somers

Thank you Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and
Committee members.
We are grateful for the opportunity to testify today, and
it is especially good to see Representative Kirkpatrick, who
has been a great ally to us in our effort to advance reforms of
the VA based on the experience of our son, Daniel Somers.
As many of you know, our journey started on June 10, 2013,
when Daniel took his own life following his return from a
second deployment in Iraq. At that time, he suffered from Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder, Traumatic Brain Injury and Gulf War
Syndrome. Daniel spent nearly six futile and tragic years
trying to access the VA health and benefit systems before
finally collapsing under the weight of his own despair. We have
attached ``The Story of Daniel Somers'' to our testimony, which
provides the details of his efforts, and we hope you will read
it if you have not already done so.
Today, it is our hope that we can begin the process which
will ultimately provide hope and care to the 22 veterans a day
who are presently ending their lives.
Four days after Daniel's death, we sat with Daniel's wife,
who has a Bachelor of Science in Nursing, and his mother-in-
law, who is a psychiatrist, and prepared a 19 page report that
we titled Systemic Issues at the VA. We have shared that
document with several of you over the last year, and it is also
attached to our testimony.
The purpose of this report remains the same as when we
wrote it: to improve access to first-rate health care at the
VA, to make the VA accountable to veterans it was created to
serve and to make every VA employee an advocate for each
veteran. (VHA)
A1.  At the start, Daniel was turned away from the VA due
to his National Guard Inactive Ready Reserve status.
A2.  Upon initially accessing the VA system, he was,
essentially, denied therapy.
A3.  He had innumerable problems with VA staff being
uncaring, insensitive and adversarial. Literally no one at the
facility advocated for him.
A4.  Administrators frequently cited HIPAA as the reason
for not involving family members and for not being able to use
modern technology.
B1.  The VA's appointment system known as VISTA is at best
inadequate. It impedes access and lacks basic documentation.
B2.  The VA information technology infrastructure is
antiquated and prevents related agencies from sharing critical
information. There is a desperate need for compatibility
between computer systems within the Veterans Health
Administration, the Veterans Benefits Administration, and the
DoD.
B3.  Continuity of care was not a priority. There was no
succession planning, no procedures in place for ``warm
handoffs''; no contracts in place for locum tenems; and a
fierce refusal to outsource anyone or anything.
B4.  At the time Daniel was at the Phoenix VA, there was no
pain management clinic to help him with his chronic and acute
fibromyalgia pain.
B5.  There were few coordinated inter-Agency goals,
policies and procedures. The fact that the formularies of the
DoD and VA are separate and different makes no sense since many
DoD patients who are stabilized on a particular medication
regimen must re-justify their needs when they transfer to the
VA.
B6.  There were inadequate facilities and an inefficient
charting process. (VBA)
There was no way for Daniel to ascertain the status of his
benefits claim.
There was no VHA/VBA appointment system interfacing, nor
prioritized, proactive procedures.
There was no communication between Disability Determination
and Vocational Rehabilitation.
This report is offered in the spirit of a call to action
and reflects the experiences of Daniel with VA program services
beginning in the fall of 2007 until his death last June as seen
through our eyes.
Our concern then was that the impediments and deficiencies
which Daniel encountered were symptomatic of deeper and broader
issues in the VA--potentially affecting the experiences of a
much broader population of servicemembers and veterans.
Unfortunately, this has been proven true as dramatically
evidenced by recent revelations.
Many of the reforms outlined in our report will require
additional funding for the VA. But with that new funding should
come greater scrutiny and a demand for better, measurable
results.
There is, however, an alternative to attempting to repair
the existing, broken system. We believe Congress should
seriously consider fundamentally revamping the mission of the
VA health system. In the new model we envision, the VA would
transition into a Center of Excellence specifically for war-
related injuries, while the more routine care provided by the
rest of the VA health care system would be opened to private-
sector service providers--much like Tricare. That approach
would compel the current model to self-improve and compete for
veterans' business. This would ultimately allow all veterans to
seek the best care available, while allowing the VA to focus
its resources and expertise on the treatment of complex
injuries suffered in modern warfare.
We thank you for your time, and would be happy to further
discuss our recommendations and suggestions. We sincerely hope
that the systemic issues raised here will provide a platform to
bring the new VA Administration together with lawmakers,
veterans and private sector medical professionals and
administrators for a comprehensive review and reform of the
entire VA system. And if the VA, Committee or Congress as a
whole make the decision to involve other stakeholders in a more
formal reform process, we would be honored to be among those
chosen to represent the views of affected families.

Prepared Statement of Susan Selke

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Distinguished
Members of the Committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about
this critically important topic of mental health care access at
the VA, suicide among veterans, and especially about the story
and experience of our son, Clay.
My name is Susan Selke and I'm accompanied here by my
husband, Richard. I'm here today as the mother of Clay Hunt, a
Marine Corps combat veteran who died by suicide in March 2011
at the age of 28.
Clay enlisted in the Marine Corps in May 2005 and served in
the infantry. In January of 2007, Clay deployed to Iraq's Anbar
Province, close to Fallujah. Shortly after arriving in Iraq,
Clay was shot through the wrist by a sniper's bullet that
barely missed his head. After he returned to Twenty Nine Palms
in California to recuperate, Clay began experiencing many
symptoms of post-traumatic stress, including panic attacks, and
was diagnosed with PTS later that year.
Following the recuperation from his gunshot wound, Clay
attended and graduated from the Marine Corps Scout Sniper
School in March of 2008. A few weeks after graduation, Clay
deployed again, this time to southern Afghanistan. Much like
his experience during his deployment to Iraq, Clay witnessed
and experienced the loss of several fellow Marines during his
second deployment.
Clay returned home from Afghanistan in October of 2008, and
was then honorably discharged from the Marine Corps in April of
2009. He earned numerous awards during his service in the
Marine Corps, including the Purple Heart for the injuries he
sustained in Iraq.
Clay received a 30 percent disability rating from the VA
for his PTS along with two smaller ratings for other health
issues after separating from the military. After discovering
his that PTS prevented him from maintaining a steady job, Clay
appealed the 30 percent rating only to be met with significant
bureaucratic barriers, including the VA losing his files.
The lapse in time during this appeals process left Clay
worried about his professional and financial future. Eighteen
months later, and five weeks after his death, Clay's appeal
finally went through and the VA rated Clay's PTS 100 percent.
The stresses and delays Clay experienced with his claim and
appeal processes were also mirrored in his experience accessing
and using VA medical care and educational benefits.
Clay exclusively used the VA for his medical care after
separating from the Marine Corps. Immediately after his
separation Clay lived in the Los Angeles area and received care
at the VA medical center there in LA. Clay constantly voiced
concerns about the care he was receiving, both in terms of the
challenges he faced with scheduling appointments as well as the
treatment he received for his PTSD, which consisted solely of
medication. He received counseling only as far as a brief
discussion regarding whether the medication he was prescribed
was working or not. If it was not, he would be given a new
medication. Clay used to say, ``I'm a guinea pig for drugs.
They'll put me on one thing, I'll have side effects, and then
they put me on something else.''
At the same time, Clay also expressed frustration with
delayed GI Bill benefit payments. This only aggravated his PTS
symptoms and inhibited his ability to heal and move on with his
life.
In late 2010, Clay moved briefly to Grand Junction,
Colorado, where he also used the VA there, and then finally
home to Houston to be closer to our family. The Houston VA
would not refill prescriptions Clay had received from the Grand
Junction VA because they said that prescriptions were not
transferable and a new assessment would have to be done before
his medications could be re-prescribed.
Clay only had two appointments in January and February of
2011, and neither was with a psychiatrist. It wasn't until
March 15th that Clay was finally able to see a psychiatrist at
the Houston VA medical center. But after the appointment, Clay
called me on his way home and said, ``Mom, I can't go back
there. The VA is way too stressful and not a place I can go.
I'll have to find a Vet Center or something.''
After Clay's death, I personally went to the Houston VA
medical center to retrieve his medical records, and I
encountered an environment that was highly stressful. There
were large crowds, no one was at the information desk and I had
to flag down a nurse to ask directions to the medical records
area. I cannot imagine how anyone dealing with mental health
injuries like PTS could successfully access care in such a
stressful setting without exacerbating their symptoms.
Just two weeks after his appointment with a psychiatrist at
the Houston VA medical center, Clay took his own life. The date
was March 31, 2011. The cause of death--a self-inflicted
gunshot wound to his head.
Clay was consistently open about having PTS and survivor's
guilt, and he tried to help others coping with similar issues.
He worked hard to move forward and found healing by helping
people, including participating in humanitarian work in Haiti
and Chile after devastating earthquakes.
He also starred in a public service advertising campaign
aimed at easing the transition for his fellow veterans, and he
helped wounded warriors in long distance road biking events.
Clay fought for veterans in the halls of Congress and
participated in Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America's
annual Storm the Hill campaign to advocate for legislation to
improve the lives of veterans and their families.
Clay's story details the urgency needed in addressing this
issue. Despite his proactive and open approach to seeking care
to address his injuries, the VA system did not adequately
address his needs. Even today, we continue to hear about both
individual and systemic failures by the VA to provide adequate
care and address the needs of veterans.
Not one more veteran should have to go through what Clay
went through with the VA after returning home from war. Not one
more parent should have to testify before a congressional
committee to compel the VA to fulfill its responsibilities to
those who served and sacrificed.
You all, especially here in the House of Representatives,
have been aggressive, courageous, and vigilant in holding the
VA accountable and trying to equip it with the resources it
needs to care for veterans. But given the magnitude and extent
of the problems at the VA, more is needed.
Mr. Chairman, I understand that today you are introducing
the Suicide Prevention for America's Veterans Act. The reforms,
evaluations, and programs directed by this legislation will be
critical to helping the VA better serve and treat veterans
suffering from mental injuries from war. Had the VA been doing
these things all along, it very well may have saved Clay's
life.
Mr. Chairman, Richard and I again appreciate the
opportunity to share Clay's story and our recommendations for
how we can help ensure the VA will uphold its responsibility to
properly care for America's veterans.
Thank you.

Prepared Statement of Peg Portwine

I am here before you to tell the testimony of my son Spc.
Brian Portwine. Brian was an infantryman and serve in Operation
Iraqi Freedom in 2006-2008 and in Operation Enduring Freedom in
2010.
During his first tour he was deployed to Baghdad and his
job was to patrol Haifa street, which was a very dangerous
area. This was before the surge of troops. During this tour,
Brian lost 8 brothers.
While in Iraq in 2006 Brian was in a Bradley tank that was
struck by a RPG. The tank was immediately engulfed in flames
and the driver was knocked unconscious. Due to the driver being
able to hydraulically let down the ramp the 5 soldiers had to
scramble thru the fire to manually lower the ramp and
miraculously they were able to get out, all with injuries.
Brian suffered a blast concussion and had lacerations to his
face and legs from shrapnel. This was Brian's first episode of
Traumatic Brain Injury.
During another mission Brian and his 1st Sgt were on patrol
in a Humvee and had switched seats so Brian was now in the
passenger seat. Twenty minutes later an IED hit the Humvee and
his 1st Sgt was killed and Brian was thrown from the Humvee and
injured his back. Besides these 2 incidents Brian was involved
in 5 other IEDs during his 15 month deployment.
After coming home after his 1st deployment Brian had
trouble with short term memory. When his friends were going
somewhere he would often say ``where are we going again, you
know I have scrambled brains'' To help cope with this he would
post everything he had to do on his calendar or computer.
In 2010 Brian was recalled to the Army and deploying from
Fort Shelby, Miss. During this deployment Brian did not email
or call home or to his friends. Little did we know how he was
struggling with PTSD and TBI. He had panic attacks being on the
same roads he had traveled on the 1st tour where IEDs went off
often. He had nightmares 3 x a week and would wake up his unit
and someone would have to wake him up. He suffered with
anxiety, depression, insomnia, poor concentration, and
hypervigilance. But he was never sent home.
After returning from his 2nd deployment in Dec. 2010 to
Daytona Beach he did not want to return to school. We did not
know he had applied for disability due to his PTSD/TBI. He knew
the stigma of saying you had PTSD so he kept it to himself.
During out processing from Fort Shelby in 2010 Brain was
diagnosed with PTSD, TBI, depression, and anxiety. During one
assessment the counselor stated ``Pt cannot remember questions
asked''. He had guilt, anxiety, hypervigilance, poor
concentration, rage and anger but the VA/DoD told him to
follow-up with the local VA outpatient.
I am horrified by this. All his symptoms are classic
symptoms of PTSD and TBI. He should have been sent to the
National Intrepid Center for excellence at Fort Hood, TX where
they have a 3-4 week program for those with TBI and PTSD.
Brian deteriorated quickly from Dec, 2010 to May 2011. He
could not stand how he acted but had no coping methods or
treatment. It took a toll on his relationships with friends.
If the DoD and VA assessed Brian at high risk for suicide
it is their duty to treat him. But he got nothing.
Brian's unit has lost 3 others to suicide, one just June
21st, 2014. It is a very slippery slope from PTSD and TBI and
the VA should realize this.
Our soldiers never hesitated in their missions to protect,
serve, and sacrifice for our country.
Now it is time for the VA to prove their commitment to our
solders.
I never knew of Brian's PTSD and TBI or high suicide risk.
I would think a life threatening event like this should be told
to the emergency contact person.
The VA needs to work the service organizations and include
the families in the plan of care.
I beg this Committee to pass act 2182, the Suicide
Prevention for Americans Act
As a mother I have lost my only miracle child to suicide.
It is devastating!
I would like to close by saying a quote from Rose Kennedy.
It says, ``time heals all wounds.''
I disagree. The wounds remain. In time the mind to protect
its sanity covers them with scar tissue and the pain lessen.
But it is never gone. Thank you.

Prepared Statement of Josh Renschler

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Members of the
Committee:
I am honored to have the opportunity to speak to you today
regarding VA mental health care.
I proudly served as a United States Army Infantryman for
5\1/2\ years, and was medically retired due to severe injuries
from a mortar blast in Iraq. Working now with a non-profit in
Washington state, I assist servicemembers, veterans and their
families who are struggling due to deployment-related trauma. I
have a great deal of experience with VA medical facilities and
VA mental health care--not just as a patient, but as an
advocate for many other warriors I've mentored, and through
dialogue with veteran leaders from across the country. Recently
VA leadership invited me to participate in an online learning
session through VA's eHealth University to share my perspective
as a veteran accessing VA care, so VA clinicians and staff
could have the opportunity to learn from my experience.
That experience with the VA health care system began in
2008. As I explained in testifying before the Subcommittee on
Health last year, that experience began badly. At the time I
was being treated for anxiety, sleep problems, migraines, pain,
and seizures, and it had taken Army doctors 3 years to
determine the right medications and dosages to treat those
conditions. Because several of those 8 different medications
were not on the VA formulary, my primary care provider at the
American Lake VA Medical Center substituted different
medications, despite the urging of my wife due to the failure
of these medications in the past. The side effects caused me so
much difficulty that I began to backslide in my recovery. I was
soon on 13 medications (some to simply counter the effects of
others); and soon all my conditions worsened and I had a severe
panic attack at work.
Since then, with my multiple medical and surgical issues
and my work with other warriors, I've had extensive experience
with VA care. As to VA mental health care in particular, I've
benefitted from excellent care at a VA medical center that for
a period of time made that care a priority and staffed it
accordingly. The facility provided easy one-stop access to OEF/
OIF/OND veterans through a ``Deployment Health Team'' that
brought together in one spot medical, mental health, pharmacy
and social work providers. Unfortunately, medical center
leadership concluded that providing this excellent, well-
staffed interdisciplinary care was too costly. With budget
considerations trumping patient-centered care considerations,
the team's providers were reassigned. (While the facility still
has a unit called the ``deployment health team'' it now
provides only primary care and social work services. Having
only a skeleton staff, the team manages a huge caseload and, as
a result, has long wait times and shorter appointments.)
Instead of seeing an interdisciplinary team, GWOT veterans now
go through an impersonal intake/assessment process. From there
they are channeled into a conventional system where providers
do not work as a team, and where veterans have to navigate
their way to the different services scattered across the
sprawling, complex campus to get the care they need. For many
of the warriors with whom I've worked, just navigating around
the many buildings housing different treatment services in this
complex facility is anxiety-provoking.

Interdisciplinary, Team-Based Care: Key to Mental Health Care
and Suicide Prevention

I cite my and other veterans' very positive experience with
this interdisciplinary, team-based-care approach (and the
effective demise of that program) because it highlights some
very important points. First, veterans with mental health
issues are seldom going to open up to a clinician they've never
met and begin discussing painful, private issues. They're more
likely to skirt those deeper issues and simply report that
they're experiencing difficulty sleeping, having headaches, or
some more general problem, with the hope that there's
medication to provide relief. It takes time to build trust to
open up to deeper problems or even to recognize them. And not
every clinician is necessarily skilled at eliciting that trust
or insightful enough to gauge from a veteran's demeanor that
there are deeper issues, and to ask the probing questions that
might begin to identify them. Working with a team increases the
likelihood that one or more will see things that others missed.
Interdisciplinary care has profound implications for
suicide-prevention. Veterans will rarely volunteer to
clinicians that they're contemplating suicide, and there aren't
obvious signs by which a mental health provider can reliably
identify a veteran as a suicide risk. And we certainly won't
prevent suicides by having physicians go down a mandatory
checklist and mechanically asking a veteran-patient a series of
questions like ``have you thought recently about harming
yourself?'' While people who commit suicide often have a mental
health condition, that alone is seldom an explanation for a
suicidal act. Life events and problems are often important
catalysts.\1\  But in a treatment system, where, for example,
I'm sent to Building 3 to see the neurologist for severe back
pain, to Building 61 to see a psychiatrist for medication to
help with sleep problems, and to Building 81 to see my social
worker for serious relationship problems, no one is getting a
full picture and no one can see and put together the red-flag
signs that may point to the fact that my life is spinning out
of control. This isn't just a problem in VA. But as an
integrated health care provider, VA can provide the kind of
care I got from the interdisciplinary deployment health team in
the past. There, the team members shared observations, and
could see potential problems as they had begun to develop and
question veterans about issues before they became explosive. In
my view, therefore, it is much less fruitful to press VA to
establish or re-design ``suicide prevention programs'' than to
improve VA health and mental health care delivery.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Keith Hawton, ``Suicide prevention: a complex global
challenge,'' 1(1) The Lancet (June 2014), 2.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``Access'' Is Only Half the Equation

When we discuss mental health care, it's not enough to talk
about ``access.'' One has to get to the question, ``access to
what?'' Access to a system in which I go to three different
buildings to see three different providers for health issues
which are all related to my mental health--pain, lack of sleep,
and relationship issues--is a real problem when those providers
aren't working as a team, and aren't even given the needed time
to coordinate their observations and treatment approaches with
one another. In other words, access to mental health care isn't
enough unless that mental health care is also effective.
This is particularly important as it relates to combat
veterans; having been trained to tough it out and soldier
through pain, they often come into treatment hesitantly and
even distrustfully. A provider needs to understand that warrior
mentality, and often must work hard to win that veteran's
trust. A clinician who doesn't understand that warrior culture
or isn't permitted the time needed to develop that relationship
of trust is unlikely to have success in helping that warrior
overcome his or her demons. In my experience, veterans have a
greater likelihood in the VA of working with a clinician who
has some understanding of that warrior experience and of
working with combat-related mental health problems than they
would ``outside.'' But a veteran who has to work with a
provider who lacks cultural awareness or whose patient care
load doesn't allow time will inevitably become frustrated
(whether in the VA or outside) and often drop out of treatment.
Similarly, many veterans who aren't ready for an often very
traumatic exposure-based therapy have dropped out of these
intense multi-week treatment programs, even though they are
hailed as an ``evidence-based therapy.'' I question the wisdom
of evaluating facilities, as VA does, based on the percentage
of veterans with PTSD who complete these evidence-based
therapies. While the underlying intent has merit, there are
many reasons that veterans don't complete those programs: for
some, they're just too intense, for others, it's too difficult
to come in for treatment that often. The bottom line is that
this performance requirement, like others, can not only be
``gamed,'' it fails to take the patient's preferences into
account. VA has often cited the importance of a veteran-
centered approach to mental health care. But if care is to be
veteran-centered, as it must be, it's critical to recognize
each veteran's unique situation, and their individual treatment
preferences, and build systems to meet their needs and
preferences, not the other way around. That seems to me, to be
essential to providing effective care, whether in the VA or
elsewhere.
The warriors I'm describing--and I've worked with many of
them--very often don't come into treatment for PTSD or anxiety
or depression when the textbooks say they should, at an early
stage when the problems can be most easily dealt with. They
finally come into treatment when things have gotten really bad.
Sometimes that's when their spouse is threatening to leave. In
some cases, it's when they've gotten into trouble with law
enforcement, often involving substance abuse. Or it might be
when the veteran has experienced a panic attack or overwhelming
thoughts of self-harm, to cite some common examples. Timeliness
is obviously critical in those kinds of instances, and they're
not at all isolated occurrences among OEF/OIF veterans. Clearly
a veteran in distress who finally asks for help for a combat-
incurred mental health condition needs to get into treatment.
VA policy did establish the expectation that veterans were to
be afforded initial appointments for mental health care within
14 days. But--just as with the challenges many VA facilities
faced in meeting that requirement for primary care
appointments, limitations in mental health staffing at many
facilities have made provision of timely mental health care
either very challenging or impossible to meet. What I saw
facilities do was to reconfigure their staffing to meet the
technical requirement of the 14-day rule. At these facilities,
warriors with mental health issues were assessed within the 14-
day window; in that way they were ``seen,'' even though
facility staffing wouldn't permit an initial treatment
appointment itself until many weeks later. Understandably,
warriors who are at the end of their rope and finally seek help
at a VA medical facility often experience deep frustration and
even despair if they are told to wait six weeks or longer to
begin therapy. Deferred treatment can set the stage for
potentially tragic outcomes.
I do believe that there are VA facilities that are
providing veterans timely access to effective, patient-centered
mental health care. But that's certainly not the case
systemwide. Unfortunately there are no measures in place to
assess patient outcomes. (In that regard, I would suggest that
the Committee look into the rates at which OEF/OIF veterans
drop out of PTSD treatment programs, surely one relevant
indicator). But with what appear to be widespread disparities
in the timeliness of VA care (but not necessarily the same
focus on care-effectiveness), I understand that some have
called for expanding veterans' access to care from non-VA
providers.

Purchased Care: No Silver Bullet

It seems doubtful that that step by itself can be the
``silver bullet'' solution for veterans' mental health care.
For one thing, it assumes first that the private sector holds a
key to meeting VA's mental health workforce ``supply'' problem.
But a 2013 report to Congress warns of ``an already thinly
stretched [behavioral health] workforce.'' \2\  The report
points to longstanding concerns about a national shortage of
behavioral health workers, cited in previous publications,
including the following:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Hyde, P., ``Report to Congress on the Nation's Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Workforce Issues,'' Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (Jan. 24, 2013), 5. Accessed at http://
store.samhsa.gov/shin/content/PEP13-RTC-BHWORK/PEP13-RTC-BHWORK.pdf

A 2009 Study that found that 77 percent of
counties had a severe shortage of mental health
workers, both prescribers and non-prescribers and 96
percent of counties had some unmet need for mental
health prescribers;

A 2012 Government report that found there were
3669 areas of the country with shortages of mental
health professionals;

A 2007 Report that 55% of U.S. counties, all
rural, had no practicing psychiatrists, psychologists
or social workers; and

A 2010 Government report finding that more
than two-thirds of primary care physicians who tried to
obtain outpatient mental health services for their
patients reported they were unsuccessful due in part to
shortages in mental health care providers.\3\

\3\  Id., 10.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not only is there a real issue in terms of a national
mental health workforce shortage, but there are real quality of
care issues to contend with. According to the 2003 report of a
presidential commission on mental health care in this country,
``not only is there a shortage of [mental health providers, but
those providers who are available are not trained in evidence-
based and other innovative practices. This lack of education,
training, or supervision leads to a workforce that is ill-
equipped to use the latest breakthroughs in modern medicine.''
\4\ The Commission found that ``too few benefit from available
treatment'' because ``state-of-the-art treatments vital for
quality care and recovery . . . are not being used.'' \5\ A
later report by the Institute of Medicine that focused on
improving the quality of behavioral health care cited
``numerous studies [that] document the discrepancy between the
[mental health and substance use] care that is known to be
effective and the care that is actually delivered.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``Achieving the Promise: Transforming Mental Health Care in
America,'' The President's New Freedom Commission on Mental Health
(July 2003), 70. Accessed at http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content//
SMA03-3831/SMA03-3831.pdf.
\5\ Id., 68.
\6\ Institute of Medicine, ``Improving the Quality of Health Care
for Mental Health and Substance-Use Conditions,'' National Academies
Press, 2006, 35.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Better Purchased-Care Model

Years ago, Washington State's Department of Veterans
Affairs, recognized the unique needs of Wartime Veterans and
their families and established a PTSD Counseling Program to
provide access to best practices of care for those who
otherwise couldn't get that care through VA because of service-
unavailability or distance. Under the Department's program, 30
licensed practitioners across the state provide counseling
services at State expense; importantly each has a minimum of 24
years of experience and all providers are veterans or are
trained to be military and veteran culturally competent.
Veterans need only contact the program director who will
determine the best practitioner for the individual situation
and connect the Veteran with that office. Given the counselor's
experience and backgrounds, the veterans I've referred to the
program have found it very helpful. (For the same reasons,
veterans with whom I've worked and whom I've met around the
country have similarly positive experiences with VA's Vet
Centers.) But in the most recent instance, the veteran I
referred to the Washington State program was informed that all
the providers in his area had full case loads and were not
taking new clients.
I don't want to suggest that VA could not benefit from
greater use of purchasing care, where that care is available
and where it offers promise of being effective. But it would
not be particularly helpful simply for veterans to be ``seen''
outside the VA by a provider who is not equipped to provide
effective care--for lack of training in treating combat- or
MST-related PTSD, for lack of ``cultural competence,'' or any
other shortcomings. In short, it is pretty clear that providing
an avenue to mental health care, even if there is a source,
does not assure that veterans will get effective care.

Improving VA Mental Health Care

So what's the answer? It's important to appreciate that the
VA health care facilities do have caring, dedicated providers.
I know, for example, that some of my own health care providers
are coming in on weekends and staying late at night to keep up
with their work. I don't believe the answer to improving VA
mental health care is to demand more of those clinicians.
But I think we have to demand that VA mental health care--
especially for veterans with service-incurred mental health
conditions--become a top priority. VA leaders have, of course,
repeatedly stated that it is. But if that were so, why would my
VA medical center in Washington State have effectively
eliminated--for reasons of cost--the one program through which
OEF/OIF veterans got excellent mental health care? Why, given
strong policies on PTSD care would there be variability on PTSD
management from facility to facility, and why would it be
``unclear whether VA leaders adhere to [VA PTSD] policies,'' as
a recent Institute of Medicine study reported.\7\ And why would
veterans in facilities across the country be having problems
getting timely and effective VA mental health care?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Institute of Medicine, ``PTSD in Military and Veteran
Populations,'' National Academies Press, 2014, 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
From this veteran's perspective--with staggering numbers
who have come back from war with psychic wounds and PTSD--the
starting point for improving VA mental health care lies with VA
leadership at all levels embracing the principle that providing
timely, effective mental health care for those with service-
incurred mental health conditions--whether due to combat,
military sexual trauma, or otherwise--MUST be a top priority!
These are not just words. We've seen with the example of VA's
efforts to combat veteran homelessness, that this Department
can have a real impact when the direction and priority are
clear, when artificial performance requirements don't create
distortions, and when clinicians have latitude to provide good
care. Improving mental health care may be as or more complex a
challenge, but it surely requires a comprehensive approach. I
don't think legislation is necessarily the path through which
to meet the challenge, although there are important steps
Congress can take. These might include:

Providing incentives to help increase the
mental health workforce;

Funding training programs for non-VA mental
health providers on treating service-incurred PTSD and
on military culture to improve clinicians' expertise
and cultural competence in working with military and
veteran populations; and

Increasing VA funding for research to find
better treatments for PTSD.

But I believe that there is much that VA should, and with
the right leadership, can do itself. First, I would reiterate
the point I made above about instituting interdisciplinary,
team-based treatment. While VA's PACT program employs that
approach in the primary care arena, it shouldn't end there.
There is also much to be learned from the Vet Center program,
and why veterans--who have to feel safe and trust their
provider if they are to engage in mental health care--are
comfortable in that setting. Vet Center counsellors are
typically veterans, and often combat veterans. Having a
connection with peers is critical. And Vet Centers engage
family members as well. I believe VA medical centers and
clinics would have far greater success in treating veterans for
PTSD and other mental health conditions--and keeping them in
treatment--if they routinely engaged the family at the same
time.
Many of the problems with which this Committee has wrestled
in overseeing VA seem to relate to management practices.
Perhaps it's time for VA to change course and rely more on the
dedicated clinicians in this health care system, and less on
arbitrary performance requirements and metrics. As the ones who
are closest to the patients, the clinicians are probably best
able to develop veteran-centered programs--like the Deployment
Health Team I described earlier.
Finally I would draw on my own experience working with
other warriors as a peer-mentor. As a former infantryman who
was badly injured and experienced psychic wounds too, I can say
things to other warriors that a clinician can't and I can
assure those warriors from my own experience that mental health
treatment can work. To its credit, VA has hired and provided
for the training of more than 800 peer-specialists, to work as
members of VA mental health treatment teams. That is a great
concept, but with the numbers of veterans coming to VA for
mental health care, I would recommend that that number be
greatly expanded.
I hope my experiences, observations, and recommendations
are of some help, and would be pleased to answer your
questions.

Prepared Statement of Maureen McCarthy

Good morning, Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud and
Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the provision of mental health care to Veterans,
particularly those who are at risk for suicide. I am
accompanied today by Dr. David Carroll, National Mental Health
Program Director for Program Integration, Dr. Harold Kudler,
Acting Chief Consultant for Mental Health Services and Mr.
Michael Fisher, Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi
Freedom Specialist. My written statement will provide a brief
overview of VA's mental health care system and programs for
suicide prevention.

Mental Health Care Overview

Since September 11, 2001, more than two million
Servicemembers have deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan. Long
deployments and intense combat conditions require optimal
support for the emotional and mental health of Veterans and
their families. Accordingly, VA continues to develop and expand
its mental health system. The number of Veterans receiving
specialized mental health treatment from VA has risen each
year, from 927,052 in Fiscal Year (FY) 2006 to more than 1.4
million in FY 2013. We anticipate that VA's requirements for
providing mental health care will continue to grow for a decade
or more after current operational missions have come to an end.
VA believes this increase is partly attributable to proactive
screening to identify Veterans who may have symptoms of
depression, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), substance use
disorder, or those who have experienced military sexual trauma
(MST). In addition, VA has partnered with the Department of
Defense (DoD) to develop the VA/DoD Integrated Mental Health
Strategy to advance a coordinated public-health model to
improve access, quality, effectiveness, and efficiency of
mental health services for Servicemembers, National Guard and
Reserve, Veterans, and their families.
VA has many entry points for VHA mental health care,
through 150 medical centers, 820 Community-Based Outpatient
Clinics (CBOCs), 300 Vet Centers that provide readjustment
counseling, the Veterans Crisis Line, VA staff on college and
university campuses, and other outreach efforts. To serve the
growing number of Veterans seeking mental health care, VA has
deployed significant resources and increases in staff toward
mental health services. Since March 2012, VA has added 2,444
mental health full-time equivalent employees and hired 915 peer
specialists and apprentices. As of January 2014, VHA has 21,128
Mental Health full-time equivalent employees providing direct
inpatient and outpatient mental health care. VA has expanded
access to mental health services with longer clinic hours,
telemental heath capability to deliver services, and standards
that mandate immediate access to mental health services to
Veterans in crisis. Starting in FY 2012, site visits have been
conducted to the mental health programs in each VA facility.
All facilities were visited in the initial round, and
subsequently one third are being visited each year by a survey
team from VHA's Office of Mental Health Operations. The site
visits are informed by ratings on performance measures;
findings from the visits are used to develop action plans; and
improvements are evaluated by following performance measures as
well as the milestones and deliverables included in the plans.
In an effort to increase access to mental health care and
reduce any stigma associated with seeking such care, VA has
integrated mental health into primary care settings. From the
beginning of FY 2008 to March 2014, VA has provided more than
3.6 million Primary Care-Mental Health Integration (PC-MHI)
clinic visits to more than 942,000 unique Veterans. This
improves access by bringing care closer to where the Veteran
can most easily receive these services, and quality of care by
increasing the coordination of all aspects of care, both
physical and mental. Among primary-care patients with positive
screens for depression, those who receive same-day PC-MHI
services are more than twice as likely to receive depression
treatment as those who did not.
VA has made deployment of evidence-based therapies a
critical element of its approach to mental health care and
offers a continuum of recovery-oriented, patient-centered
services across outpatient, residential, and inpatient
settings. State-of-the-art treatment, including both
psychotherapies and biomedical treatments, are available for
the full range of mental health problems, such as PTSD,
substance use disorders, and suicidality. While VA is primarily
focused on evidence-based treatments, we are also assessing
complementary and alternative treatment methodologies that need
further research, such as meditation and acupuncture in the
care of PTSD. VA has trained over 5,900 VA mental health
professionals to provide two of the most effective evidence-
based psychotherapies for PTSD, Cognitive Processing Therapy
and Prolonged Exposure Therapy, as indicated in the VA/DoD
Clinical Practice Guideline for PTSD \1\ VA operates the
National Center for PTSD, which guides a national PTSD
mentoring program, working with every specialty PTSD program
across the VA health care system. The Center has begun a PTSD
consultation program for any VA practitioners (including
primary care practitioners and Homeless Program coordinators)
who request consultation regarding a Veteran in treatment with
PTSD. So far, over 500 VA practitioners have utilized this
service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/MH/ptsd/cpg-PTSD-
FULL-201011612.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We know that there have been Veterans with complaints about
access. We take those concerns seriously and continue to work
to address them. Receiving direct feedback from Veterans
concerning their care is vitally important. During the fourth
quarter of FY 2013, a survey of 26 questions was mailed to over
40,000 Veterans who were receiving mental health care. This
survey shows VHA's effort to seek direct input from Veterans in
understanding their perceptions regarding access to care. We
recognize that this is data only from those who chose to
respond. We will bear those responses in mind as we strive to
improve the timeliness of appointments; reminders for
appointments; accessibility, engagement, and responsiveness of
clinicians; availability and agreement with clinician on
desired treatment frequency; helpfulness of mental health
treatment; and treatment with respect and dignity.

Programs and Resources for Suicide Prevention

Overall, Veterans are at higher risk for suicide than the
general U.S. population, notably Veterans with PTSD, pain,
sleep disorders, depression, and substance use disorders. VA
recognizes that even one Veteran suicide is too many. We are
committed to ensuring the safety of our Veterans, especially
when they are in crisis. Our suicide prevention program is
based on enhancing Veterans' access to high quality mental
health care and programs specifically designed to help prevent
Veteran suicide.
In partnership with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration's National Suicide Prevention Lifeline,
the Veterans Crisis Line/Military Crisis Line (VCL/MCL)
connects Veterans and Servicemembers in crisis and their
families and friends with qualified, caring VA responders
through a confidential toll-free hotline that offers 24/7
emergency assistance. August will mark seven years since the
establishment of the initial program, which was later rebranded
to show its direct support for Servicemembers. It has expanded
to include a chat service and texting option. As of March 2014,
the VCL/MCL has rescued 37,000 actively suicidal Veterans. As
of March 2014, VCL/MCL has received over 1,150,000 calls, over
160,000 chat connections, and over 21,000 texts; it has also
made over 200,000 referrals to Suicide Prevention Coordinators
(SPCs). In accordance with the President's August 31, 2012,
Executive Order titled, ``Improving Access to Mental Health
Services for Veterans, Servicemembers and Military Families,''
VA completed hiring and training of additional staff to
increase the capacity of the VCL/MCL by 50 percent.
VA has a network of over 300 SPCs located at every VA
medical center and the largest CBOCs throughout the country.
Overall, SPCs facilitate implementation of suicide prevention
strategies within their respective medical centers to help
ensure that all appropriate measures are being taken to prevent
suicide in the Veteran population, particularly Veterans
identified to be at high risk for suicidal behavior. SPCs
receive follow-up consults from the VCL/MCL call responders
after immediate needs are addressed and any needed rescue
actions are made. SPCs are required to follow up on consults
received from the VCL/MCL within one business day to ensure
timely access to care for Veterans callers who need additional
support, treatment, or other services, including enrollment
into VA's health care system. SPCs also plan, develop,
implement, and evaluate their facility's Suicide Prevention
Program to ensure continual quality improvement and excellence
in customer service. SPCs are responsible for implementing VA's
Operation S.A.V.E (Signs of suicidal thinking, Ask the
questions, Verify the experience with the Veteran, and Expedite
or Escort to Help). This is a one-to-two hour in-person
training program provided by VA SPCs to Veterans and those who
serve Veterans to help prevent suicide. Suicide prevention
training is provided for every new VHA employee during Employee
Orientation.
SPCs participate in outreach activities, which remain
critically important to VA's goals of reducing stigma for
mental health issues and improving access to service for all
Veterans. Examples include community suicide prevention
training and other educational programs, exhibits, and material
distribution; meetings with state and local suicide prevention
groups; and suicide prevention work with Active Duty/National
Guard and Reserve units as well as college campuses. To date,
each SPC is required to complete five or more outreach
activities in their local community each month.
Veterans may be at high risk for suicide for various
reasons. Determination of suicide risk is always a clinical
judgment made after an evaluation of risk factors (e.g.,
history of past suicide attempts, recent discharge from an
inpatient mental health unit), protective factors, and the
presence or absence of warning signs. VHA Handbook 1160.01,
``Uniform Mental Health Services in VA Medical Centers and
Clinics,'' requires inpatient care be available to all Veterans
with acute mental health needs (including imminent danger of
self harm), either in a VA medical center or at a nearby
facility through a contract, sharing agreement.
To ensure that high-risk Veterans are being monitored
appropriately, SPCs manage a Category I Patient Record Flag
(PRF) with a corresponding High-Risk List. The primary purpose
of the High Risk for Suicide PRF is to communicate to VA staff
that a Veteran is at high risk for suicide, and the presence of
a flag should be considered when making treatment decisions.
Once a Veteran is identified as high-risk, the SPC ensures that
weekly contact is made with the Veteran for at least the first
month, and that continued follow-up is made, as clinically
appropriate. The SPC works with the treatment team to ensure
that patients identified as being at high risk for suicide
receive follow up for any missed mental health and substance
abuse appointments at VA. Clinicians are required to initiate
at least three attempts to contact Veterans on the High-Risk
List who fail to appear for mental health appointments and
ensure appropriate documentation. If attempts to contact the
Veteran are unsuccessful, the SPC collaborates with the
Veteran's treatment team to decide what further action is
appropriate involving a range of options from continued
outreach efforts to the Veteran and/or family members up to
requesting local law enforcement perform a welfare check in-
person.
SPCs ensure that all Veterans identified as high risk for
suicide have completed a safety plan that is documented in
their medical record, and that the Veteran is provided a copy
of his or her safety plan.
National suicide prevention outreach efforts continue to
expand and include targeted efforts for Veterans,
Servicemembers, families, and friends. VA has sponsored public
service announcements, rebranded and optimized the VCL/MCL Web
site for mobile access and viewing, and developed social and
traditional media advertisements designed to inform Veterans
and their families of VA's VCL/MCL resources including phone,
online chat, and text services.
In addition, VA has established an online Community
Provider Toolkit \2\ for individuals outside of VA who provide
care to Veterans. This Web site features key tools to support
the mental health services provided to Veterans including
information on connecting with VA, understanding military
culture and experience, and working with patients with a
variety of mental health conditions. There is also a
comprehensive Suicide Prevention Mini-Clinic which provides
clinicians with easy access to useful Veteran-focused treatment
tools, including assessment, training, and educational
handouts.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/communityproviders.
\3\ http://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/communityproviders/clinic-
suicideprevention.asp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2010, DoD and VA approved plans for a Joint Suicide Data
Repository (SDR) as a shared resource for improving our
understanding of patterns and characteristics of suicide among
Veterans and Servicemembers. The combined DoD and VA search of
data available in the National Death Index represents the
single largest mortality search of a population with a history
of military service on record. The DoD/VA Joint SDR is overseen
by the Defense Suicide Prevention Office and VA's Suicide
Prevention Program.
On February 1, 2013, VA released a report on Veteran
suicides, a result of the most comprehensive review of Veteran
suicide rates ever undertaken by VA. With assistance from state
partners providing real-time data, VA is now better able to
assess the effectiveness of its suicide prevention programs and
identify specific populations that need targeted interventions.
This new information will assist VA in identifying where at-
risk Veterans may be located and improving the Department's
ability to target specific suicide interventions and outreach
activities in order to reach Veterans early and proactively.
These data will also help VA continue to examine the
effectiveness of suicide prevention programs being implemented
in specific geographic locations (e.g., rural areas), as well
as care settings, such as primary care, in order to replicate
effective programs in other areas. VA continues to receive
state data which is being included in the SDR. VA plans to
update the suicide data report later this year.
In 2011, the most recent year for which national data are
available, the age-adjusted rate of suicide in the U.S. general
population was 12.32 per 100,000 persons per year. At just over
12 for every 100,000 U.S. residents, the 2011 rate of suicide
has increased by approximately 15 percent since 2001. Rates of
suicide in the United States are higher among males, middle-age
adults, residents in rural areas, and those with mental health
conditions.
The most recent available data shows that suicide rates are
generally lower among Veterans who use VHA services than among
Veterans who do not use VHA services. In 2011, the rate of
suicide among those who use VHA services was 35.5 per 100,000
persons per year; a decrease of approximately 6 percent since
2001. Rates of suicide among those who use VHA services have
remained relatively stable; ranging from 36.5 to 37.5 per
100,000 persons per year over the past 4 years. Despite
evidence of increased risk among middle-aged adults (35-64
years) in the U.S. general population, rates of suicide among
middle-aged adults who use VHA services have decreased by more
than 16 percent between the years 1999-2010. For males without
a history of using VHA services, the rate increased by more
than 60 percent, whereas for males with a history of using VHA
services, the rate decreased by more than 30 percent. Decreases
in suicide rates and improvements in outcomes were also
observed for some other high-risk groups. Between 2001 and
2010, rates of suicide decreased by more than 28 percent among
VHA users with a mental health or substance abuse diagnosis,
and the proportion of VHA users who die from suicide within 12
months of a survived suicide attempt has decreased by
approximately 45 percent during the same time period.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ www.mentalhealth.va.gov/docs/Suicide-Data-Report-Update-
2014.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comparisons of rates of suicide among those with use of VHA
services and the U.S. general population are ongoing. However,
in 2010, rates of suicide were 31 percent higher among males
who used VHA services when compared to rates of suicide among
males in the U.S. general population. During that same year,
women who used VHA services were more than twice as likely to
die from suicide when compared to women in the U.S. adult
population. Increases in rates of suicide have also been
identified for younger males who use VHA services. Over the
last three years, rates of suicide have increased by nearly 44
percent among males under 30 years of age who use VHA services
and by more than 70 percent among males who use VHA services
between 18 and 24 years of age.
In response to these findings, VA has been focusing on
public health and community programming. This includes
increased and targeted outreach efforts throughout the country
to Veterans and their family members with significant emphasis
on safety. We encourage Veterans and their families to learn
more about mental illness and to take precautions particularly
during times of stress (e.g., properly storing weapons and
medications). Being alert to items in the environment that
offer potential means of suicidal behavior can make a life-
saving difference during a crisis. Messaging and interventions
are geared toward those who are most at risk for suicide,
including our younger male Veterans, women Veterans, Veterans
with mental health conditions, and established patients who are
known to be at high risk for suicide. Strategies include
specialized training for VHA staff to enhance their recognition
and treatment of those at risk, and offering Veterans skills-
building and other preventive strategies to address major
stressors in their lives. Furthermore, VA is engaged in ongoing
research to determine the most effective mental health
treatments and suicide prevention strategies. Finally, VA has
established the Mental Health Innovations Task Force, which is
working to identify and implement early intervention strategies
for specific high-risk groups including Veterans with PTSD,
pain, sleep disorders; depression, and substance use disorders.
Through early intervention, VA hopes to reduce the risk of
suicide for Veterans in these high-risk groups.

Readjustment Counseling Service (RCS)

VA's RCS provides a wide range of readjustment counseling
services to eligible Veterans and active duty Servicemembers
who have served in combat zones and their families. RCS also
provides comprehensive readjustment counseling for those who
experienced military sexual trauma, as well as offering
bereavement counseling to immediate family members of
Servicemembers who died while on active duty. These services
are provided in a safe and confidential environment through a
national network of 300 community-based Vet Centers located in
all 50 states (as well as the District of Columbia, American
Samoa, Guam, and Puerto Rico), 70 Mobile Vet Centers, and the
Vet Center Combat Call Center (877-WAR-VETS or 877-927-8387).
In FY 2013, Vet Centers provided over 1.5 million visits to
Veterans, active duty Servicemembers, and their families. The
Vet Center program has provided services to over 30 percent of
OEF/OIF/Operation New Dawn Veterans who have left active duty.

Closing Statement

Mr. Chairman, VA is committed to providing timely, high
quality of care that our Veterans have earned and deserve, and
we continue to take every available action and create new
opportunities to improve suicide prevention services. We
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today, and my
colleagues and I are prepared to respond to any questions you
may have.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9378.015

Prepared Statement of Jonathan Sherin

Greeting

Thank you Mr. Chairman, ranking member and committee for
convening today's hearing on the critical issues of mental
health access and suicide prevention challenges in the Veteran
community. I am deeply honored to testify on these topics.
Aside from being core drivers of my mission in life they
represent national imperatives of the highest order.

Preface

Let me preface my testimony by stating that to manage
serious mental health issues and to prevent suicide in any
population requires not only identifying those who are
suffering and dismantling any barriers that may be interfering
with their access to treatment, but also creating enriched and
cohesive communities in which all comers belong, in which
opportunities to live purposefully are cultivated, in which
wellbeing is nourished broadly and in which human flourishing
is an articulated, promoted and attainable goal; in other
words, we need proactive systems set up to disrupt suicidal
thinking on the front end.

My Expedience, Current Role and Perspective

After completing my graduate work in medicine and
neurobiology I was fortunate to be selected by UCLA as a
psychiatry trainee. On the first day of residency orientation I
drove myself to the majestic and hallowed grounds of the WLA VA
campus, a primary clinical venue affiliated with UCLA's
training program, and parked myself at the golf course where I
watched Veterans come and go for hours. This experience changed
me as it became clear in this one afternoon that my life's work
would revolve around caring for our nation's Veterans. Four
years later, the VA hired me straight out of training and my
dream became a reality. Over the course of the next decade I
served as a clinician, teacher, researcher and administrative
leader at VA with my last stop as Chief of Mental Health for
the Miami VAHS.
Since leaving the VA 2 = years ago to join Volunteers of
America (VOA) as Executive Vice President for Military
Communities and Chief Medical Officer, this mission has
continued. VOA is a large direct human service provider whose
legacy of work with Veterans dates back to the post-Civil War
era. We currently employ over 16,000 staff working in over 400
communities around the country and provide a broad array of
programs to the Veteran community including services to well
over 10,000 homeless Veterans through VA grants and contracts
alone. It is VOA's national priority to do anything and
everything we can for the Veterans of our Nation which we do
not only through programs funded specifically for Veterans, but
through any resources we can bring to bear for the mission. One
of these programs, the Battle-Buddy-Bridge (B3), which
leverages Veterans as peers in service to one another, is
particularly relevant to solving access problems that are under
review today (see B3 Concept Proposal, attached).
My experience working on this mission from inside the VA
and now outside the VA gives me a great deal of perspective as
to the nature of the problems facing Veterans and some possible
solutions. It is my contention that a great deal can be done to
improve access to the resources that will help improve mental
health outcomes and decrease suicides by aligning VA and
community in a manner that mutually leverages existing
infrastructure and expertise to increase the depth, breadth and
efficacy of our efforts.

The Access Problem

One of the primary challenges facing VA as well as the
health and human service sector in general, is dealing with
broken systems of access to services. Access barriers are
present in essentially every community today and affect
vulnerable individuals as a rule, but they are particularly
problematic for Veterans in need who can be hard to reach for
any number of reasons: some are unaware of available services
and opportunities; many are reluctant to seek help as a
consequence of military culture and/or mistrust of the system;
others are too sick to advocate for themselves or have been
rebuffed or delayed in seeking assistance; and too many have
fallen through the cracks as a consequence of poorly
coordinated and overly complex bureaucratic systems. Though not
unique to the Veteran community, a massive amount of
unnecessary suffering is endured, lives are broken, and in some
cases lives are taken as a result of suboptimal access. Access
problems simply cannot continue to plague our Veteran
population.

A Holistic Approach

The ultimate goal of our work with Veterans facing
emotional challenges involves accessing not only mental health
treatment but also interventions targeting other factors that
mitigate mental distress and thereby protect against mental
illness and suicide. For example, it is possible to improve
mental status by providing access to resources such as peer
navigation, case management, housing, education, training,
employment, legal services, benefits assistance and family
support when indicated.
Given the vulnerabilities conferred on any number of these
factors by the military experience, Veterans in particular must
receive care in a holistic manner that extends well beyond
mental health treatment. Along these lines, the familial
relations found in peer-peer programs, the community experience
provided by a respectable job and the spiritual benefits
obtained by engaging in mission-oriented endeavors are salves
for disruptions in life that can occur during enlistment,
service and separation.

The Need

As the offerings needed in the Veteran community are
myriad, the resources limited, and the processes for accessing
them frustrating to navigate, urgent problems sometimes go
unaddressed, worsening mental states evolve and devastating
life circumstances such as homelessness or life-threatening
emergencies such as suicidal behavior emerge. Keeping in mind
the principles of overcoming access barriers and broadly
targeting needs to mitigate mental distress as well as suicide,
Veterans with urgent problems (such as worsening family
dynamics, spiraling substance-abuse, housing instability,
health crises, progressing financial problems, acute legal
challenges or loss of employment) need real time access to
resources that can keep them on a road toward community
reintegration.
For these reasons, a caring advocate such as a fellow
Veteran functioning as a battle buddy in the community who is
trained, equipped, deployed and supported to provide expert
hands-on engagement and local resource navigation can make all
of the difference. We must immediately scale this type of
solution as part of a full frontal assault on the barriers to
access that face our nation's Veterans.

The Current Situation

Access to mental health services is suboptimal. In light of
recent findings from investigations of scheduling practices at
VA as well as a plethora of testimonials regarding wait times
and inadequate service availability, there is clearly a need to
develop strategies for improving real-time responsiveness to
Veterans reaching out for help.
Suicide rates are unacceptably high, especially in the
younger and older Veteran populations. Though discrepancies
exist regarding the rates of suicide in different
subpopulations, rates have climbed in the Veteran community and
require the highest level of attention that our nation can
muster to improve access.
The VA reaches less than half of the Veteran population.
While it is clear that receiving care at VA benefits Veterans
and mitigates suicidal behavior, many Veterans at risk never
connect with these programs. Though many Veterans never connect
with these programs because of outreach limitations, many
others refuse to use the VA system.
Receiving care at the VA can be difficult due to time and
distance constraints. Many of those who are reached by the VA
find travel and wait times problematic which deters their
interest in ongoing treatment, especially in the face of
rapidly developing crises.
Community providers are woefully under leveraged as
resources to support mental health and mitigate suicide risk.
Due in part to the VA's noble tradition of trying to serve all
the needs of all Veteran and in part to the constraints that
complicate public-private-partnership, communities have not
been fully engaged to assist in getting services to Veterans.

Recommendations for VA

The VA alone cannot provide all services to all Veterans in
all geographies and must partner vigorously with appropriate
providers to improve access to services as has been done to
house homelessness Veterans by partnering with and embracing
the community.
1. Promote pubic-private partnerships (PPP) across all
sectors to increase agency reach and expand access
opportunities for Veterans.
2. Use grant mechanisms straight out of VACO (such as
NCHAV's SSVF) to avoid layers of bureaucracy and improve
overall efficiency.
3. Identify partnerships to push out services as below that
strategically supplement, complement and create synergy with VA
operations to increase access through outreach, engagement and
resource navigation according to a B3-like program model.
a. Place Veteran Peer Specialists (VPS) in the community to
function as ``battle buddies''.
b. Connect Veterans in need to VPS thru suicide prevention
coordinators, crisis line, 211.
c. Retrofit VA campuses with, and transform service centers
into, reintegration centers that host VPS, a modicum of
services and a map of all available community resources.
d. Leverage technology to amplify access to VPS (for
example, PosRep).

Requests of Congress

Assistance from Congressional leadership in moving forward
is critical.
1. Visit the trenches of your local VA and community
providers to better understand the opportunities available
through partnership between VA and other organizations.
2. Review the structure of VA and its strategy for
facilitating Veteran reintegration in partnership with the
community with special focus on considering the SSVF grant
mechanism as a gold standard for how to manage organizational
relationships.
3. Lobby for and support demonstration projects that employ
Veterans to work as peer specialists who can expand outreach,
facilitate engagement and lead navigation efforts for Veterans
with acute needs.
4. Push reform where possible and develop new legislation
where necessary to facilitate partnerships with the community.

Closing

Time is a conspiring enemy in what is becoming a domestic
war. The resolve and urgency that our country mounts to win
foreign wars must be employed to achieve victory at home. With
the help of Congressional leaders, bureaucratic barriers must
be torn down aggressively so that solutions can be erected.
Most importantly, facile mechanisms that foster relationships
across all sectors of the American collective must be developed
with unprecedented efficiency to implement a shared process for
promoting the wellbeing of our noble military community.

Statement For The Record

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Report by Citizens Commission on Human Rights International

Questions For The Record

LETTER AND QUESTION FROM: HVAC, TO: VA

July 17, 2014

The Honorable Sloan Gibson
Acting Secretary
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
810 Vermont Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20420
Dear Mr. Secretary:
Committee practice permits the hearing record to remain
open to permit Members to submit additional questions to the
witnesses. In reference to our Full Committee hearing entitled,
``Service Should Not Lead to Suicide: Access to VA's Mental
Health Care'' that took place on July 10, 2014, I would
appreciate if you could answer the enclosed hearing questions
by the close of business on August 29, 2014.
In preparing your responses to these questions, please
provide your answers consecutively and single-spaced and
include the full text of the question you are addressing in
bold font. To facilitate the printing of the hearing record,
please email your response in a Word document, to Carol Murray
at
[emailprotected]
by the close of business on
August 29, 2014. If you have any questions please contact her
at 202-225-9756.
Sincerely,
MICHAEL H. MICHAUD
Ranking Member

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Michaud:
Ranking Member Michaud
1. How is a call from a veteran in crisis handled by the
phone system or personnel of VA facilities during working
hours?
2. Is a veteran in crisis currently able to be transferred
directly to the VA crisis hotline by automated system during
off hours when he or she calls any VA facility, that is,
without having to hang up and dial another number?
3. Has the VA analyzed what resources would be needed to
provide an automated system that would allow a veteran in
crisis to be directly transferred to the crisis hotline if he
or she calls any VA facility?
4. Has the VA analyzed what resources would be needed to
provide a ``warm handoff'' to the crisis hotline to a veteran
in crisis calling a VA facility during non-working hours?
Rep. Brown
1. There are 22 veterans who commit suicide every day. The
treatment most accessible to veterans is psychiatric drugs and
the most commonly prescribed are the SSRI anti-depressants. The
FDA placed a black box warning on these drugs noting the
particularly high risk of suicide in those 24 years old and
younger taking them. Are the veterans who are prescribed SSRI
anti-depressants told the drug may greatly increase their risk
of suicide? What is the VA doing to ensure veterans are
receiving full informed consent (which includes all information
about risks and alternative treatments)?
A study in the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry titled,
``Pharmacotherapy of PTSD in the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs: diagnostic- and symptom-guided drug selection,'' found
that 80% of veterans diagnosed with PTSD received psychotropic
medication, with 89% prescribed anti-depressants, 61%
anxiolytics/sedative-hypnotics, and 34% antipsychotics.
According to Department of Defense Instruction, Number
6000.14, September 26, 2011, entitled, ``DoD Patient Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities in the Military Health System
(MHS),'' military personnel are entitled to informed consent
for any treatment and to refuse to receive treatment. That
regulation states, in part, under the section, ``PATIENT
RIGHTS'':
``f. Informed Consent
``Patients have the right to any and all necessary
information in non-clinical terms to make knowledgeable
decisions on consent or refusal for treatments, or
participation in clinical trials or other research
investigations as applicable. Such information is to include
any and all complications, risks, benefits, ethical issues, and
alternative treatments as may be available.''
2. A UCSF professor once explained: ``The mechanism of
action of SSRI anti-depressants is to block the normal re-
absorption of Serotonin, which leaves it firing at the receptor
site over and over, artificially creating the effect of
elevated Serotonin in the brain. It is possible to have an
initial positive response to the drug, but shortly thereafter
the brain recognizes the unnatural excess firing of Serotonin
at the receptor sites. As a result, the brain adapts and tries
to regain its equilibrium by shutting down production of
Serotonin. If the SSRI anti-depressant continues to be taken,
the brain will then move to shut down some of the receptor
sites in a bid to regain normal. This mechanism of action is
why the drugs stop working and why people have a hard time
coming off them and why people get depressed when they come off
the drug. The SSRI altered the normal brain chemistry and
created a chemical imbalance. This is evidence-based. The use
of SSRIs leads to chronic depression.''
a. This is creating more need for treatment and
overburdening the system. Has the VA done any outcome studies?
What percentage of patients treated with SSRIs recover and are
able to successfully discontinue the drug? Where is the
evidence of SSRI effectiveness?
3. The VA is relying heavily on psychotropic drug
treatments. Adverse reactions of psychotropic drugs include a
long list of medical symptoms and conditions including weight
gain, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, liver damage. Has the VA
done any studies on iatrogenic illnesses caused by psychotropic
drugs?

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

[all]
