- RESTORING TRUST: THE VIEW OF THE ACTING SECRETARY AND THE VETERANS COMMUNITY

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RESTORING TRUST: THE VIEW OF THE ACTING SECRETARY AND THE VETERANS
COMMUNITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JULY 24, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-82

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

89-381 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              DINA TITUS, Nevada
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
DAVID JOLLY, Florida
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Nancy Dolan, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Thursday, July 24, 2014

Restoring Trust: The View of the Acting Secretary and the
Veterans Community.............................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Jeff Miller, Chairman.......................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    87

Hon. Michael Michaud, Ranking Minority Member....................     4
Prepared Statement...........................................    88
Hon. Corrine Brown
Prepared Statement...........................................    89

WITNESSES

Hon. Sloan Gibson, Acting Secretary U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    90

Accompanied by:

Mr. Danny Pummill, Principal Deputy Under Secretary for
Benefits, Veterans Benefit Administration, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Philip Matkovsky, Assistant Deputy Under Secretary
for Health for Administrative Operations, Veterans
Health Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Ms. Verna Jones, Veteran Affairs Director, The American Legion...    49
Prepared Statement...........................................    95

Mr. Ryan Gallucci, Deputy Director, National Legislative
Service, Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States.........    51
Prepared Statement...........................................   106

Mr. Carl Blake, Acting Associate Executive Director for
Government Relations, Paralyzed Veterans of America............    53
Prepared Statement...........................................   109

Mr. Joseph Violante, National Legislative Director, Disabled
American Veterans..............................................    55
Prepared Statement...........................................   117

Mr. Richard Weidman, Executive Director of Government Affairs,
Vietnam Veterans of America....................................    56
Prepared Statement...........................................   128

Mr. Alex Nicholson, Legislative Director, Iraq and Afghanistan
Veterans of America............................................    58
Prepared Statement...........................................   138

RESTORING TRUST: THE VIEW OF THE ACTING SECRETARY AND THE VETERANS
COMMUNITY

Thursday, July 24, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:32 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Flores, Denham, Runyan, Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup,
Cook, Walorski, Jolly, Michaud, Brown, Takano, Brownley, Titus,
Kirkpatrick, Ruiz, Negrete McLeod, Kuster, O'Rourke, and Walz.
Also present:  Representative Fitzpatrick.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN, JEFF MILLER

The Chairman. Good morning. I want to welcome everybody to
today's oversight hearing entitled Restoring Trust.
I want to ask unanimous consent also that Representative
Michael Fitzpatrick from the State of Pennsylvania be allowed
to join us at the dais today and participate in this morning's
hearing. Without objection, so ordered.
The committee is going to examine this morning what steps
we need to take to help the Department of Veterans Affairs to
get back on track to meet its core mission, a mission to
provide quality health care to our veterans.
Since the beginning of June, this committee has held almost
a dozen full committee oversight hearings. Some of them, as you
well know, have gone way into the night and some into the early
morning hours.
We want to do a top-to-bottom review of VA and to delve
into how we are now situated in a crisis at the Department of
Veterans Affairs. And while I hope to focus on the major themes
we have covered and to receive updates from VA this morning on
the topics that we have talked about over the last few weeks, I
can promise the department and the committee Members here that,
as we move forward to help mend the broken VA system, the
oversight done by this committee is going to continue.
Mr. Secretary, in your written statement, you state that
the status quo and our working relationship must change and
that the department will continue to work openly with Congress
and provide information in a timely manner.
First I agree that the relationship between VA and this
committee must change. We must go back to the way business used
to be handled for decades when Members and staff could
communicate directly with VA senior leaders about routine
business we conduct with the department.
But using the phrase continue to work openly is in my
opinion not a reflection of the current reality that we find
ourselves in. Members of this committee, other Members of
Congress and our staffs are still being stonewalled to this day
and you will hear several questions that relate to that
information.
For example, the day after our July 14th VBA hearing, our
colleague, Mr. Jolly, personally spoke to Kerrie Witty, the
director of the St. Petersburg Regional Office and asked for
information regarding the firing of Mr. Javier Soto, a
whistleblower who testified at that hearing.
Mr. Soto had raised very serious concerns about both
retaliatory action and mismanagement at the St. Pete RO. And it
is incumbent upon this committee to investigate those
allegations.
But instead of being open and honest about the process,
about Mr. Soto's removal, VA has equivocated, stonewalled,
changed its story, and obstructed Members of this committee in
what appears to be an attempt to cover up, VA's retaliation
against Mr. Soto.
We are prepared to subpoena the documents if that is what
it takes. We have got to get compliance with the multiple
requests that we have made to the department.
I could not agree with you more that the department needs
to earn back the trust of veterans, their families, the veteran
service organizations, Members of Congress, and the American
people through deliberate, decisive, and truthful action.
The recent scandals that have tarnished trust in the VA are
a reflection of a broken system that didn't just happen
overnight, nor can it be fixed overnight.
Upon stepping up as the acting secretary, you have stated
that there has to be change and there has to be accountability,
but I have yet to see where the department has drawn the line
and brought those people who have caused this crisis to
justice.
We have shown through many of our hearings that one
contributing factor to the current crisis is that VA has
clearly lost sight of its core mission and that extra funding
didn't go to improvements in patient care but towards ancillary
pet projects and an ever-growing bureaucracy.
According to an article by former under secretary of
Health, Dr. Ken Kizer, in the New England Journal of Medicine,
VHA's central office staff has grown from about 800 in the late
1990s to nearly 11,000 in 2012. This further illustrates VA's
shift of focus to building a bureaucracy as opposed to
fulfilling its duty to providing quality patient care.
And as I said before, the problems that exist today will
not be fixed overnight and it cannot be fixed by simply
throwing money at those problems. To date, the VA has been
given every resource requested by the Administration. Every
year during our budget oversight hearings, Members of this
committee and Dr. Roe in particular has asked if the secretary
had enough to do his job and every time we as a committee were
told unequivocally yes.
This is why last week the acting secretary said that an
additional $17.6 billion was needed to ensure that VA is
available to deliver high-quality and timely health care to our
veterans and when he did that, it raised some very obvious
questions. Where did the number come from? What assumptions
underlie this request and how were they made? What effort was
made to look within existing resources at the department to
meet these new sources or resource needs?
I know many of my colleagues would agree that after
multiple oversight hearings, outside investigations, countless
accounts being made by whistleblowers, VA's numbers simply
cannot be trusted.
VA's determination that 10,000 additional medical staff is
needed is also surprising when the secretary's own written
statement states, and I quote, ``VA doesn't have the refined
capacity to accurately quantify its staffing requirements,''
end quote.
If they don't have the ability to accurately predict
staffing needs, then how do we know that 10,000 more bodies is
what is needed to solve the problem?
I would also remind Members that we don't have any type of
grasp on how the department is going to spend the new funding
that they have requested. The President's 2015 budget request,
1,300 pages. You have all seen it. It is in your office, 1,300
pages.
The request from the department, the first request from the
department I had been saying was a three-page request and that
request actually is a single page. This is all we got. I hope
all of you got a copy of this because this is how they, in
fact, justified their request.
And I asked the secretary on the telephone early this week
if he would delve into and give us a more complete review of
what they requested and I was told that we would get a much
more detailed request. We got two pages. That is all we got,
two pages entitled Working Estimate as of July 22nd of 2014 for
$17.6 billion.
Now, yes, the number has been refined to about $13 and a
half billion now, but, still, two pages for $13 and a half
billion? Our veterans deserve the best, but throwing money at
the department into a system that has never been denied a dime
will not automatically fix the perverse culture that has
encompassed the department.
VA can no longer consider itself the sacred cow that is not
subject to rules of good government and ethical behavior.
Veterans are sacred. VA is not. Ultimately we are talking about
a system that has a long road ahead of it before it can get
back to an organization deserving of our veterans and the
sacrifices that they have made.
I hope that today we receive the needed insight from our
veteran service organizations. They and their members are on
the ground. They need to be partners as VA tries to rebuild the
trust that is lost. I hope that together we can bring about
true change to this broken system and a change that will fix
the corrosive culture that has encompassed the Department of
Veterans Affairs for far too long.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Jeff Miller appears in
the Appendix]

With that, I yield to the ranking member for his opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MICHAEL MICHAUD, RANKING MINORITY MEMBER

Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and good
morning.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's
hearing and for leading our rigorous oversight over these past
few months. It has been a long road getting here. The hearings
that we have held over the past few months have yielded
difficult, disturbing, but ultimately important information.
With each hearing, we have heard of a different aspect of
the Department of Veterans Affairs that just isn't working. We
heard about some challenges like the claims backlog and
technology issues which we have been confronting for quite some
time now. We learned of others like how the VA treats
whistleblowers and the reality of the data VA reports and new
ones.
The VA has a good product. When veterans get to see a VA
doctor, they like the care that they get. When veterans get the
eligibility rating and starts receiving VA benefits, they find
those benefits to be useful and helpful.
But the business model for producing and delivering and
supporting the VA product is fundamentally broken. We have
heard this time again over the course of these hearings. There
is a clear cultural problem at the Department of Veterans
Administration. There are scheduling failures and technology
problems. Inconsistent office practices lead to backlogs that
appear to be tackled at the expense of other services.
The Department of Veterans Administration is a sprawling
agency that offers critical services to millions of our
veterans. It is clear to me that we need a business-minded
approach to reform the agency. More of the same isn't going to
solve the underlying problems. Tweaks and band-aids around the
margins aren't going to sustain the system.
We need a new model, a new approach, and a new way of
thinking about and looking at the department. We need immediate
short-term fixes, but we also need a long-term vision and a new
approach to the business of the Department of Veterans
Administration.
And I would like to thank you, Secretary Gibson, for
joining us today and for your efforts over the last few months.
You have stepped up to the plate at the most challenging
moments in the Department of Veterans Affairs' history and you
owned the problem of the organization that has been experienced
over the last several years.
And I thank you for your increased effort to communicate
with us on The Hill, for your dedication to our Nation's
veterans, and for exhibiting the courage to be the face of the
Department of Veterans Administration during these very
difficult times.
I would also like to similarly thank Bob McDonald who I
hope will soon be confirmed as the next VA secretary. I am
looking forward to talking with Mr. McDonald about his vision
for reforming the Department of Veterans Administration both in
the short term as well as in the long term.
Like Mr. Gibson, Mr. McDonald is exhibiting extraordinary
courage and commitment for taking on this role at this very
important time.
I would also like to thank the veteran service
organizations for joining us today. You have been strong and
relentless advocates for the well-being of our veterans. You
have done an excellent job in holding all of us in Congress and
the department accountable. You are a key stakeholder in this
whole debate over the Department of Veterans Affairs. You need
to be active, engaged in the process of long-term reforms for
the Department of Veterans Administration.
So I want to thank all the VSOs as well for your continued
effort that you have been doing and keeping an eye on what is
happening with the department and for joining us today.
So, once again, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for
having this very important hearing. With that, I yield back the
balance of my time.

[The prepared statement of Hon. Michael Michaud appears in
the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much to my good friend, Mr.
Michaud.
Before we begin this morning, I want to recognize some
participants that are in the audience with us from The American
Legion Boys Nation who joined us here today. Welcome to all of
you and thanks for being here. We are glad to have you with us.
This morning, we are going to hear from the Honorable Sloan
Gibson, acting secretary for the Department of Veterans
Affairs. And to you, sir, we owe a great debt of gratitude for
stepping in as number two and then stepping up, as my ranking
member has said, during a very trying time for the department.
And we appreciate you being here.
He is accompanied by Mr. Danny Pummill, deputy under
secretary for Benefits at the Department of Veterans Affairs,
and Philip Matkovsky, assistant director under secretary for
Health and Administrative Operations at the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
And as always, your complete written statement, Mr.
Secretary, will be made a part of the hearing record. And with
that, you are recognized for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SLOAN D. GIBSON, ACTING SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, ACCOMPANIED BY DANNY PUMMILL, PRINCIPAL
DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR BENEFITS, VETERANS BENEFIT
ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; PHILIP
MATKOVSKY, ASSISTANT DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR HEALTH FOR
ADMINISTRATIVE OPERATIONS, VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

STATEMENT OF SLOAN D. GIBSON

Mr. Gibson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will get straight to business. Concerning VA health care,
we have serious issues. Here is how I see the problems.
First, veterans are waiting too long for care. Second,
scheduling improprieties were widespread including deliberate
acts to falsify scheduling data. Third, an environment exists
where many staff members are afraid to raise concerns for fear
of retaliation. Fourth, metrics became the focal point for some
staff instead of focusing on the veterans we are here to serve.
Fifth, VA has failed to hold people accountable for wrongdoing
and negligence. And, last, we lack sufficient resources to meet
the current demand for timely, high-quality health care.
As a consequence of these failures, the trust of the
veterans we serve, the American people, and their elected
representatives has eroded. We have to earn that trust back
through decisive action and by greater transparency in dealing
with all of our stakeholders.
To begin restoring trust, we have focused on six key
priorities. Get veterans off wait lists and into clinics; fix
systemic scheduling problems; ensure that veterans are the
focus of all we do. In a culture where leaders ensure
accountability, where transparency is the norm, and where
employees live, our VA values every day.
Hold people accountable where willful misconduct or
management negligence are documented; establish regular and
ongoing disclosures of information; and, finally, quantify the
resources needed to consistently deliver timely, high-quality
health care.
Here is what we are doing now. VHA has reached out to over
173,000 veterans to get them off wait lists and into clinics.
We are adding more clinic hours, recruiting to fill clinical
staff vacancies, deploying mobile medical units using temporary
staffing resources, and expanding the use of private sector
care.
In the last two months between mid May to mid July, we have
made over 570,000 referrals for veterans to receive care in the
private sector. That is up more than 107,000 over the
comparable period a year ago. Each of those referrals will on
average result in seven actual appointments and visits. So that
produces an increase of more than 700,000 appointments and
visits for care in the community above last year just
associated with the increase in referrals over a two-month
period.
VHA is posting regular twice monthly data updates to keep
veterans informed about progress we are making in access. As
part of the effort to improve transparency, I recognize, Mr.
Chairman, that we have more work to do in providing complete
and timely responses to congressional inquiries and requests.
You all are keeping us very busy in that regard right now.
We are moving to improve our existing scheduling system and
simultaneously pursuing the purchase of a modern commercial
off-the-shelf system. I have directed medical center and VISN
directors to conduct monthly in-person inspections of their
clinics to assess scheduling practices and identify any related
obstacles to timely care for veterans. To date, over 1,500 of
these visits have been completed.
We are putting in place a comprehensive external audit of
scheduling practices across VHA and we are building a more
robust system for measuring patient satisfaction. I have
personally visited 13 VA medical centers in the last six weeks
to hear directly from the field how we are getting veterans off
wait lists and into clinics.
The 14-day access measure has been removed from over 13,000
individual performance plans. For willful misconduct,
management negligence, or whistleblower retaliation is
documented, appropriate personnel actions will be taken.
I have frozen VHA's central office and VISN headquarters
hiring. VHA has dispatched teams to provide direct assistance
to facilities requiring the most improvement including a large
team on the ground in Phoenix right now. In addition, we have
taken action on all of the recommendations made in the IG's May
interim report on Phoenix.
All VHA senior executive performance awards for fiscal year
2014 have been suspended. Additionally, I have directed a
fundamental revision of all medical center and VISN directors'
performance objectives to ensure they are aligned with patient
outcomes.
I have repeatedly taken a firm stand on the subject of
whistleblower retaliation. In messages to the entire workforce
and in numerous face-to-face meetings with employees and
leaders, I have made it clear that we will not tolerate
retaliation against whistleblowers.
Furthermore, I committed to Carolyn Lerner when I met with
her several weeks ago that we will achieve compliance with the
Office of Special Counsel certification program, and she and I
have agreed to streamline the process by which we work together
to ensure appropriate whistleblower protection.
We have also established internal processes to ensure
appropriate personnel actions are taken where retaliation has
been documented. I have made a number of leadership changes
including naming Dr. Carolyn Clancy interim under secretary for
Health. New to VA, she is spearheading our immediate efforts to
accelerate veterans' access to care.
Dr. Jonathan Perlin has begun his short-term assignment as
senior advisor to the secretary. Dr. Perlin comes to us on loan
from the Hospital Corporation of America where he is the chief
medical officer and the president of clinical services. He is
also chairman elect of the American Hospital Association. Dr.
Perlin brings a wealth of knowledge and experience to help us
bridge the period until we have a confirmed new under secretary
for Health, a position Dr. Perlin himself once held.
As part of the restructure of VHA's Office of the Medical
Inspector, we call that OMI internally, Dr. Jerry Cox has been
appointed to serve as interim director. A career naval medical
officer and a former assistant inspector general of the navy
for medical matters, Dr. Cox will help ensure OMI provides a
strong internal audit function, helping to ensure the highest
standards of care quality and patient safety.
As we complete reviews and investigations, we are beginning
to initiate personnel actions to hold those accountable who
committed wrongdoing or were negligent. To support this
critical work, Ms. Lee Bradley has begun a four-month
assignment as special counsel to the secretary. Ms. Bradley is
former general counsel at VA and most recently a senior member
of the general counsel team at the Department of Defense where
she has direct responsibility for their ethics portfolio.
Shifting gears, in the area of resources, I believe that
the greatest risk to veterans over the intermediate to long
term is that additional resources are provided only to support
increased purchases of care in the community and not to
materially remedy the shortfall in internal VA capacity. Such
an outcome would leave VA even more poorly positioned to meet
future demand.
Today VA's clinical staff and space capacity are strained.
Between 2009 and 2013, the number of unique veterans we treat
annually has increased by over a half a million. And the
typical veteran we treat today has on average nine major
diagnoses.
In just the last three years, 40 veterans' health care
facilities have experienced double digit growth in the number
of patients who come through their doors. As an example, at the
Fayetteville, North Carolina VA Medical Center which I visited
several weeks ago, the number of patients being treated has
grown 22 percent in the last three years.
Resources required to meet current demand covering the
remainder of fiscal year 2014 through fiscal year 2017 total
over $17 billion. While the amount is large, it represents a
moderate percentage increase in annual expenditures. These
funds would address clinical staff, space, information
technology, and information technology necessary to provide
timely, high-quality care.
Let me briefly address benefits. Since arriving at VA, I
have been very impressed with VBA's ongoing transformation. I
doubt that any major part of the Federal Government has
transformed so much in the past two to three years. And I
believe that because of this transformation, we are on track to
eliminate the disability claims backlog in 2015.
Having said that, veterans still wait too long to have
their claims decided and our quality is still not up to our own
standard. A portion of our request for additional resources
will be invested to accelerate accurate and timely claims
decisions for veterans.
In closing, we understand the seriousness of the problems
we face. We own them. We are taking decisive action to begin to
resolve them. The President, Congress, veterans, VSOs, the
American people, and VA staff all understand the need for
change. We must, all of us, seize this opportunity. We can turn
these challenges into the greatest opportunity for improvement,
I believe in the history of the department.
Furthermore, I think that in as little as two years, the
conversation can change, that VA can be the trusted provider
for veterans' health care and for benefits. Our ability to do
that depends on our willingness to seize the opportunity,
challenge the status quo, and drive positive change.
I deeply respect the important role that Congress and the
Members of this committee play in serving veterans. I am
grateful for your long-term support and will work hard to earn
your trust.
We cannot succeed without the collaboration and support of
veteran service organizations. I conducted some 20 meetings and
calls in the last two months with VSO leaders and other
stakeholders to solicit their ideas for improving access and
rebuilding trust. And I look forward to hearing the VSO
testimony on the panel that follows.
And, last, I appreciate the hard work and dedication of VA
employees, the vast majority of whom I continue to believe care
deeply about our mission, want to do the right thing, and work
hard every day to care for veterans. Because of their work
today, Thursday, today, hundreds of thousands of veterans will
receive great care in facilities all the way from Maine to
Manila.
And in the midst of this crisis, it is all too easy for us
to forget that simple fact. Mr. Chairman, I am prepared to take
your questions.

[The prepared statement of Sloan D. Gibson appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary, and it is
an honor to have an opportunity to work with you, call you a
friend.
We have got some questions that we are going to ask today
and both sides will have some pretty probing questions. And I
think we appreciate the actions that have been taken at the
department to move the veterans off of wait lists.
And I think probably one of the significant questions that
needs to be asked right now is how many veterans currently are
on waiting lists over 30 days for appointments?
Mr. Gibson. Do you want to take the wait list question and
I will address the broader issue?
Mr. Matkovsky. Veterans on the EWL or electronic wait list
number about 40,000 nationwide today, down from 57,000 May
15th.
Mr. Gibson. The new enrollee appointment request list which
was another focal point for this overall effort started at
roughly 64,000. It is currently sitting on what is really going
to be a permanent level of about 2,000 because there is flow in
and out just about every single day.
When you look at the number of veterans that are waiting,
that are scheduled, but waiting longer than 30 days for their
appointments, it is about 640,000 total. We see the number of
veterans waiting longer than 90 days as we release information
each two weeks. We see that coming down steadily, but not
precipitously, not fast enough.
The Chairman. If we can talk a little bit about the funding
request that you alluded to in your----
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir.
The Chairman [continuing]. Opening statement. Is this a
formal request being made by the President? Is it an emergency
request, a supplemental request?
Mr. Gibson. What I am trying to do here is to articulate
the requirement as best as I can possibly articulate it. From
my perspective, it is a formal request for funding.
The Chairman. From the Administration?
Mr. Gibson. That is my understanding, yes, sir.
The Chairman. Is anybody aware of how the supplemental
request was made by the White House in regards to the process
crisis that exists on the border right now, $3.4 billion?
Mr. Gibson. I am not aware of the method by which it was
conveyed.
The Chairman. It was a supplemental request from the White
House. And so I am trying to figure out, because everybody
keeps dancing around the word request, even yesterday, an under
secretary did here on The Hill, and I am trying to find out
what do we--you know, it is a desire, but ordinarily it would
come through the White House. And so walk me through. How did
this come up right now? What was the impetus that began you
looking at the need? We already got $35 billion on the table
and so now during negotiations on a conference committee
report, you have injected $17.6.
Mr. Gibson. I think as we launched into, now over two
months ago, we launched into an effort to accelerate care for
those veterans that are waiting the longest, we undertook
simultaneously a process of evaluating the adequate resources
in the field in order to be able to meet that standard of
consistent high-quality health care, timely, high-quality
health care.
As we work through that process using the information
systems that we have available to us, we developed an initial
set of requirements and began working with the Office of
Management and Budget.
As my testimony last week to the Senate became closer and
closer, nearer and nearer, there was an increased effort there
to try to get that process to closure so that during that
testimony as well as this testimony that I would be able to
present that statement of requirement.
The Chairman. So the memo that you gave to Senator Sanders
on the 16th of July says per your request, attached for your
information is a summary for additional resource needs through
2017.
So was it Senator Sanders' request, a combination, or
yours?
Mr. Gibson. Senator Sanders requested the information, the
information, the requirement that is being communicated here,
and, if you will, the request is our request.
The Chairman. You come from a banking background. If
somebody came into your bank with three pieces of paper and
asked for a million dollars, would you give them a million
dollars?
Mr. Gibson. The honest answer there is it probably would
depend on who the borrower was. But I understand your point.
The committee needs additional information.
The Chairman. And we have set a goal of trying to wrap up
the conference committee by the end of next week before we
leave so that we can get something to the President for his
signature. And we got three pieces of paper to justify a
request that Senator Sanders clearly wants put into the scope
of the conference, making it very, very difficult for us to be
able to do our job if all we get are sheets of paper that
basically says they are working documents. At some point, they
have to say this is the document.
With that, Mr. Michaud, you are recognized.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Once again, I want to thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being
here.
You stated in your statement that VA doesn't have the
resources that it needs. In your view, what led to this lack of
resources, number one, and when was this under-resourcing
identified? And my third question is, what did the department
actually request in their budget?
The reason why I ask that question is when I first became a
Member of this committee, when I was first elected, we had
Secretary Principi sitting where you are sitting and we asked
him as he was defending the President's budget and the question
was can you deliver the services for our veterans with Iraq and
Afghanistan and the current. His response was, he requested an
additional $1.2 billion, did not receive it, but he will make
due with this budget.
So I would be interested in knowing what your actual
request was when you originally submitted your budget.
Mr. Gibson. First of all, as I have come into the
department five months and six days ago, I formed opinions
about what I see and what I hear. My general sense is that what
we have done historically is we have managed to a budget number
as opposed to managing to requirements which is what you do in
the private sector.
And I think as a result of that, what has happened is we
have sort of muddled our way along and not been able to meet
the standard of care that veterans deserve because we did not
manage to requirements.
The exercise that we have gone through and, frankly,
continue to go through as we work to ensure that we are ringing
all the productivity that we can out of the existing resources
is really about managing to requirements.
I would tell you that process, as I mentioned in response
to the chairman's question, has really been underway for about
the last two months. I have been in place as the acting now for
seven weeks. And so we are working through that process.
In the private sector, this would be a routine part of the
business. You would be managing to requirements. You would be
continuously exercising productivity tools and over a period of
years, you would be building the organizational capacity to
ensure that you have got the responsive resources to be able to
meet existing demand. That is simply not the way the department
has historically been run. We have managed to a budget number
instead.
I can't answer your question about what the specific budget
request was in relation to what was actually finally approved,
but we will take that one for the record and get you an answer.
Mr. Michaud. I appreciate that and I appreciate your
comments because that was my same response to Secretary
Principi at the time was I don't care how big of a budget
increase you received. I want to know are you taking care of
the veterans. The outcome is so critical.
And over the years through several secretaries I have sat
here and listened to, I believe that they have always operated
the department based upon the budget they had, not what they
need to take care of our veterans. And hopefully that will
change.
Mr. Gibson. Well, if I may interrupt, sir. I committed to
the President, I committed to employees at VA, and, most
importantly, I have committed to veterans, I will not hold
back. If I think resources are required, I am going to ask for
them. And I have told the internal staff don't you ask for one
penny more than you can justify.
You know, I am not looking here for some kind of a blank
check, but I am not going to sit here--in my meetings with
individual employees as they raise issues about the needs that
they have and the resources that they lack, you know, I have
come to understand what my job is.
My title may be acting secretary, but my job is to create
the conditions for them to successfully meet the needs of the
veterans that they serve. And that is what I am obligated to do
when I come here and sit in this seat.
Mr. Michaud. I appreciate that.
Do you think the business operating model that the VA
currently operates is sustainable in the long term?
And getting to what Chairman Miller had mentioned, when you
look at the fact that at the VISN level, they have exploded
with management. And I think the VA definitely has to be
reorganized and, you know, in a better format.
Do you think the current business model is sustainable in
the long term?
Mr. Gibson. My sense is that there are opportunities for us
to structure differently. I don't like bureaucracy, but I
understand in an organization as large as this one, you have
got to have some of it. The challenge is making it work for the
people that are serving veterans day in and day out. And I
don't think we are doing that very well.
So I think there are opportunities. There has been
concentration at the VISN level and at the VA central office
level. Part of that I would tell you I think was positively
done as part of taking and consolidating support activities
either at the VISN level or at the VHA central office level
where they can be performed more efficiently and effectively
than they can scattered in 150 different locations. But that
doesn't mean that we got it exactly right. There is still work
to do there.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Gibson, for being here today.
And I want to follow-up on something that was brought up
earlier by Chairman Miller, a very important issue that I would
like to get more information on, and it has to do with where
you said in your statement we don't have the refined capacity
to accurately quantify our staffing requirements.
And, yet, in your $17.6 billion resource requirement, you
are requesting $8.2 billion for about 10,000 primary and
specialty care physicians and other clinical staff.
Given that you said that the department is unable to
quantify its staffing needs, how can a number like that even be
arrived at?
Mr. Gibson. I am going to let Philip Matkovsky, who is
intimately involved in helping to develop the estimates,
address the fundamental question.
I would tell you generally speaking what we have got, as I
said earlier, we have not been working to solve to
requirements. I think earlier today some of the staff
participated and I think Congressman Wenstrup may have
participated in a briefing that we delivered about the
operation of our ophthalmology specialty.
And inside that model when you look at some of the
productivity tools that we are now rolling out into the
organization, you get a good microcosm of what ultimately is
going to give us the kind of granularity. We are going to find
as we exercise that model there are some locations that have
enough staff.
There are some other locations that may need some
additional support resources, either some additional support
staff or additional space, and then there are going to be other
locations where we look and we say we have enough providers
here. And it is going through that kind of bottom-up, highly
granular process that is going to give us the precise answer.
And we are working and doing that right now. But in the
meantime, as we go out in the field, as I go out in the field
and as we look at top-down requirements, it is clear to us that
we do not have the resources we need.
Philip, the process that we have used.
Mr. Matkovsky. The one thing I would indicate is we tried
to use a bottom-up approach which was looking at veterans who
are waiting greater than 30 days for care and forecasting that
into fiscal year 2015, 2016, and 2017.
We made certain assumptions about improving efficiency over
the years and that for us gave us the definition of the count
of appointments that we needed to accelerate and cost in the
model.
Then we worked with the assumption that in year one, we are
going to do mostly purchasing of care in the private sector
because of staffing issues that would take time. And then we
would blend it over time and sustain it using internal staff.
But the way that we came about that was estimating the
number of veterans and their appointments that wouldn't be
delivered in a timely manner, then costing that and turning
that into the $8.2 billion.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Well, it sounds like it is a work in
progress as you both are saying. So I question how specific you
can actually be.
But a follow-up question is, are there a lot of slots that
are sitting empty right now that you haven't been able to find
someone to fill, either a doctor or other health care
professional?
Mr. Gibson. I would say yes, there are thousands of vacant
positions. All across VHA, roughly 28,000 vacant positions. And
in some instances, those aren't all being actively recruited to
fill. I would tell you as part of accelerating care we have
been pushing particularly on clinical staff and direct support
staff to accelerate some of that hiring.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, then my follow-up question there is if
you have 28,000 minus X open slots and you add 10,000 or so
more open slots, are you ever going to even be able to fill
those slots under current requirements?
The current productivity requirements you have which I
understand from testimony is different than in the private
sector.
Mr. Matkovsky. I think organizations will always have some
measure of organic vacancy rates. You will have turnover in
your staff. But what it allows us to do is to raise the floor
so that the floor of the fully encumbered positions grows with
additional staff brought in.
So I think there will be staff that leave the organization.
People leave. They retire. They move on to other jobs. There
will be a vacancy rate. Our vacancy right now is about 10
percent and that sort of reflects the turnover rate. So as
turnovers occur, you have a certain vacancy rate.
The other thing we are looking at, though, at the same time
that we are doing this is looking at our position management
practices. Rather than hiring to vacancy, hiring to the
requirement which may require in certain cases that we have
fully encumbered staff as opposed to where we are today.
But to your point, I think the additional staff allows us
to raise the floor of the on-board FTE.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Was Ms. Brown here at the gavel?
Ms. Brown, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want you to know I was here before the chairman.
I have been on this committee for 22 years. In fact, when I
came, Jesse Brown was the secretary and his motto was putting
veterans first. And I have been through all of the secretaries
and, you know, some of them left a lot to be desired and some
was--but the point of the matter is that I understand that VA
has changed over the period of time.
And at one time, we were serving a certain kind of veteran.
Now we have expanded to the veteran. I don't want to say they
are sicker. Their conditions are different because of the war.
They come back with different ailments.
How can you plan for that, because they want their services
at the VA? I want to make sure that the VA is there for them.
And it is a lot more complicated than what we are seeing
because, like you said, they have 10 additional things as
opposed to at one time. It was maybe a lot more simple than it
is now.
Mr. Matkovsky. We have an actuarial model that we use to
forecast. Part of that looks at the past practice and then
forecasts into the future. That is part of it. The other part,
I think, though, is to start introducing more bottom-up
planning and having our field give us, if you will, the
statement of requirements, so if this is the number of veterans
that you think you can serve.
I also think that, and I neglected to mention this for
Congressman Lamborn's question, if we improve performance, that
is if we are better at providing high-quality and timely care,
that is going to affect veterans coming to the VA. They will
come to us more if they can get care more timely.
So having a bottom-up planning approach and working with
our medical center leadership and our network leadership to
give us a bottom-up operating plan of what their financial
requirement is in the out years, I think will also help us be
better prepared to adjust for where we are succeeding and when
we succeed.
Ms. Brown. And someone said that we have given the VA
everything they requested. Now, I guess institutional memory
should be important because I remember in 2007 and 2008, it was
the first time that the veterans was able to get the budget
that they requested, forward budgeting. You know, that was
under President Barack Obama. I know I am the only one that
remembers that.
But, you know, it is important to remember how you got
where you are. As we move forward, you need to remember that
many of us talk the talk, but we didn't walk the walk or roll
the roll. So I think that is important for us to remember how
we got where we are.
And VA, yes, we are having problems, but we are not to the
point that we need to destroy the system. And I feel very
strongly about that and I don't want to be the only one saying
that the VA shouldn't--I mean, I think we should work with
community partners and community stakeholders.
And how do you feel about that? We have teaching hospitals
that we should partner with. We could share equipment. But I
still want VA to be in charge.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am. You know, as I travel around and
visit VA medical centers, one of the----
Ms. Brown. You just returned from Gainesville.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am. And at medical center after medical
center, I am impressed with the academic affiliations that we
have with local partners in the community and the benefits, all
the many benefits, the extraordinary care that that has allowed
to be made available for veterans, the expert staff, clinical
staff that we are able to recruit in part because of those
strong affiliations. It is one of our opportunities to continue
to pursue.
Ms. Brown. Thank you very much. And thank you very much for
your service.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. I yield back the balance of my time, sir.
The Chairman. You got 42 seconds.
Dr. Roe, you are recognized.
Dr. Roe. Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today and
thank you for your service in this tough time.
I agree with your opening statement. I have said this from
the very beginning. One of the problems that VA has, that it
did have was loss of trust. And I think Ms. Brown brought up
the point a minute ago that a previous secretary, and I have
said this from the very beginning, what the motto should be of
the VA is we work for the veterans. I don't work for the VA,
but I work for the veterans. So I think those things, that
cultural change will help.
One of the things that I am just not sure about having more
people is going to solve the problem because when I came on
this committee five and a half years ago, a quarter of a
million people worked for the VA, 250,000 people. And the
number I saw in your testimony was 341,000. That is more people
that work for the VA than any city in my district. It is huge.
And I am just not convinced getting bigger is going to
solve the problem. I think getting better will solve the
problem and getting more efficient will solve the problem, but
I don't think--getting larger may make the problem worse. I
honestly believe that.
And when you see an office go from 800 people at a VISN
level to 11,000, that is mind boggling to me that that many
more people could be needed when you don't have that many more
employees. And I think you are looking internally. I truly
believe that.
A question I have is, you mentioned accountability, has
anyone been held accountable yet and terminated?
Mr. Gibson. There were three actions that were announced
dealing with Phoenix back about two months ago. There is an
additional individual, senior executive manager that has been
placed on a leave of absence. I would tell you----
Dr. Roe. But is there anybody that doesn't have a job that
had a job?
Mr. Gibson. There is nobody----
Dr. Roe. Nobody at all being fired? Has anybody----
Mr. Gibson. Well, I understand what being fired means. And
I am also learning the hard way how you do that in the Federal
Government. And so, you know, it starts when you create this
massive base of information that is documented.
The end of June, I got the first results from the IG
finally released on one location, a thousand pages of
transcripts of sworn testimony. And in the midst of all of
that, there still wasn't all the information needed, so we had
to dispatch additional investigators to go take additional
testimony.
We reviewed all of that. We pulled email traffic and then
we go through the process of I have to delegate authority for a
proposing official and a deciding official. And they have to
review all the information.
There are two things going on right now in the
accountability space.
Dr. Roe. Mr. Secretary, let me interrupt you because my
time is short. You have just made my point. When you were in
the private sector, did you have to go through a thousand
pages----
Mr. Gibson. No.
Dr. Roe [continuing]. And do all this to fire somebody?
Mr. Gibson. No. No.
Dr. Roe. The answer is, no, you didn't. And so creating
more inefficiencies in there, I think more people making this
bigger before we trim it down and make it better is not the
right direction.
And I want to very briefly, I don't have a lot of time
left, but we are going to try to have to make some decisions,
big decisions in the next week or so that involve a lot of
money, the taxpayers' money. And it is $17 billion or that is
the request.
And as the chairman pointed out, I have asked every time we
have had a budget hearing, I have asked do you have enough
money to carry out your mission. And the answer each time has
been, yes, we have enough money to carry out our mission.
So how will I know this is enough money when I have been
told before you had enough money because I voted for every
single budget? That is one of the things I will never apologize
for up here is to spend money on our veterans. I absolutely
will never do that because I think they have served this
country. We would not have this country the way it is that I
enjoy and have grown up in if it were not for the veterans of
this Nation.
So that is not an issue, but I don't want to take the money
that hard-working people including veterans go out and pay
taxes and not spend it wisely. So can you tell me how this $17
billion, and that is $17,000 million--where I am from, that is
a lot of money.
Mr. Gibson. A lot of money where I am from too.
Dr. Roe. How is it going to be spent and can I know that it
will be spent wisely? And would it be better to take some of
that money and not look at building this bigger bureaucracy but
to veterans who want to--if a veteran says I would like to go
to see my doctor outside, just let that veteran do that. Would
that not be cheaper?
The infrastructure is already out there. The hospitals are
already out there. We had those folks in here a week and a half
ago, I guess a week ago it was today, who expressed the desire
to do that and they had the capacity to do that. Wouldn't it
just be easier and more efficient to do just that?
Mr. Gibson. You know, one of the points that was made
earlier in one of the opening statements was the fact that
veterans are pleased with the care they get. It is just once
you get it. It is hard to get it.
Dr. Roe. I agree, but they are pleased with the care they
get in the private sector, too, for the most part.
Mr. Gibson. The other thing that has been interesting to me
is we have been working down these lists and we call veterans
that are waiting too long for care and we ask them do you want
us to refer you out into the community. Sometimes the answer is
yes, but more often than not, the answer is no, I want to wait
for my appointment inside VA.
Dr. Roe. Mr. Chairman, just one thing I want to tell you. I
had a sergeant in my office this week. I am not going to say
who. But he called the VA to cancel his appointment. He was on
hold for two hours, two hours. He just walked around his office
doing his job.
And then later when he had an appointment, he--you all have
done something, I will tell you that, because he said he got
eight different phone calls from eight different people about
his appointment. Now, is that efficient or is that inefficient?
Mr. Gibson. It doesn't sound very efficient to me, sir.
Dr. Roe. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Takano, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, point blank, is there a shortage of doctors
at the VA and, if so, what areas are the shortages in?
Mr. Gibson. I would say the short direct answer is yes,
there are shortages and there are shortages in primary care and
specialty care and in mental health, all three.
Mr. Takano. Mental health is a big portion of the shortage.
I have heard that there is problems referring people to
specialists, so certain areas of specialty care is in deficit.
What are the VA's most successful physician recruitment
tools and does the VA need stronger tools for recruitment?
Mr. Matkovsky. I think we have a number of very strong
improvement tools. One of the areas where we have done a lot of
work is in surgery. The surgery program has actually made
significant use of informatics to actually look at practice,
process, and then to identify deficiencies. That program runs
nationally and is able to actually support both at the regional
level, national level, and local level tracking and trend----
Mr. Takano. Recruitment tool.
Mr. Matkovsky. Recruitment.
Mr. Takano. Recruitment.
Mr. Matkovsky. I said improvement tools. Geez. I am very
sorry, Congressman.
One of the areas that had come up before, would we look to
have tuition reimbursement and other kinds of authorities like
that provided. And I think looking at costs, those are
valuable. And I think we need to look at extending those.
Mr. Takano. But recruitment is going to, that kind of
recruitment, tuition reimbursement presupposes that there is a
supply that is adequate to recruit from.
We know that doctors are more likely to stay in practice in
the place where they completed graduate and medical school
education. GMEs seem like one of the best recruitment tools
that hospitals have.
Is the VA GME effectively?
Mr. Matkovsky. I think we are. I think where we find that
we don't have a really good strong academic affiliate,
sometimes we have challenges. And where we have developed a
strong academic affiliate, we have a good pipeline of quality
providers who want to work for the VA. They have done work in
the VA. They were introduced. They understand our mission. They
love our mission and they come to work for us.
Mr. Takano. Would you welcome funding to expand the VA's
GME program?
I know that nationally the VA has normally been 10 to 12
percent of graduate and medical school education with Medicaid
and Medicare taking the other 90 or so percent. We have been
frozen at a number since 1996. I have to think that that is
contributing to a shortage of doctors generally.
Mr. Matkovsky. I would have to look at that. I mean, I
would say that conceptually we would support it, but I just
need to look at the details.
Mr. Takano. Well, I mean, do you think this would help
address the physician shortage at the VA if we were to be able
to get and to get more timely care to our veterans if we were
to increase the number of graduate and medical school education
slots at the VA?
Mr. Matkovsky. I think so.
Mr. Takano. Is my time up, Mr. Chairman?
Ms. Chairman. No.
Mr. Takano. Okay. With the current fee-basis system, has
the lack of interoperability between the electronic health
records at the VA and non-VA providers been a barrier to
providing high-quality continuity of care to our veterans?
Mr. Matkovsky. I think one of the things that separates us
when we talk about private sector and other sort of fee-for-
service systems, for instance, Medicare, is the requirement
that we have. We have the responsibility to maintain continuity
and coordination of care. It has, Congressman Takano.
I think in some of our contract options, we have the
ability to exchange electronic data and that is written into
the contract. So we actually get clinical documentation back.
Mr. Takano. Here is the thing. You know, I think many of us
support the idea of non-VA access given our emergency
situation, cooperation with county, both public and private. We
support that, a lot of us on the democratic side.
But our concern about the solution that is the focal point
of the funding is this potential lack of continuity. And is
that part of your plan going forward?
Mr. Matkovsky. It is a part of it. We are looking at one of
our major contracts that we have in place today to look at
further making the data that we share back and forth
computable. Today it is not computable. When we have individual
authorizations for fee care, it will come in sometimes as paper
and we scan it, image it, put it into the clinical record. In
contracts, we get a PDF, but we need to make it data.
Mr. Takano. So we need more interoperability between the VA
and non-VA care to really make outsource with the non-VA
providers more feasible.
The IG, the interim IG or the acting IG said in the long
run, the best efficiencies for the VA are going to be to own
its own doctors and to keep care within its system. I mean, no
system really, whether you are private or public, wants to
outsource to out-of-network care. There is usually a huge
charge to go out of network.
And I think the VA has the same sort of challenge, right?
But in this emergency situation, we do want to make sure that
when we do outsource that there is continuity of care.
Mr. Gibson. As we look at purchase care in the community,
we think in terms of extraordinary geography, extraordinary
technology, and extraordinary demand. Clearly we are in a
period right now of extraordinary demand that we are dealing
with as we accelerate care to veterans waiting too long.
Extraordinary geography, there are always going to be
communities where we can't justify building a CBOC. And so we
are going to have to provide timely and appropriate access to
care for those veterans.
And then there are going to be occasions where very highly
specialized procedures, not going to make sense for us to do
those in-house and want to refer them out.
Mr. Takano. I think many of us want to support more non-VA
care, but we want to maybe set the parameters so it really is
possible and really does work.
Mr. Gibson. Correct.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Flores, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Gibson, for joining us today.
In your testimony, you said, quote, ``We will work hard to
earn your trust,'' unquote, we being the VA and your trust
being the trust of Congress.
Your background and my background are fairly similar. We
were both sea level officers in private organizations, you as a
chief financial officer and me as chief financial officer and
chief executive officer.
Now, in those positions, each of us had to report to boards
who were responsible in a fiduciary manner for the oversight of
the resources of those organizations. And so I am going to lay
out the following sort of environment.
Let's say that you are the CFO of an organization that
looks like this. It is a corrosive culture. It has performance
measures that aren't trustworthy. It has senior executives who
manipulated information in order to receive bonuses. Its past
financial projects included requests for funding that caused
funding levels to be higher than were not actually used, in
this case by billions of dollars, and then those funds were
reprogrammed to other purposes without letting the board know.
And then you have a resource management system that according
to your own testimony is not accurate.
So in light of that, what do you think the board's reaction
would be if you go to it and say I need a whole bunch more
money and I am only going to give you three pages to explain
it?
So that is sort of the first part of the question. The
second part of the question is, wouldn't it have been much more
wise to come and say we need a small amount and we are going to
come back to you in a few months and show you what a great job
we did with this small amount and then say in light of that, we
would like to make a larger request because we are on the right
track? So that's my first question.
Mr. Gibson. Well, I think the sense is that we needed to
provide, as the conference committee was considering other
appropriations, we needed to provide our best estimate of the
requirements to meet the current demand.
Mr. Flores. But you turned those requirements into a
request and I don't think that was wise. I think it would have
been a lot smarter to come back to us and say this is the down
payment that we need and if we are successful at turning this
around and putting veterans' health care first, then we're
going to come back to you and ask for X, Y, and Z. But you
asked for the whole enchilada at one time.
And that has caused a lot of us to struggle. And now we
have got other folks that are trying to latch on to that and
say that has got to be an integral part of the deal to reform
the VA. I just don't think that is a good idea.
Let's go into a little bit more granular information. In
the health care model that the VA uses, it is called the
enrollee health care projection model or EHCPM, that takes into
consideration a number of components, projected number of
enrollees, projected workload, projected unit cost for
providing the services.
In fiscal 2011 and 2012, the VA used the EHCPM to estimate
the resources for about 83 percent of its health care budget
estimates. In 2014, it expanded the use of EHCPM to develop
cost estimates beyond that.
Over the years, the GAO has identified many problems with
the EHCPM. In essence, it is not a very trustworthy product.
And so that is an issue.
And now the Administration is requesting $17.6 billion
which I think was an unwise request to ask without proving that
things are going to get better.
So here are my questions and I am going to run out of time,
but you can answer these supplementally, hopefully before the
end of today.
Number one is, was the EHCPM used to estimate the
additional $17.6 billion needed to clear out the current
backlog at the VHA? Number two, why did the EHCPM fail to
predict the demand on the VHA system and is there a way the
model can be adjusted to incorporate reasonable wait times?
And, number three, and this is the most important one, should
we continue to advance appropriate VA health care funding if
clearly the method used to predict the funding needs so far in
advance is not working?
As I said earlier in my testimony, the VA overestimated and
then used the funds for other purposes again without talking to
Congress or its board, if you will. And so the model just goes
all over the place. Now you are saying that it needs $17.6
billion.
So let's ask the first question. Did you use EHCPM for the
$17.6 billion budget estimate?
Mr. Matkovsky. Indirectly. We used costs, unit costs that
were derived from the model, but looked at appointment wait
time and used the data that we had for veterans waiting for
care greater than 30 days. That is different than the model,
though.
Mr. Flores. Okay. So the only thing from the model is the
unit costs; is that correct?
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir.
Mr. Flores. Everything else was starting----
Mr. Matkovsky. Looking at the data that we had at the time.
Mr. Flores. Okay. Do you know why the EHCPM failed to
predict these estimates in the past?
Mr. Matkovsky. I don't know that it did fail to predict it.
I would have to go look at the details.
Mr. Flores. The facts say it did fail.
Mr. Matkovsky. Okay.
Mr. Flores. But, anyway, get back to us on that----
Mr. Matkovsky. I will.
Mr. Flores [continuing]. As well as my third question.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Titus, you are recognized for five minutes. Ms. Titus,
you are recognized.
Ms. Titus. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman.
Well, I think we all agree that the purpose of these
hearings and of your proposed reforms is to increase service to
our veterans and to their families. These are services that
they have deserved.
And I thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here and all that
you propose to make that happen.
We have heard of all the many problems and if these
problems exist generally for veterans, I think that the
problems are perhaps even worse for our LGBT and women
veterans. And that is where I would like to address my
concerns.
I would ask you, Mr. Secretary, do you believe that
veterans and their spouses should have equal access to federal
benefits through the VA regardless of their current state of
residency?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am, I do.
Ms. Titus. Well, I thank you for that answer. And I ask you
this because last month, the VA announced that your agency has
exhausted all avenues in the wake of the decision by the
Supreme Court in Windsor versus the U.S. that struck down DAMA
for giving benefits to our LGBT veterans.
And unless Congress acts, those veterans and their families
who live in states that don't recognize their marriages will be
denied access to earned benefits; is that correct?
Mr. Gibson. That is correct, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Titus. Well, and that is most unfortunate. But because
of that, I recognize that need. And after the Supreme Court
decision, I introduced H.R. 2529. That is a very simple bill
that would correct that language problem in the statute.
We had a hearing on that last March. Nobody came forward to
oppose it. We had VSOs speaking in favor of it. Nobody is
working against it.
And I would ask you would you support our efforts here in
Congress to make that change so all our veterans who have all
worn the uniform, who have all served equally, who served the
United States, not a particular state, could have access to
those benefits?
Mr. Gibson. Ma'am, I am not familiar with the legislation
specifically, but my own policy decisions at the department
have been to provide equal benefits to all veterans to the
maximum extent permitted by the law.
Ms. Titus. And I thank you for that, and our veterans do,
too, I am sure.
As for women, I would like to ask you about that. Some of
the recent reports have highlighted some very disturbing
statistics about the low quality of care that our women
veterans face. And they are less likely to seek out care. They
are often called our silent veterans.
But when they do, we found that the VA served 390,000 vets
last year, yet nearly one in four of the VA hospitals does not
have a permanent gynecologist on staff. And one out of every
two female veterans received medication that was determined
could have caused birth defects even though they are at an age
where they might want to have children.
These are unacceptable statistics and they really address
the question of quality of care. I sent a letter along with 50
of my colleagues here in the House asking that this be
addressed. I know you have been busy. I haven't heard back from
you.
But I wonder if you could speak to that this morning.
Mr. Gibson. Well, I owe you an answer, first of all,
apologies, and we will get you one. We are, quite frankly,
playing catch up. The growth rate in women veterans that are
coming to VA for care radically outstrips the overall growth
rate in the number of veterans that are coming to VA for care.
We have not historically been well positioned to provide
that care. We are doing things. We are training for existing
providers, hiring additional providers as well as I know what a
big deal it is every time we are able to cut the ribbon on a
new women's clinic in a medical center because I always get
invited and I attend as many of those as I can.
So it is a really big deal, but we are playing catch up and
we have got work to do.
Ms. Titus. Well, I appreciate that, and I thank you for
your answers because sometimes we look at this in the big
picture and we forget that there are certain veterans who are
perhaps being overlooked. And I want our improvement of
services to go for all our veterans because they have all
served and sacrificed as have their families.
So thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Titus.
Looks like, Dr. Benishek, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Frankly, your story of coming in, you know, in the interim
like this and trying to pick up the pieces of a system that has
obviously been under, you know, a lot of stress is admirable
and I appreciate what you are doing.
I have a couple of quick questions----
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir.
Dr. Benishek [contining]. That I hope you will be able to
help me with. First of all, I just want to address a personal
issue. You know, the CBOC in Traverse City, Michigan has been
scheduled to be increased in size for years. And, actually, the
money is apparently in your department and all it needs is a
signature from you to get that to happen.
So I would like to get your signature on that to make that.
My district has been waiting for this for years. And the money
has been appropriated and it is in the budget, but, you know,
we have been trying to get this to happen for a long time. So I
hope you can fix that.
Mr. Gibson. We will dig into that one, sir.
Dr. Benishek. Well, I have been trying to get this to
happen for a long time.
Mr. Gibson. I've got to tell you when I am out in the
field, I run into all kinds of instances where----
Dr. Benishek. Well, you know, I appreciate the fact that
you are out there.
Mr. Gibson [continuing]. Before I leave the room.
Dr. Benishek. I appreciate that you are out there yourself
seeing what is happening on the ground because, you know, my
problem with management is that when somebody is sitting back
behind their desk and listening to their subordinates tell them
how things are, that is when trouble happens.
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Dr. Benishek. And I think that is what has happened in the
past, frankly, here.
Now, the question that we brought up and some of the
Members brought it up earlier is what does the secretary need
to do his job? You mentioned how difficult it is to remove
people, so what would your recommendations be to--what powers
should the secretary have that he doesn't have now to make sure
that change happens?
Mr. Gibson. That is not an easy question to answer. I have
said repeatedly I will use whatever authority I have got and
use it to the maximum extent that I can to hold people
accountable.
There are different proposals out there about granting
additional authority to the secretary and if those are
provided, then we will use them. We recognize that to the
extent that those are targeted solely at the Department of
Veterans Affairs, that has an impact over time on our ability,
I believe----
Dr. Benishek. No. You are explaining a lot, but you are not
giving me an answer. What do you need to make this happen
better?
Mr. Gibson. Well, you know, somebody asked a question
earlier about is that how it worked in the private sector. I
would tell you, you know, let's work like we do in the private
sector. But that ignores a century of authority and----
Dr. Benishek. Well, what is a century of mismanagement?
Let's make a step forward. What would the number one thing that
you would recommend to make it easier for the secretary to do
his job and promote accountability and action?
Mr. Gibson. Well, I think the flexibility to expedite
personnel actions.
Dr. Benishek. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Gibson. That would be a big deal.
Dr. Benishek. Let me ask another question and that is, we
are trying to get the patients off of waiting lists and into
the private sector, so, you know, my experience with the VA is
it is very difficult to make that happen because there is like
so much paperwork that the veterans have to go through.
What have you done in this emergency situation to make it
easier for that veteran actually to get out into the private
sector and make it happen and the guys get paid and it all is
happening quickly? Now, what have you actually done to make
this happen?
Mr. Matkovsky. That is a good question. Congressman
Benishek, one of the things that we have done is we have
created these new tools. I know we have talked about them
before, non-VA care coordination. It helps us to automate the
documentation of the referral so that it occurs a little bit
faster.
But what it also allows us to do is it for the first time,
we get to look at that referral through all of its stages and
we get to manage to it. So we get to look at when was the
referral created, when was it authorized.
Did we sit on it too long before we authorized it? After it
was authorized, when was the appointment scheduled, how much
time passed, and then, finally, when was the care delivered and
the documentation returned?
That is helping us. It is not perfect yet. We still have
work to do. I think----
Dr. Benishek. Well, what exactly are you doing to get these
people off the waiting lists and into the doctor's office in
the private sector? Tell me how that process works.
Mr. Matkovsky. So specifically it is phone calls to
veterans asking them if they would like to be seen in the
private sector if they would. And we can coordinate with PC3.
We are using our PC3 partners----
Dr. Benishek. PC3 is not in place for the most part?
Mr. Matkovsky. Not fully, but where it is, PC3 will
coordinate that appointment for us and where it is not, we are
working with veterans. If they know a provider they want to
work with, they will work with their own provider. If they
don't, we will work to set up that appointment with providers
we have relationships with.
And there is a scripted process. We did script it this
time. I think it is a little bit better. We still have a lot of
work to do to get that done right. Actually, we have even
talked with some VSOs to help us look at that process from a
veteran's perspective. Is it easy to understand? Is it easy to
follow through? I think we have work to do there.
Dr. Benishek. I am glad you admit to that. Thank you.
The Chairman. Dr. Ruiz, you are recognized. Excuse me. Mrs.
Kirkpatrick, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, thank you for being here today.
On Monday, I was out on the Navajo Nation in my district
and talking with lots of folks. And we have a lot of veterans
and many of them live in areas with no cell phone coverage or
broadband coverage. And I know one of your goals is to expand
tele-medicine and that is a great opportunity for my district.
But my first question is is, in your budget, do you have
money for expanding broadband infrastructure in those areas
where we have veterans who have no access?
Mr. Matkovsky. I think it is one of the things we will have
to look at. In the supplemental request, we did have additional
support for IT to include hardware and bandwidth for expanded
care. But I think we need to look at that specifically. I don't
want to give you a false answer.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. And I would love to be part of that
conversation as we continue on because it is going to be so
critical to getting them the care they need.
My other question is for the secretary. I mean, you know,
the inspector general's reports have been very valuable to this
committee in trying to unravel the problems at the VA and come
up with real solutions, and just would like to know what you
have done, what you have put in place since the interim report
from the inspector general in May.
Mr. Gibson. There were a series of findings and
recommendations that were included in the IG's May report, most
of them having to do with first working the list of 1,700
veterans that they had turned up in their process which we have
reached out to every single one of those. I think roughly a
thousand appointments have been or appointments for a thousand
veterans had been scheduled as a result of that particular
process.
There were recommendations in the report about producing
the NEAR report, the new enrollee appointment request report,
producing that at the medical center level and distributing
that out so that it can be worked. That has happened. And as I
mentioned earlier, the NEAR list has gone from 64,000 to--it
was 2,100 the last time I looked which is going to be about the
bottom of that.
There were items that I am not remembering. Seems like
there were one or two others.
Mr. Matkovsky. Yeah. Each one of them became a specific
action plan. We have worked on them. We have, I think, closed
them. We have implemented their recommendations in the interim.
Whatever the IG--sorry, sir.
Mr. Gibson. I got it. There was also a recommendation
regarding reviewing wait lists nationwide which obviously we
do. We are producing them and publishing them every two weeks.
And those are really the four or five recommendations and we
have vigorously pursued every single one of them.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Well, I thank you for that effort.
And I just want you to know I visited recently with a
doctor at Flagstaff Medical Center and they had just entered
into a contract with the VA to treat local veterans. And they
were very happy and pleased to do that.
So with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Dr. Wenstrup, you are recognized.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here today and for
your many years of service to our country in many, many ways.
You know, let me just start by let's take the assumption
that the goal of the VA is to see all those that are eligible
for care as soon as possible and provide quality care. And that
I think should be the assumption there.
But what I find is that the motivational factors that are
really needed to accomplish that and to achieve that on a
regular basis and to comply with human nature don't really
exist. In other words, the incentives aren't necessarily there
that would exist in the private sector, et cetera.
And I am curious how you would propose in this mass
bureaucracy that we are dealing with from administrators to
physicians and nurses to those that are support staff, how do
we create an environment where truly seeing the veteran patient
is an asset rather than a liability to the system?
Mr. Gibson. Interesting way to frame the issue. As I
mentioned in my opening statement, I continue to believe when I
go out to the field--I was in Phoenix several weeks ago and
visited with a roomful of employees and, you know, that is
clearly our most troubled location faced with what I have
characterized as leadership failure, mismanagement, chronic
under-investment and, yet, person after person raised their
hand and talked about the things they were doing, the things
they had to overcome in order to be able to take care of their
veterans.
I still find everywhere I go the vast majority of people
care deeply about the veterans that we are serving. And I would
tell you if we didn't have that, I wouldn't have anything to
reach in and grab a hold of. As I try to take this organization
in the direction that we need to go in, being able to reach in
there and grab a hold of the fact that they care, they want to
do the right thing is a critical, critical element of what we
are doing.
I would tell you other structural things. And, again, I
alluded to it in my opening statement. I have got situations
where quality of care at a medical center is declining and
medical center directors are getting top-box scores on their
evaluations.
And that was what prompted my direction to say we are going
to overhaul the standard performance contract for medical
center directors and VISN directors because we are not going to
have a contract where their result isn't aligned with the
patient outcomes that we are delivering.
And I think it is going to take some of those kinds of
structural changes as well to ensure that we got people focused
on veterans.
The last thing I would say to this point, you know, we are
so focused on wait times. And as we think about how we gauge
timeliness of access in the future, I think the centerpiece of
that is going to be a much more robust focus on patient
satisfaction. I think that helps us recenter back on the
veteran that we are serving and not looking at wait times and
the 700 other metrics that we have got people trying to----
Dr. Wenstrup. And those types of responses should be the
driving force to whether someone gets a bonus or how they are
compensated.
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. And, you know, inspector general implied to
us that as money over the last decade has increased, it led to
more layers of administrative aspects rather than actual care.
And that really is a concern.
As you know, I had a meeting this morning with several
Members on measuring productivity and efficiency which we have
done a couple times with some of the doctors here. And I think
they are going in the right direction, but I still think that
there is some things missing. When you evaluate just based on
RVUs, what you are able to look at is how much we are paying
the doctor per RVU. But there is a lot more that goes into that
for us to be efficient.
And this comes into when we are asking for $17 billion,
right? And so, for example, if you have an old physical plant,
you know, you have got to take a look at how much you are
spending for productivity and RVUs in a plant that is costing
you out of this world. You may be better closing that entire
facility and putting everything in the community in that
particular spot.
But we are not measuring that. Those are the types of
things we have to measure as well because when you talk about
outsourcing and saying it costs, maybe it doesn't cost more if
your physical plant is costing you so much more. Those are
business decisions and that has got to be the approach. We
can't assume that where we are is the best place to be always.
So I am going to continue to work with that group and with
you. And hopefully we can see these types of changes. And I
appreciate it.
And with that, I am out of time and I yield back. Thank
you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Brownley, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it very
much.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Secretary, the way I understand your proposal of the
$17.6 billion is predominantly for additional space, additional
personnel, professionals, and some money for IT. And I
certainly agree that in terms of facilities and personnel,
there is a need.
My CBOC in Oxnard, California has, as you stated in your
testimony, is one that has had double digit increases each year
over the last couple of years and not much has been done over
those last couple of years, I will add.
I think what I have learned through all of the hearings
that we have had that the care for veterans once they get in
the system is pretty good. It is accessing the system is where
we have seen is truly broken.
And when I see the IT proposal there, it concerns me. It is
a red flag for me because you did mention off-the-shelf
products that you are looking at, off-the-shelf technology that
you are looking at.
But I really want to know. We have got to fix the access
part of this and I don't want to invest more money into a
broken system. I want to invest money into new technologies and
innovation and getting the VA into the 21st century much like
the private sector is and the tools that they have to access a
health care system.
So if you could just comment on that, please.
Mr. Gibson. First of all, I would say the majority of the
IT resources, as I understand the proposal here, are associated
with the activation of the facilities, so it is the IT
infrastructure that we need as we activate facilities and bring
on additional clinical staff.
There are a number of things underway to really take us
into the 21st century here. Part of it is the purchase of the
commercial off-the-shelf scheduling system which is not
included here. It is already provided within the core funding.
But there are other things. We were talking about
interoperability for purchase care and there are technology
investments that are included here associated with that.
Philip, anything else to add?
Mr. Matkovsky. I would just add a couple of items relative
to the IT. I mean, part of it is we have a capital request in
there and we are requesting a certain amount. I think it is
about 12 to 13 million square feet for leased space, but we
have to outfit that leased space with IT actually to make it
useful to connect PCs, cables, networks, wireless, telecoms, et
cetera. Sorry.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Yeah, I can't see. I'm sorry.
Mr. Matkovsky. So that is a part of it. So that is built
into it. It is not all just raw development work. It is what
you need actually to make use of the space you get and then to
actually connect the staff you are hiring. You need IT to make
that happen. So that is part of the request.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. So, Mr. Secretary, then in terms of off-
the-shelf solutions that you are speaking of, what is the time
frame in that? What are we looking at?
Mr. Gibson. Sure. There are actually three or four
different initiatives, kind of parallel initiatives on the
scheduling front. We have already let a contract to deal with
some of the most challenging aspects of the current system and
we are expecting those to begin to be fielded within the next
six to 12 months.
The time line for the purchase of the commercial off-the-
shelf system is still a bit up in the air based upon the
contracting approach that we are going to have to pursue there,
but I think 2016 is probably the best case scenario for the
introduction of that particular system.
Does that sound right, Philip?
And so that is one of the reasons we are going ahead to
make the investments in the fixes to the existing system so
that we don't wait two years to have that improved
functionality.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
And very quickly, in your opening comments as well, you
talked about the VBA and the improvements there. We also
learned in our hearings that we have had a 2,000 percent
increase in the appeals with regards to benefits. So when you
add that together, to me it gives me pause in terms of
believing that we have made the improvement.
And if you could just briefly comment on that.
Mr. Gibson. Sure. Glad to. There has been this laser sharp
focus on the disability claims backlog. I perceived that
walking in the door the morning of my third day at VA. I was
over at the White House talking about the backlog and VBMS. And
so, you know, this laser sharp focus on the disability claims
backlog, we have not been as focused as we needed to be on non-
rating claims and on appeals and on our fiduciary claims.
And that is what we are really talking about doing here,
particularly with appeals where the majority, 90 percent of the
number of appeals that are in process sit in VBA. We have
allocated additional resources, thank you very much to
Congress's support, to the Board of Veterans Appeals which is
helping us and we are using some technology there to make them
more efficient.
But we have work to do in the VBA side to be able to
provide----
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Gibson []. Timely decisions.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Huelskamp, you are recognized for five minutes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate your
continued leadership on so many issues and appreciate the
opportunity to question the acting secretary.
And I want to bring attention first to a very famous
publication, Life Magazine, May 22nd, 1970. I presume you are
somewhat familiar with this publication and also the photo that
gained much attention across the country of, again, May 1970 in
which the VA was found to have abused the trust and neglected
our veterans.
And, Mr. Gibson, I think we sit here today and that is the
same topic, how are we going to restore the trust to our
American veterans and to the American people. And what I have
heard from you today so far has been that if we will spend,
give you another $17.6 billion, somehow that will restore that
trust. And I don't think that does that for my constituents,
certainly not for my veterans.
And I have some very specific questions I would like to ask
of you. First of all, have all secret waiting lists been
eliminated and identified?
Mr. Gibson. To the best of my knowledge, yes, they have.
Dr. Huelskamp. You have identified, at least Mr. Matkovsky
identified those on the electronic waiting list, but it is my
understanding there are 18 different schemes identified
internally. So you are absolutely certain that every one of
those waiting lists have been identified?
Mr. Gibson. I don't know where the number 18 comes from.
Dr. Huelskamp. That comes from the OIG report and,
actually, from a memo in 2010 that came from your department. I
just say if we are going to restore trust----
Mr. Gibson. Well, the IG is in over 80 locations right now
and I am not privy to what they are finding. So that is why I
say to the best of my knowledge, they have been uncovered. But
until the IG completes their reviews in all those locations and
comes back and issues their reports, I can't tell you that
definitively.
Dr. Huelskamp. Well, how do we restore that trust if we
don't know the extent of the problem?
Mr. Gibson. Well, I think you start where you are.
Dr. Huelskamp. You start by spending money?
Mr. Gibson. No. You start where you are. You start by
articulating expectations about how we are going to operate.
You start by getting veterans off of wait lists and into
clinics. You start by fixing the chronic scheduling problems
that exist within the organization.
Dr. Huelskamp. Well, how do we know we are achieving
progress? What we have heard and I am sure you are aware of
numerous employees from the VA have come before this
committee----
Mr. Gibson. Yes, they have.
Dr. Huelskamp [continuing]. And identified falsified data,
fake data presented to this committee. And you come in here
today and present data and say, hey, we are making progress.
How do we restore the trust that we can actually believe
the data you are presenting to the committee?
Mr. Gibson. I would tell you when I directed all the
medical center directors and VISN directors to go out and spend
time in each of their clinics and engage with their schedulers,
you know, people have asked me, well, gee, that doesn't sound
like much of a check and balance because they are on the
inside.
The real motivation behind that direction was for them to
be out there on the ground and to take ownership for the
quality of health care that is being delivered including the
timeliness of the health care that is being----
Dr. Huelskamp. Well, the whistleblowers that I hear from,
Mr. Secretary--I am short on time--they are saying that has not
changed.
Mr. Gibson. We are coming behind that. We are coming behind
that with an independent audit, comprehensive audit of
scheduling practices all across the organization because we
need to restore that trust.
Dr. Huelskamp. Has anyone lost their job for retaliating
against----
Mr. Gibson. No, there has not. There are two whistleblower
retaliation referrals that have just come from the Office of
Special Counsel. And Tuesday morning, I will have investigators
on the ground pursuing those specific----
Dr. Huelskamp. How many ongoing investigations are
currently underway for investigating these retaliation
complaints?
Mr. Gibson. Oh, it is 70 or something.
Dr. Huelskamp. Seventy.
Mr. Gibson. The number is----
Dr. Huelskamp. And so we are going to hear about two and
the other 68 are still ongoing?
Mr. Gibson. These are ongoing at the Office of Special
Counsel. I am waiting for the Office of Special Counsel to
provide me the results of their investigation. I can't----
Dr. Huelskamp. What are you doing about it?
Mr. Gibson. What I can do----
Dr. Huelskamp. What we heard from whistleblowers is----
Mr. Gibson. What I can do----
Dr. Huelskamp. Let me describe what we heard from
whistleblowers. Maybe you didn't hear that. But they said we
get an email once a year that says we have a right to
whistleblow.
Mr. Gibson. What I can do is----
Dr. Huelskamp. And then we are faced with retaliation. I am
hearing this still going on today.
Mr. Gibson. I have no doubt that it is. I can articulate
over and over again the expectation that we are not going to
tolerate that behavior. But until I have got a set of facts
that I can act on, I can't take the action. I can't take the
personnel action. And so nobody is more anxious than I am to
have that opportunity.
That is why, in fact, this morning, I checked again have we
gotten anything from the Office of Special Counsel. The answer
was yes, we just got two. Tuesday morning, we will have
investigators on the ground at that level.
Dr. Huelskamp. I requested in the last meeting, following
the last meeting information of contacts between a
whistleblower here that had contacted the chief of staff to the
President. I don't believe we received that information.
Your department can look into that. You have access to the
information. You just need to call Mr. Nabors. That hasn't been
looked into. That hasn't been responded to. These are very
serious allegations, Mr. Secretary.
And I presume we are going to have a new secretary in a
couple weeks. But to come in and say we are going to restore
the trust, but we haven't addressed the whistleblower problem
because that is somebody else's job, that if you give us $17
billion----
Mr. Gibson. No, it is not somebody else's job. It is my
job.
Dr. Huelskamp. No. It is the OIG's job.
Mr. Gibson. I just can't take action until I have got the
results of the investigation.
Dr. Huelskamp. From the OIG. So we are waiting on----
Mr. Gibson. Either from the OIG or from the Office of
Special Counsel, one or the other.
Dr. Huelskamp. Have you issued any new statements to the VA
system about whistleblowers?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. Could you provide that to the
committee?
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Dr. Ruiz, you are recognized for five minutes.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary, for your hard work.
Before I begin, I want to recognize a friend of all of
ours, Nancy Brown Park. She is the national president of The
American Legion Women's Auxiliary who is here in our room
today. She is visiting us from my district, California's 36.
And as you know, it is in southern California, so it is a long
trek.
Thank you for being here and thank you for all your hard
work.
You know, recently my office has really done an incredibly
detailed, thorough investigation of the different issues that
face our veterans not only when I started office last summer
when we held community forums, stakeholder analysis, research
but also key stakeholder interviews.
We underwent that again in light of this crisis. We have a
veterans' advisory board that is just top notch. We conducted
surveys. We did more interviews and had multiple meetings with
the Loma Linda VA and the VA Administration.
And we recently conducted this informal survey of veterans
in my district to assess their satisfaction with access to the
VA health care.
But, you know, our approach means the world of difference
to veterans and we approach this with a spirit of problem
solving. We approach this with the spirit of partnerships for
solutions. We approach this with the spirit of honoring our
veterans with our relentless determination to serve and put
them above anything else.
And we found, and I am going to give you some information,
though, and we understand there is some selection bias here, so
I take these numbers with a grain of salt, but, nevertheless,
they tell a story, we found that the vast majority of my
district veterans who responded said that they waited more than
60 days. Of course, these are individuals who are upset and who
are willing to conduct this survey.
When asked what issues were preventing them from obtaining
timely care, about a third said that they cited a shortage of
staff which is echoing the concerns raised by Secretary Gibson
and the VSOs represented here today.
Even more troubling, when asked what could be improved to
better provide timely care, the vast majority again said,
quote, ``people who care.'' And we have heard that on multiple
occasions.
So we also heard that there is this culture where the VA
system believes that perhaps it is about them. And we need to
change that culture to make it a more high-performance,
veteran-centered culture. The VA exists to honor, respect, and
give dignity and care for our veterans who have put their lives
at risk. The veterans do not exist to serve the VA health care
system. That is very important for that sentiment to penetrate
every level of the VA health care system.
Now, my question to you is, what is the plan for a system-
wide cultural change that will create a culture of high-
performance, veteran-centered system?
Mr. Gibson. I think as you look at organizational change,
cultural change in an organization, the critical ingredient in
all of my experience is leadership. Part of that has to do with
articulating expectations and then holding people accountable
for behavior that is aligned with those expectations.
You know, we are working hard to do the first part. We are
working hard to get ready to do the second part. And we are
anxious to do the second part as well because, quite frankly, I
think that is where we begin to get real traction.
I would also tell you on the leadership part I agree with
you completely. I think there is a fundamental shift in culture
that has to happen. One of the things that I talk about an
awful lot internally is ownership really at all levels, and we
are talking about leaders not at the top of the organization,
but leaders at all levels, taking ownership for issues that are
getting in the way of delivering care to veterans.
In some instances, it could be a leader that is taking
ownership for a greeter's less than cordial welcome of a
veteran. It could be more fundamental in terms of a leader
taking ownership for the steps that need to be taken to get X-
ray machines repaired in an operating room as I ran into in
Phoenix.
But it is really about taking ownership and understanding
that, you know, my job, as I said earlier, my job is to create
the conditions for them to successfully take care of veterans.
Dr. Ruiz. I believe that that is very important. That leads
to a culture of accountability which we absolutely need.
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Dr. Ruiz. However, we need a veteran-centered culture. So
what are you being held accountable for? What are the
institutionalized tools that you are going to use to make sure
that our eyes aren't necessarily on the spreadsheet but are
always on the veterans themselves?
And that can be done with veterans' advisory boards. That
can be done with veteran surveys. That can be done with tying
promotions----
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Dr. Ruiz [continuing]. To veteran satisfaction. That can be
done in a lot of different ways that focuses on all of our
eyes, all of our accountability, everything we do, everything
that we strive for and exists even in our high performance
always answers the question through the lens of the veterans.
Mr. Gibson. Agree.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Dr. Ruiz.
Colonel Cook, you are recognized, sir, for five minutes.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Appreciate you being
here.
We are talking about trust and confidence. And I will be
very honest with you. I lost a lot of trust and confidence in
the VA. You know, when I was in a platoon, felt very, very
confident with the troops that I had, the company commander,
trust and confidence in the battalion all the way up there. And
I am trying to, you know, not let the events of the past, you
know, influence my judgment.
About three months ago, I called one of the VAs. I am not
going to call as Congressman Cook. I am not going to call as
Colonel Cook. I just said, hey, this is Paul Cook. You know, I
am on file in there. I just want to get an appointment. I
couldn't even get past the switchboard. Okay?
Called the VA, the regional office and told them about
that, but there is part of me that wanted to go to war, if you
will, but there is part of me that my office, they do a great
job handling the veterans and I didn't want to endanger other
cases that are on file.
So, anyway, I said to myself, okay, Cook, what are you
going to do. You are a dumb marine. So I said, all right, here
is what is going to happen. I am going to walk into a VA and I
am going to try and get an appointment. I am going to bring my
ID card. I probably will not show them first. I just want to
give them my driver's license. They are going to look at it.
Right away they are going to see I am older than dirt. But it
will have my Social Security number on there.
And what I want to know from you guys, if you can, what
five questions should I have answered right then and there so I
can go forward with the process because if I think those
questions are working, I am going to spread that through every
veteran that, hey, you going to VA, make sure you have blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah, and you ask these questions because I
am going to say if they didn't answer those questions, then we
have a problem and we have to address it. And I will come back
to you and here we go again.
Sorry. It is a long question, I guess.
Mr. Matkovsky. I think to get care in any VA, you should
ask only one question, am I enrolled. If you are enrolled, you
should be getting care. The second questions after that would
be what kind of care would you want. If you are not enrolled,
the second question after that would be I would like to enroll,
how do I do that.
Mr. Cook. I am enrolled. Let's go with that.
Mr. Matkovsky. That should be just the one question, I am
enrolled and I would like to get an appointment.
Mr. Cook. Then the next one? Just ask----
Mr. Matkovsky. I would like to see my primary care
provider. I would like to see this provider. That is it. You
shouldn't be asking any other questions.
Mr. Cook. Okay. So two questions----
Mr. Matkovsky. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cook [continuing]. Or three questions. Okay. Got a
couple of questions of the IG. The IG, you might not be able to
answer. How many of the IG visits are unannounced?
Mr. Gibson. I am sorry. How many IG visits----
Mr. Cook. Are unannounced.
Mr. Gibson. I would say the large majority.
Mr. Cook. Okay. So they don't know in advance that they
are--okay.
Mr. Gibson. Oftentimes they are responding to a hotline
call or something like that. I don't even know where the IG
is----
Mr. Cook. Yeah. But, you know, I mentioned this before
about the principle, and I was an IG, so this thing about
managing by walking around where sometimes you walk into a
battalion or what have you, you know, you don't like to do that
when you have evidence that there is something going on with
the unit.
I walked in one time. I found a live mortar in a place with
the bore riding safety pin off. Unbelievable. And, yet, when
you come in like that, particularly if you are worried about an
organization based upon the statistics that have gone out
there.
So I don't know. I am kind of excited about you being here.
You answered your question. I still don't understand
granularity and it is the third time I have heard it in two
committees in the last two days. It took me a long while to
understand pseudomonas aeruginosa, escherichia coli, and
tricuspid valvelectomies, and now you throw that at me. I am
just a dumb marine, but I am glad we are going to start over
again and we are focused on it.
And Dr. Ruiz is right. It is about the culture of the
military and we can never forget that. Thank you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. O'Rourke, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, let me begin by thanking you not only for
being here but for the amazing job that you have done in under
two months as the acting secretary. You have been incredibly
responsive. You have been transparent. You focused on issues of
accountability and I believe you have defined a vision for
excellence even in the first two minutes of your opening
statement.
And my hope is that as we have a new secretary for the VA
that you will still be part of this organization at the very
highest level continuing that very aggressive, ambitious push
towards excellence and accountability and changing this culture
that all of us have been working on and talking about for so
many months and in some cases years now.
Let me quickly switch to El Paso, and I realize it is
parochial, but I hope that it has some implications for others
who have similar situations in their districts and for the
system as a whole.
You visited 13 facilities, I believe. El Paso was one of
them. The amazing Verna Jones from The American Legion also set
up a command center there within the last month. That shows us
that you are taking this issue seriously, but it also shows us
that we have a problem in El Paso.
The access rankings that we saw from the VHA reported in
June showed that out of 151 facilities, we were dead last,
absolute worst for established veterans' access to mental
health care appointments. We were fourth worst for new
veterans' access to mental health and second worst for
specialty care.
You in some of your comments that you made while you were
in El Paso talked about problems with the capacity of the
facility that we have, the quality of the facility that we
have. I would love for you right now to say, Beto, I am going
to help you with a full-service veterans' hospital. I am not
going to ask you to make a commitment that you can't follow
through on and don't have the power to implement.
But I will ask you this. Will you work with me to ensure
that we can increase capacity, that we can improve the level
and quality and access to care in El Paso and similarly under-
served, poor-performing facilities in this country?
Mr. Gibson. I absolutely will. El Paso is one of those
locations that has grown almost 20 percent over the last three
years. It is located, as we both know, in a medically under-
served market.
And so we have got challenges there as it relates to space,
as it relates to the scope of services that we are providing
organically in that particular location, and challenges in some
instances, which you have personally helped us with, in terms
of trying to attract clinicians to come to work there.
Mr. O'Rourke. Let me, if you don't mind, Mr. Secretary, I
told you Friday that I was going to call a psychologist who we
were trying to recruit to El Paso. When I was sworn in in
January of 2013, we had 19 and a half vacancies in mental
health care in El Paso. As of last month, we had 19 and a half
vacancies in mental health care in El Paso.
I have been making recruitment calls. I spoke to a
wonderful psychologist yesterday, a leader in PTSD care. I
learned that because we are a clinic, she will be a GS-13 most
likely. That will be the pay scale. If she were coming to a
hospital, she would be a GS-14.
I cannot blame her or anyone who would make a decision
based on what they will be able to earn in a position given the
fact that they are coming into a historically under-served
area. It is another piece of the case that I am making that we
need a full-service VHA hospital in El Paso.
Quickly switching gears, the chairman and ranking member
convened an amazing panel week before last of survivors of
servicemembers who have taken their lives as they transition
into civilian life. And we talked about PTSD and the need to do
a better job of taking care of these servicemembers when they
come back.
And the parents of Daniel Somers, Dr. and Mrs. Somers, also
provided a potential solution or at least a suggestion for us
to explore and that was, and kind of picking up on something
that Dr. Roe said about how we coordinate with community care
and private care, could the VHA become a center of excellence
for war-related injuries for survivors of PTSD, of TBI, of
musculoskeletal injuries, of exposure to toxins like Agent
Orange and those that our servicemembers were exposed to in the
Gulf War, and have community care for all other services.
I am not endorsing the idea, but I would love to get your
thoughts and perhaps Mr. Matkovsky's thoughts with the
chairman's permission since I am close to running out of time.
Mr. Gibson. Well, I think the first part of the question
should we become a center of excellence around a lot of those
practice areas, I would tell you we either are or should be.
And so those are instances where we need to have deep knowledge
and expertise but also exceptional capacity to be able to meet
the needs of servicemembers there.
How that fits into a revised model of VA care delivery, you
know, I don't know that I am ready to give you a view on that,
but clearly in those particular areas, and as I learned from
our friends at PVA, oftentimes the things that VA has over the
decades developed deep specialties in are absolutely vital to
our veterans. And these are great examples of today's areas.
Mr. O'Rourke. As I yield back, I would just ask that we
continue to work together to at least explore this concept.
Perhaps the VA cannot be everything to all veterans and maybe
we should focus on centers of excellence.
With that, I yield back to the chair.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke.
Mrs. Walorski, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary Gibson, it is an honor to meet you. I
appreciate you being here.
I just want to take a second and just let you know why I am
stymied by this request for $17 billion because I just want to
take you back how this started on the committee.
I am from the State of Indiana. We have 6.2 million
Hoosiers that live in the State of Indiana. We have a half a
million veterans out of 6.2 million people. Our State is
passionate and they are freedom fighters. We love the military.
We embrace the VA in the State of Indiana. We have the fourth
largest national guard in the Nation, a little tiny State in
the Midwest behind California and Texas. We love and we are
patriots in our State.
So I am passionate about this issue because I believe that
when our little State, a half a million people answer the call
and they heard a promise from this government, and I have sat
here for 18 months with a lot of my fellow freshmen on this
committee, and I still have for you today the original
questions I asked when these hearings began because we have
never got an answer from the VA.
And all we wanted to know, all I wanted to know was, what
is the status of my State? What is happening with the clinics
in my State?
I have gone to several hospitals in my State. I have a
hospital that is not even a fully functioning hospital. They
don't even have an ICU. So if you are a veteran that comes in,
you are going to be looked at in the ER and shipped across the
street to a private facility and, yet, taxpayers are paying for
both.
I have got a large institution in Indiana I went through
two weeks ago that had probably two-thirds beds empty and they
have never been called by the VA on the supposed nationwide
check. They showed up on the list of 122 original audits that
the VA had additional questions from and the CEO personally
told me he has never heard a word. Nobody has ever checked with
him. There have been no checks.
Nobody has been fired. They are still harassing
whistleblowers. There have been no checks. We don't know the
status of our states. We can't get the answers to the questions
that we started with.
And I guess the question I want to ask you, but I am almost
mortified to hear your answer is, when will we know the status
of our states? Mr. Matkovsky has been here before. I am sure I
have asked those questions from day one, but when are we going
to hear the status of our states? And please don't tell me it
is up to counsel general, it is up to the IG and everybody is
cryptic and mysterious and anonymous.
Mr. Matkovsky. Monday and Wednesday of next week,
Congresswoman Walorski, myself and maybe one or two of my peers
will be conducting eight-hour briefings here to the committees
both in the Senate, the House, and all the State delegations.
We will also be sending that data out to the field as well so
that what we provide to you, we provide to the facilities and
the networks themselves.
Mrs. Walorski. Perfect.
Mr. Matkovsky. So Monday and Wednesday.
Mrs. Walorski. Yea, because that has been a huge concern.
My second question goes back to Representative Brownley's,
which is we have sat in here on many, many hearings on IT. And,
in fact, I will never forget the gentleman in charge of IT was
sitting where that blank microphone is right now. And your IT,
according to the hearings that we have had, has been a
disaster. There have been many breaches. Our veterans have had
their information coopted and breached.
And the gentleman that was in charge of IT sat there and I
said to him, do you have enough money to do what you need to do
to protect our VA and to protect our veterans and to upgrade
the systems that you need. Yes, ma'am.
We find out during a subsequent hearing that, and the $17
billion request, that we have allocated long before I got here,
this committee has consistently, faithfully allocated all the
money the VA IT department has asked for, and then we find out
a revelation in one of these hearings, that they are using 1985
scheduling software. And I think that is one of the most
shocking revelations I heard.
So in one of the hearings just a few months ago, I said
where are the billions of dollars, where did they go in this
giant VA? They obviously weren't addressing IT.
And when you come to us and ask for $17 billion and nobody
can answer the question of why we are using antiquated
equipment, when every request has been funded, the IT at the VA
is a disaster.
What is the answer to the question of how can we possibly
trust you now even for another billion just for IT when all
that money has been unaccounted for and the revelation under
oath was we are using 1985 software?
I think that is shocking and I think the American taxpayers
deserve an answer as to where did their money go and how can
they trust you with another $17 billion or just $1 billion in
IT upgrade, either of you.
Mr. Gibson. I was listening for a question there.
Mrs. Walorski. My question is, how can the American people
trust you for more money, even a billion?
Mr. Gibson. Be glad to come give you a lay down of the work
that IT does on an annual basis, the projects that are
undertaken, the systems that are both maintained and developed,
and the functionality that is delivered.
Mrs. Walorski. So I guess, Mr. Chairman, if I could indulge
just one final question, so I guess the information we heard
that day from your IT, the guy in charge of IT was incorrect
and it could not have possibly been correct information then
for us to find out under a hearing where people are taking an
oath that we are using 1985 outdated scheduling software when
he simply sat there to me and said we need no more money, we
are compliant, we are fine, thank you very much.
So the information he gave us then wasn't true, correct?
Mr. Gibson. I think he gave you an honest answer. I think
what you heard was the result of an organization that is
managing to a budget as opposed to an organization that is
managing to requirements.
I would tell you one of the things we need is a scheduling
system. We have got it built into our budget for 2015 and 2016
and we are----
Mrs. Walorski. In all due respect----
Mr. Gibson [continuing]. And we are going to----
Mrs. Walorski [continuing]. According to your professional,
it was built into the budgets for years and we were funding it.
And we were trusting that it was used for the allocation that
was requested.
Mr. Gibson. There was a highly reported failed development
effort that occurred back years ago where VA invested a
substantial amount of money in a scheduling system and it
wasn't able to deliver.
And I would tell you in the years since that time starting
in 2010 when VA developed the project management accountability
system, and I would refer to you and I will make sure that we
get you a copy of the recent GAO report where GAO looked at
seven different major departments and the progress that their
IT functions have done, particularly in agile development which
is the way we go about delivering software these days, VA was
the only one of the seven departments that passed the grade
with the GAO.
Mrs. Walorski. I appreciate it.
Mr. Gibson. So lots----
Mrs. Walorski. And the other question I would love
answered----
Mr. Gibson [continuing]. Lots of change and improvement.
Mrs. Walorski [continuing]. Is if that guy who is in charge
of your IT got a bonus, I am curious, for the information he
has provided for the lack of adequate resources that you have.
I want to know if the guy got a bonus. I would just appreciate
it for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. For Mrs. Walorski 's knowledge and the rest
of the Members, we actually were going to have an oversight
hearing this week in regards to IT. We were not able to do it
because the person who is responsible for IT is out of the
country on a long-planned family vacation and so we cancelled
in hopes that he would be able to attend on another date in the
future.
Mr. Walz, you are recognized.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you. I, for one, am thankful and
grateful that this nation still producing citizens like
yourself. I have had the privilege of working with you in other
capacities on the USO and your commitment is unquestioned.
And I think when you started out, Mr. Secretary, when you
talked about--I agree with you on this. This is one of our
greatest opportunities to make lasting improvement. What we do
possibly within the next weeks and months will have decades
long implications. That is why it is important that we get it
right, not just get it done; they are hand in hand.
I have been advocating that what has been missing is a
national veterans strategy very similar to the Quadrennial
Defense Review that sets that priorities, that gets that
transition. Because I am interested--in a minute I am going to
ask you about your commander's intent and the transition, if
you will, as it goes to the next commander as we all know and
how that will work.
But what I am hearing and I think what you are hearing the
concern on this is, this nation is committed to getting this
right. This nation is committed to providing the resources. But
we also have a commitment, and they are not mutually exclusive,
to ask that every dollar be spent in a wise manner. In trying
to strike that out--I am going back to best practices. Because
I want to clarify when we talk about the private sector, let's
be clear, eight out of ten businesses fail in the private
sector. Don't pick the eight where you are getting your
information. So this oversimplification, or if the Government
is going to do it right and get into these idealogical
differences, that clouds it and I think it takes us away from
the mission is there is best practices. There is things that
are out there.
So I would ask you this, and this is what I would like to
get your take on, Mr. Secretary: I have the privilege of
representing the number one hospital in the nation, the Mayo
Clinic, and I have watched and I have looked at and I
understand how Mayo has done this and one of the things that
Mayo has always, of course, been focused on is the patient
first, just like we are talking about the veteran first, but
systems analysis, from the very beginning over a hundred years
ago has been at the mantra of what they are done. And these
things, as far as Baldrige criteria and performance excellence
drives what they do. And interestingly enough, it starts on the
flowchart with leadership and it ends with results.
And so my question is in Mayo, they have a quality
academy--the levels correspond to Six Sigma and all of those
things--they are asking, basically, and been there because--
many people don't know this, but Mayo was basically founded on
battlefield medicine--so they are deeply engrained into
battlefield medicine, the VA, and they have partnerships with
you. They are asking now what they can do. I guess my question
is when Under Secretary Hickey said here, she talked about ISO
9001 certification, so if they can come back and answer where
this is from. What are you suggesting or what can be done in
VHA to ensure a Baldrige-type, Mayo-Six Sigma-type of
performance so that then we know if we give you the money, how
it is going to be implemented?
Mr. Gibson. Interestingly enough, when we did a review of
scheduling practices and access practices, we invited folks
from Mayo to come brief us. When we looked at water safety
practices and the VA, we invited engineers from the Mayo Clinic
to come. So I would completely agree with you that they are a
model organization.
I think one of the things we need to look at--I agree with
your characterization that we should look at it as a system and
look at our entire health care system as a system, not just
focusing on a metric here, a metric there, but looking at
concepts like throughput, looking at concepts like being
veteran-centric and how do we measure, how do we manage, how do
we assess that? I think over the next couple of months we are
going to go take a look at some of our productivity work that
we have done. We have briefed Dr. Wenstrup on it. Maybe bring
some folks from the outside, and help us look at doing
purposeful system changes. Not spot initiatives here and there,
by looking at what the practice would look like if we changed
it, maximized throughput, assess it with real clinicians, to
Dr. Benishek's point, on the ground. Real physicians, does this
work? Can we deploy it? Test it and measure it? Use the
principals of measurement?
And then I think for the long-term sustainability, VHA and
VA, but especially VHA, used to have these academies that were
really great and we sort of let that erode and we have to bring
them back and we have to build leaders by focusing the training
on them, building them over time, and investing in them to
succeed.
Mr. Walz. And I think that is what we want here. This
corresponds to the quality of care. I think all stems from
there, and I think this is an opportunity to build that hybrid,
not this either/or, the private sector does it best, you do it
here.
The core mission of the VA needs to remain intact. We need
to strengthen it. There are certainly positive lessons out
there in the private sector, Mayo and others, and we heard last
week from a panel that offered up great suggestions. I thought
there was a great one coming from Indiana. Mrs. Walorski was
talking about Indiana University says he looks out the window
and he sees five hospitals. He knows on any given day, they are
only using 79 percent of their capacity. Let's tap that other
21.
So, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Gibson. Well, I was just going to say I was in
St. Louis on Tuesday and had the opportunity to visit our
training academy on the cemetery side of the business, and
cited that as an internal best practice----
Mr. Walz. Absolutely.
Secretary Gibson. [continuing]. That we need to import into
the VHA because we don't have the kind of talent development
and succession planning inside VHA that you would find in a
private sector.
Mr. Walz. And I think it is important that you bring that
back up again. The older members here will remember this, the
crisis out at our cemeteries, out at Arlington and others, and
the focus that was put on that and the turnaround that has been
there and the verifiable turnaround and the quality that has
been made. We can do this, but if we miss this opportunity or
don't cease to rise to the occasion, then shame on all of us.
So, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Runyan, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am going to probably throw out a couple rhetorical
questions and maybe some analogies to kind of set the table,
and one you probably won't answer, but I just want to throw it
out there and see if you can respond to why someone would seen
ask it: Is VA took too big to fail? I mean that is something
that we have dealt with in other sectors in the last decade. I
think it is a legitimate question.
And when we talk about trust and processes, how are we
going to get there? As Representative Flores said earlier, and
you followed up answering Mr. Huelskamp's question about
process, and your quote was, ``On the personal factor, you need
a set of facts to act on.'' That can be done in a budgetary
process.
I will use the analogy. I will go back to your high school/
college days. You know, your girlfriend broke up with you. You
made up the next day, but you didn't ask her to marry her that
day. A legitimate process of gaining trust over time. And to go
to that, and I love the fact that you brought up manage to
requirements. There is what, seven, eight members on this
committee that serve on Armed Services? And Mr. Walz brought up
Quadrennial Defense Review. I think most of us that sit on that
committee believes the DoD does the same thing; they tweak the
requirements to meet the budget. They don't lay the whole thing
out to Congress and allow us to say, at some point we are going
to have to prioritize what we are going to do because there is
only so much to go around, but we have to know what is out
there. And when we are dealing with a crisis like this--and I
asked the question to Under Secretary Hickey last week--I said,
when we are attacking something and me and maybe the chairman--
and we are attacking something like the claims backlog, that is
a category of claims. Now, when you do your analysis to say we
need this much money to solve this problem, are we going all
the way back into everything from--and I know it changes on a
daily basis--could you do it by a quarterly basis, a biannual
basis to say to eliminate all of the claims in whether it is
death benefits, whether it is burials, whether it is education,
pension, all that kind of stuff, is that even possible to move
the overlay of what we are making definitions of putting claims
in piles, to say, do you have an idea of even what that number
is, VA, why?
Because you are alluded to it on several patient aspects,
but in an overall claims--because we continue to say well, we
are only going to ask for this much because I put this overlay
on it, what is the overall big picture? What is that
requirement to eliminate this once and for all?
I don't think these questions really get asked and/or
answered on a regular basis.
Secretary Gibson. And you are talking about on the claims'
side, on the benefits' side? I am not clear.
Mr. Runyan. Just to boil the whole thing down. Let's just
say claims. Every single one of them that is sitting on a desk
in an RO somewhere, what is that number and what is that fiscal
number that goes to eliminate that? I mean because you are--a
lot of times I know you talk a lot about modeling and all of
that. Well, your models, you are using filters and layers to
actually actuate those numbers that come out of those models.
What is the big picture? Is the crisis bigger than we--I think
we are realizing it is bigger than we thought it was a year
ago, but can we, at some point, push all of this back and say
we really got to step back and take a look at this and realize
this is a bigger problem and we really need to dive into this
deep.
Secretary Gibson. You know, I think as it relates to both
the claims side of the business, the benefits side of the
business, if you will, and the health care side of the
business, part of what you are seeing, and VBA has done this
for some period of time, this regular, weekly publication of
detailed information, not just about the disability claims, but
also now detailed information about all the nonrating claims
buckets, so that people have that complete picture.
The same thing on wait times. You know, up until six weeks
ago, we weren't pushing detailed wait time information out on
every single location--care quality and patient safety
information out on every single location so that we are
creating that kind of openness and transparency so that people
can understand the magnitude of the problem. So that as I sit
here and say it is 641,000 veterans that have appointments that
are more than 30 days from when they wanted to see.
Mr. Runyan. And I know my time is running out, and I just
want to tell you that I have experienced this in my four years
in Congress, as you build trust and we say we are going to do
it one step at a time, I don't think that there is anybody on
this committee that would have a problem coming in here and you
tackling this $10 million at a time. I don't think they would.
As we do that and make sure we get it right and have that set
of facts that we can act on, as you said.
So with that, I will yield back, Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Runyan.
Ms. Kuster, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you so much,
Secretary Gibson for being with us today and taking on this
extraordinary task. We appreciate it. I want to echo the
comments of my colleagues. I think that you will find that this
is one of the very rare bipartisan committees on Capitol Hill
right now when we strive to work together.
I want to focus in on the issue you mentioned, Ms. Bradley
and the work on ethics and accountability, because what my
concern is, is while I wholeheartedly believe that we need to
do every possible thing to ensure that our veterans get the
care that they deserve, I have a hard time addressing the
funding request before we get into how the VA is going to fix
this underlying systemic issue of integrity. In particular, the
testimony that we have heard here about this scandal, of people
receiving bonuses upon manipulated data, frankly, a lack of
truthfulness--truthiness, if you call it, honesty, and
integrity, that not only the veterans deserve, but, frankly,
the American taxpayer deserves.
And so if you could address--before we get into the
additional funding--how do you intend to restore that level of
integrity throughout this system and what will be the actions
taken for deceit and failure to abide by basic, basic issues of
integrity?
Secretary Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
When the President told me that he was going to have me to
be the acting secretary, I said, ``Don't expect me to behave
like 'acting' is in front of the job title,'' and I have tried
not to do that consistently. We have moved out on every front
that we can conceivably move out on.
So it has been a process of working, not sequentially on
tackling different issues, but working across a much broader
front at the same time. So working to get veterans off of wait
lists; working to fix scheduling issues; and simultaneously
working to build the processes so we can hold people
accountable for willful misconduct and management negligence
when it arises.
As we went through this process I perceived the need for
additional expertise in that area which is why I went and
recruited Leigh Bradley and with Secretary Hagel's strong
support, to come over to the Department, to return to the
Department of Veterans Affairs. We have built underneath her a
cross-functional team of senior leaders from across the
organization. Part of the process--part of the challenge that
we are going through the right now, part of it is just what it
takes in the Federal Government to pursue personnel actions and
to have them done in a way that you at least hope it is going
to stand up to an appeal.
The other challenge that we are working through right now
is really the re-calibration of the Department's yardstick, if
you will.
Ms. Kuster. Uh-huh.
Secretary Gibson. That behavior that looks like this, which
in the past might not have had any accountability action
associated with it at all, may, in the future be appropriate--
deemed appropriate for removal from federal service or for very
extended period of suspension.
So what we have done and as we have now, I mentioned
earlier, got the first of these cases in from the IG, are now
exercising that process; following due process, but also
managing through this reset that has to happen, this re-
calibration that has to happen to ensure that appropriate
accountability actions are taken for the wrongdoing that has
been identified.
Ms. Kuster. And if there is anything that we can do in our
capacity in congress and I know that, you know, including
passing a bill to give you the authority to literally fire
employees, because I think that is the only thing that is going
to bring this integrity back.
And I just want to say, for the record, I had a tremendous
honor this week. My constituent, Sergeant Ryan Pitts, received
the Presidential Medal of Honor, and I was there for the
ceremony with he and his wife, Amy, and son, Luke, at the White
House and as he was inducted into the Hall of Fame at the
Pentagon. I was very interested in his comments this morning on
national television when asked about his own care at the VA,
that the care he has received in New Hampshire has been a very
high quality. But I want to say for the record that every
veteran deserves that care.
And my time is coming up, but I do want to say is that I
hope you will pursue best practices, because I think we have
some exemplary care in New Hampshire and I'd like to see that
throughout the country.
Secretary Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kuster. So thank you, and on that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Kuster.
Mr. Secretary, I apologize. Some Members are going to have
to depart to go to a conference committee meeting over in the
visitors' center which is at twelve noon. We tried every way we
could to find a time that was agreeable for everybody, but I am
going to turn the chair over to Mr. Bilirakis at this time and
recognize him for his statements. But thank you, sir, for your
service, your candor, and I look forward to continuing to work
with you.
Secretary Gibson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. [Presiding] Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that and I will recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Secretary, again, thank you for your service to our
country. Mr. Secretary, are you aware of this incident that
occurred I believe on Monday in an Orange County, Florida,
facility, a CBOC, where a marine, a veteran was actually
waiting three hours for care, did not receive that care, and
then he was subsequently locked into a facility during closing
time, so it was inadvertent, obviously. I mean what are we
going to do about this? This is accountability. Are you
investigating this? Will the people responsible, the
administrators, be held responsible?
Secretary Gibson. All I know about it is what I read in the
clippings this morning. It will be an object of intensive
review to determine what happened and ensure that nothing like
that happens again at that CBOC.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Can you report back to me, Mr.
Secretary, with regard to that?
Secretary Gibson. Yes, sir. Will do.
Mr. Bilirakis. I mean it is outrageous, as far as I am
concerned.
Next question: You have directed that an independent
external audit of VA's scheduling practices be performed. What
do you expect the external audit to reveal that VA's own audit
has not--has a contract been awarded, and how long do you
anticipate this to go on, and then I have a couple other
questions to follow.
Secretary Gibson. The contract has not been awarded yet
which is why I am not in a position to be able to reveal the
entity that we are working with. I believe once it is
announced, the reaction will be that they must be pretty
serious about making sure this gets done right.
Quite frankly, I hope it doesn't tell us anything that we
don't already know. I hope it confirms that what we now have in
place are scheduling practices that are aligned with our
policies. But I think to some of the earlier questions that
were asked about the need for some verification, you know, how
do you believe--we are publishing wait-time data every two
weeks--is it valid data? And one of the issues for us there is
to look at the scheduling practices and have a rigorous
independent review. Determine that they are sound practices
aligned with our policy and, therefore, we have credible data
for external consumption, as well as for our own internal
actions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. What is the expected costs of the
audit?
Secretary Gibson. I don't have a number for you. I will
take that for the record.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Very good. Thank you.
Again, with regard to the bonuses, have any bonuses been
rescinded so far due to, you know, willful misconduct or
negligence management? Can you answer that question?
Secretary Gibson. I will give you the best answer as I know
it. There were some bonuses that were rescinded recently that
were associated with administrative error. The law allows us to
do that.
Where there is a--something is learned after the
performance period and after the performance contract has been
officially--the performance review has been officially
approved, we don't legally have the ability to go back and
change that performance evaluation, and therefore, claw back
that particular bone us. We do have the ability to go and
reduce salary and take other actions which would be the typical
actions upon some subsequent, learning of some subsequent
information that affected performance during a performance
period.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Last question: I understand that you
implemented a hiring freeze for the VHA central office and the
VISN offices with the exception of so-called critical
positions, to be approved by you in a case-by-case manner. What
would you consider a critical position for a VHA central office
and the VISN offices?
Secretary Gibson. Well, I would say, for example, we
currently have, if my memory serves me right, four vacant VISN
director positions. And if we were in a--if we were where we
had the right person identified to step into one of those key
leadership roles, then I would be prepared to grant an
exception for that personnel action.
Mr. Bilirakis. Have you granted an exception so far?
Secretary Gibson. I have not for that purpose. There is one
employee that I granted an exception for where he has already
been made an offer and accepted an offer, and had already begun
to relocate, and for that instance, I did grant an exception.
This is really focused on the roughly 3,000 people that
comprise the VISN headquarters leadership, as well as the VHA
central office leadership. There are other staff that are
associated with those particular areas, such as call centers.
We have thousands of people who work in our call centers in VHA
and those would not be positions because they are providing--
that would be subject to the hiring freeze--because they are
providing direct service to veterans.
Mr. Bilirakis. How long will the hiring freeze be in
effect?
Secretary Gibson. Don't know.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. You can't anticipate how long, huh?
Secretary Gibson. You know, the real purpose of that hiring
freeze, very directly here, was to basically send a shot across
the bow of the bureaucracy to say we have got to get ourselves
refocused here on delivering the support that the frontline
needs, the people that are taking care of veterans day in and
day out. So that is really the purpose behind that particular
freeze.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Thank you very much. I appreciate
that.
And I have Ms. McLeod, you are recognized for five minutes,
ma'am.
Ms. Negrete-McLeod. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
Mr. Acting Secretary for being here. However being near the
end, all of the questions have been asked, so rather than being
redundant, I yield my time.
Mr. Bilirakis. You are finished? Okay. Thank you very much.
I apologize. Thank you.
I will recognize Mr. Fitzpatrick for five minutes.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I also thank the chairman and I would
thank the acting secretary for your time here today. I know
that we all honor and appreciate your service. It hasn't been
said here today about your time at the USO, which was a real
turnaround, a great success, a great American story----
Secretary Gibson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fitzpatrick [continuing]. And I want to thank you for
that. We saw that in Philadelphia with the USO organization
there and, of course, we all hope that you can bring that
enthusiasm and that success and bring it back to the
organization at the VA--desperately needs it and needs your
leadership there. And I echo the comments of some of my
previous colleagues who said that we hope that you stick around
the VA and continue----
Secretary Gibson. I plan to.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. The VA is really a stool with really three
legs and they are--we have the health administration here. We
have the benefits administration here. Of course, the third is
the cemetery administration.
As Mr. Walz said, in the past, you know, has not been
without its issues, but I have to say coming from Bucks County,
Pennsylvania, we have a new national cemetery, the Washington
Crossing National Cemetery, beautifully being developed,
serving very well the constituents of southeastern
Pennsylvania, the greater region, and so the, you know, the
veteran community, the families of military and the bigger
communities is left with a very positive view of the Veterans
Administration because of the cemetery administration there and
the community; not so much with the benefits administration.
Mr. Secretary, I am sure that you are familiar with the
hearing that we had here last week when we went well into the
early hours of the morning. There was a whistleblower from
Philadelphia, an outstanding employee, very dedicated employee
who parenthetically, is a whistleblower for her work providing
direct outstanding service to veterans and indirect service by
going to her middle managers, pointing out flaws in the system.
She's pointed out backlog and delays. She's pointed out double
and duplicate payments that she thinks should be recalled and
having been recalled. She pointed out shredding of documents,
and for that she's been sort of vilified and set aside and made
a victim herself, when really the administration and the
management there at the Philadelphia VARO should be embracing
her.
And I know that you were in Philadelphia a couple of weeks
ago. My staff really appreciated your time and commitment in
going through, but based on what you saw in Philadelphia and
based on what you heard and what you now know, I would ask:
What is the plan? What are the action steps to turn around the
Philadelphia office, which would apply to many of the other ROs
across the country?
Secretary Gibson. That is a great question, Congressman. I
think we are back to the earlier point of leadership. We have
one of our most capable and experienced senior leaders that is
in the process of relocating to take over that troubled
location and I would expect in the wake of her arrival, to see
steady improvement.
I have, as I go out to visit medical centers, I make a
point to visit regional offices in the communities, and there
are a number of those that I visited fairly recently, that not
that long ago were not necessarily distinguishing themselves
for a variety of reasons in terms of the timeliness or the
accuracy of the work that they were doing or some other
challenges and problems. And yet find that has we get new
leadership in there on the ground, the right kind of
leadership, that we see a very strong recovery and improvement
and that is what I am looking for in Philadelphia and am
expecting. It is a vital location for us.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. It is a change in leadership, but there
needs to be a complete change in culture and there has been a
lot of discussion of the number $17.8 billion. I mean how many
billion dollars does it take to fix a broken culture within the
VA?
Secretary Gibson. You know, I would say, as I was alluding
to earlier, this is not a one-stage effort. This is not
something, either, that we feel like veterans expect us to
tackle some of these problems in sequence, because if we did,
we would be three years before we got veterans out of a wait
list the way they need to be gotten off of wait lists. So there
are things that we are doing to get veterans off of wait lists;
to fix scheduling practices; to address cultural issues; to
enforce accountability; and along with that, part of that is
identifying and quantifying the resources that we believe that
we need over the next several years to be able to meet the time
we can deliver care.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. And in my remaining little time here, I
just want to get into this issue of the goal to eliminate the
backlog. I don't see it in your written testimony, but I think
you testified here today that you have an intent to see that
backlog eliminated by--I think you said----
Secretary Gibson. 2015.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. 2015.
Secretary Gibson. Absolutely.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. And, you know, that is an audacious goal.
It is one that I hope--I find it hard to believe, based on what
I heard about Philadelphia recently, and based upon our own
investigations where you have middle managers essentially
cooking the books to the point where they with produce reports
and send them up the chain of command to say, based upon these
metrics, we have met the goal, but it is a hollow victory,
which is no victory at all. Because we may look like we have
met the goal and we may celebrate meeting the goal, but there
still would be hundreds of thousands of veterans waiting to be
served. So how do you address that?
We heard General Shinseki a couple of years ago say that we
will eliminate veteran homelessness by 2015. How are we doing
on that goal?
Secretary Gibson. We make steady progress. That is one
particular goal that doesn't necessarily lend itself to the
most frequent and accurate measurement, but there is progress,
steady progress being made in reducing the number of veterans
who are living on the streets. And I would tell you, and I will
say it again right now, I believe that we will eliminate the
disability claims backlog in 2015. I think we are on track to
do that; notwithstanding the challenges that we have got in a
number of our regional offices. We have work to do.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Gibson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Fitzpatrick. You yield back.
Well, if there are no further questions, you are now all
excused and I will invite the second panel, the final panel for
witnesses, all the witnesses to the table, please.
On our second panel we have Ms. Verna Jones, Veterans
Affairs Director, for The American Legion. Welcome.
Mr. Ryan Gallucci, deputy director of the National Veterans
Service for Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States.
Welcome, sir.
Mr. Carl Blake, Acting Associate Executive Director For
Government Relations, Paralyzed Veterans of America. Welcome,
sir.
Mr. Joe Violante who is the National Legislative Director
for Disabled American Veterans. Welcome, sir.
Mr. Rick Weidman, Executive Director of Government Affairs
for the Vietnam Veterans of America. Welcome, sir.
And Mr. Alex Nicholson who is the Legislative Director for
the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America. Welcome, sir.
Thank you all for joinings here this morning. Thank you so
much for your patience. Your complete written statements will
be made part of the hearing record.
Ms. Jones, if you are ready, you are now recognized for
five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF VERNA JONES, VETERANS AFFAIRS DIRECTOR, THE
AMERICAN LEGION; RYAN M. GALLUCCI, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
LEGISLATIVE SERVICE, VETERANS OF FOREIGN WARS OF THE UNITED
STATES; CARL BLAKE, ACTING ASSOCIATE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FOR
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, PARALYZED VETERANS OF AMERICA; JOSEPH A.
VIOLANTE, NATIONAL LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, DISABLED AMERICAN
VETERANS; RICK WEIDMAN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT
AFFAIRS, VIETNAM VETERANS OF AMERICA; ALEX NICHOLSON,
LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN VETERANS OF AMERICA.

STATEMENT OF VERNA JONES

Ms. Jones. I wonder how many people in this room would bet
their last $40 in a long-shot chance to make some sense of the
VA.
Mr. Vice Chairman, Ranking Member Michaud, on behalf of the
National Commander Dan Dellinger, and the 2.4 million members
of The American Legion, thank you for your diligence and
oversight during this crisis.
The American Legion has spent the least six weeks in five
cities setting up crisis centers. We have seen over 2,000
veterans. I have been at each one of those crisis centers and I
can tell you that it is bad and I am deeply saddened. The
American Legion is saddened. We is listened to veterans and
widows and children who, one by one, told their stories of
broken promises, pain, mistreatment, delays, and, yes, even
death. Many of them full of hurt, anger, confusion, and
uncertainty just want to be heard, yet they have told their
stories many times, but their pleas have fallen on deaf ears.
During this town hall meetings, The American Legion listened,
because what those veterans and family members have to say is
important and we want to help. It is woven into the very fabric
of who we are as an organization.
I am going to tell you about a man in Fort Collins,
Colorado, who spent his last $40 on a cab ride to get to an
American Legion crisis center because he literally had nothing
left. I met a widow in Phoenix, Arizona, 70 years old reduced
to sometimes sleeping in public bathrooms because the VA
couldn't get her DIC claim correct. They came to us in tears.
We were able to put her in front of the VA and get those errors
fixed on the spot in our crisis center. In El Paso, Texas,
within the first three days, with 74 veterans, we recovered
$462,000 on the spot for those veterans who were entitled to
those monies.
I read a letter from the Office of Special Counsel about
the VA and the harmless errors that included a veteran waiting
more than eight years for a psychiatric appointment: eight
years. We have veterans taking their own lives. Twenty-two
veterans a day, here in America, and it is a harmless error
that a veteran has to wait eight years for an appointment?
We saw in North Carolina a veteran who had been working on
his claim for 14 years. As he left the crisis center he said,
``I can't believe it took me 90 minutes to fix what I have been
working on for 14 years.''
That is what we have been doing. Five cities and we have a
half a dozen more scheduled. We are making the extra effort;
that is what it takes. We all heard whistleblower talk about--
talk to this committee about the boxes of mail languishing in
Pennsylvania. ``You can identify that mail,'' she said, ``it
just takes a little extra effort, but they don't allow you to
make the effort.''
If an employee wants to make extra effort to help veterans
at the VA, that employee shouldn't have her car vandalized and
be subject to harassment. You need to promote that kind of
employee. I hope the VA is listening. I how about you take the
whistleblowers, you know, the people with the guts to stand up
and say, ``That is not the right way to treat veterans,'' and
put them in leadership positions so they can be the example for
the people who work for them? You can make some room for them
by getting rid of the ones who covered up veterans waiting for
care so they could earn a little extra money every year or
overstate accuracy to look good.
I want to be perfectly clear, though. This is not about
tearing down the VA; it is about saving the VA. The American
Legion wants a good VA for all veterans. Abraham Lincoln said,
``To care for him who shall have borne the battle, for his
widow and his orphan.'' I didn't read the part that said that
is null and void if that affects your bonus.
Who talked to veterans in every city who wanted VA, a place
that belongs to them. They want doctors and medical
professionals who understand that what--their service and
understand their needs. When The American Legion says the VA
has a problem with access and accuracy and leadership, we don't
want to throw out the VA; we want to help restore it and make
it what it should be for veterans, make it what veterans
deserve.
The man I told you about in Colorado, he had been let down
by the system. The system was supposed to care for him. He was
broke. He felt broken and he spent his last $40 on a cab ride
to get The American Legion crisis center. All of his worldly
positions on his back in a knapsack, he arrived at the crisis
center after it closed that day, so he had to sleep at a gas
station waiting for us to open. The next morning we were able
to get him in front of the VA and that gentleman was placed in
a housing program and received the services that he really
needed.
Our chairman of veterans affairs and rehabilitation for The
American Legion was so affected that he gave that gentleman
back his $40 because The American Legion truly believes that no
veteran should have to pay for services they have already paid
for by virtue of their own service. We have served over 2,000
veterans through these crisis centers and life-changing
decisions have been made, and we appreciate the support and
collaboration of the VA. Those VA employees came into the
crisis centers and worked with veterans and they did a great
job. This is what happens when we all come together and do what
we know is right.
And while we as an organization have been honored to help,
the question still remains: Why did it have to come to this
point in the first place? Thank you for listening.

[The prepared statement of Verna Jones appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Ms. Jones. Thank you so much for
that testimony.
Now, I will recognize Mr. Gallucci for five minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF RYAN M. GALLUCCI

Mr. Gallucci. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman, and Ranking
Member Michaud and Members of the Committee, on behalf of the
Veterans of Foreign Wars, thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the state of VA care and restoring trust in the VA
system.
The allegations made against VA are outrageous and our
members are rightfully outraged, plus the VFW worries that the
loss of trust among veterans has the potential to be more
harmful than some of the impropriety that we have seen. When
the scandal broke, the VFW worked quickly to intervene directly
on behalf of veterans. We advertised our help line, 1-800-VFW-
1899, where veterans could turn for assistance or share their
experiences. We also conducted a series of town halls and
directed surveys around the country.
And over the first two months of our outreach, we received
more than 1,500 comments, most of which were negative. The VFW
then worked with VA leadership to help resolve more than 200
critical issues. Next, we sorted through this data to identify
trends and make specific recommendations to fix the system.
As we seek to resolve these issues, we must be careful not
to dismantle VA or abdicate VA of its responsibility to care
for veterans. VA care is far too important since many of its
services cannot be duplicated civilian-side. My full comments
are submitted for the record.
Today I will share specific concerns on scheduling, non-VA
care, and accountability. The major issue facing the VA Health
Care System is timely access. Even veterans who relayed
positive experiences to VFW still shared concerns over
unreasonable wait times. To date, to the VFW outdated
appointment scheduling technology is central to the access
issue. VA knows that its antiquated patchwork system allows
patients to slip through the cracks and makes it nearly
impossible to manage clinician workload. This is why the
scheduling system is rife with fraud and manipulation and why
veteran care suffers.
One veteran who contacted the VFW shared his problems
transferring into the Salt Lake City VA system. At first, VA
said it would take six months to see primary care. After six
months, VA told the veteran it would be another six months. Six
months later, when the veteran called VA, he was informed that
he was disenrolled since he had not been seen in more than a
year. We have to do better than this. This is why Congress must
provide VA with the resources to--necessary to acquire a modern
and sustainable appointment scheduling system.
Next, the VFW acknowledges that VA must fully leverage its
non-care authority; however, VA must have the responsibility
and resources to properly coordinate and deliver non-VA care,
otherwise, veterans will suffer. Earlier this week I spoke with
a veteran caregiver in Missouri who recounted a recent
nightmare receiving non-VA care. The veteran needed a seemingly
routine knee surgery, but VA was backlogged and had to send him
on the economy for the procedure. What followed was a
bureaucratic mess. After the outside provider performed the
operation, the veteran was quickly discharged and told that the
hospital had no further responsibility, meaning the veteran and
his caregiver had to drive directly to VA to receive proper
medication and prosthetics needed for recovery.
Now, the VFW understands that the VA may have been best
suited to provide both, but this was not communicated to the
veteran prior to the procedure. Moreover, the caregiver
reported that the non-VA facility was inflexible in providing
basic assistance to a veteran who was clearly in pain while
still in their care. This is a prime example of why outsourcing
VA care is not a catchall solution.
Must VA outsource care when they cannot deliver it in a
timely manner? Absolutely; however, VA must continue to serve
as the guarantor of such care and Congress must ensure that VA
referral teams and private networks can make responsible,
timely health care decisions.
Finally, we all know accountability is a major problem for
VA and a problem that goes beyond executive employees. Secrecy
and a low morale seem to be symptoms of a VA culture that
focuses on internal processes rather than patients. Veterans
tell the VFW that resources are stretched too thin but
employees are afraid to speak up and worse, as we have heard
today, penalized when they do.
VA has to focus on patients first by changing this mindset.
This demands strong executive leadership and strong
whistleblower protections. The VFW also worries that the
current bureaucracy incentivizes retention of poor-performing
employees over termination and replacement, since VA
acknowledges it can take up to a year to fill vacancies. If VA
cannot quickly hire top talent, we cannot expect VA to fire bad
employees. If VA cannot fire bad employees, we cannot expect VA
to deliver timely quality care to the veterans who need it.
Thankfully, not everything the VFW hears about VA care has
been bad. Nearly 40 percent of the veterans who contacted us
praised VA. Just this week, several veterans sought out our
professional staff at our national convention to share how VA
doctors had saved their lives. Others offered perspective on
how the system has improved over the years. We believe the
system can work, but it cannot work without Congress taking
action.
This week at our national convention VFW members also
passed a stern resolution calling to pass the VA Access and
Accountability Act. Both chambers have already agreed that
these reforms will help veterans receive timely care which is
why our members insist that Congress absolutely cannot go into
the August recess without passing this bill. When the current
scandal broke, every legislator in Washington agreed that this
was a national imperative; however, some have recently backed
off, it is post caring more about costs than the veterans who
are waiting for care.
We have an opportunity here. We have an opportunity to show
our veterans and those still serving in harm's way that our
nation will live up to its promise to care for those who defend
it. We have to get this right. We have to restore trust and
confidence in the VA system and the VFW will do whatever it
takes to make that happen.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, Members of the Committee,
this concludes my testimony, and I am happy to answer any
questions that you may have.

[The prepared statement of Ryan M. Gallucci appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Gallucci.
And now I will recognize Mr. Blake for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARL BLAKE

Mr. Blake. Thank you Vice Chairman Bilirakis, Ranking
Member Michaud, Members of the Committee. On behalf of
Paralyzed Veterans of America, I would like to thank you for
the opportunity to testify today.
You know, it is truly frustrating and disappointing to see
the things that have been reported about the VA Health Care
System in the last several months, and yet not a thing we have
heard is surprising. PVA members, veterans with spinal cord
injury and dysfunction, are the highest percentage users of the
VA health care system in the veteran population. I can promise
you that our members are experienced the long delays and the
appointment scheduling gimmicks have that been disclosed.
I am a regular user of the VA. It has happened to me as a
regular user of the VA; however, we have fortunate because VPA,
30 years ago, developed an agreement with the VA to allow us to
do annual site visits to fully understand what goes on in the
SCI system of care and to ensure that adequate staffing and
adequate resources are devoted to that system. The sad reality
is that veterans who try to access the larger VA health care
system do not have that luxury.
The fact is that we are all responsible for these problems.
Veterans service organizations should have provoked greater
examination of our concerns by encouraging Congress and senior
VA leadership to examine the face of these problems has we saw
it. Meanwhile, the administration should have been fully honest
about the resources and staffing needed to meet actual demand
on the system; not manipulating demand data and statistics to
make things look better than they obviously were. Finally,
Congress should have actually listened to what we had to say as
advocates, and as we have been saying for years.
These access problems can be traced all the way back to
2003 when the VA had to actually begin denying enrollment to
eligible veterans who were seeking care because it did not have
the capacity or the resources then. Unfortunately, instead of
taking meaningful steps then, we allowed the VA to just close
its doors to some people and now it has simply got worse, and
so here we are today talking about this problem.
In a meeting recently, a member of congress told several of
us in the VSO community, ``We thought we were giving the VA
enough resources.'' That is a ridiculous statement. This just
affirms that no one is listening to what we, the VSOs, and
particularly the co-authors of the Independent Budget, have to
say because we have been pointing to these problems in both our
budget and policy recommendations for 28 years. In fact for
years now, we have not once had the opportunity to formally
present in front of the MilCon/VA Appropriations Subcommittee
to outline our concerns--for years now.
I will not dispute the fact that the VA health care system
has been given large sums of money in recent years and that the
VA has done a poor job of managing and spending those
resources; those are facts. But that does not automatically
mean that additional resources are not needed now. We believe
they absolutely are, whether to address the recommendations
made by the VA or the Administration or the White House or
whoever made the $17 billion recommendation, or to address
legislation that the conference committee is currently
wrangling over right now.
Unfortunately, the discussion was turned more towards using
private health care to resolve these problems instead of
restrengthening the VA from within. Sending veterans out into
the private marketplace may alleviate the serious pressures on
access right now, but that is not the answer to the long-term
problem. The VA has provided its appraisal, and yet some
Members of Congress have laughed that off as being unacceptable
or not part of this debate.
When will it be part of this debate? Because I am convinced
that it will never be a part of this debate. Is Congress not
really interested in fixing the VA from within?
I hear all the discussions about culture and I couldn't
agree with anyone more. The culture needs to be fixed. I use
the VA, so I know what the culture of the VA is like, but I can
tell you that I prefer to go to my VA doctor.
The question was asked at this committee hearing last week
about the possibility of VA contracting out for most services,
nonspecialized care or care that is unique to the VA. But that
question ignores the fact that primary care is not a generic
function, particularly when it comes to veterans. Even the
representative from the American Hospital Association sat right
there and admitted that they would need time to understand the
nature of the veteran patient population before they could
actually begin to truly meet demand.
Meanwhile, one of the other representatives who sat right
here in this seat said, ``We have longstanding concerns about
the rates of reimbursement.'' Are we not concerned when the
people that it seems that we are going to turn to, to help us
address these access problems, will readily admit that they
fully do not understand veterans as patients and that they are
worried about how much they are going to get paid? Their
motivations are not our motivations. Their mission is not the
mission of the VA.
To be clear, PVA finds it wholly unacceptable that tens of
thousands of veterans have waited for far too long for care and
in many cases are still waiting to be seen or have never been
seen. Not a single veteran should have to wait for care when it
is needed and it is incumbent upon this committee, all of us at
this table, and the folks sitting behind me to get this right
because it will matter in the long run to millions of veterans.
So it is time for the rhetoric to stop.
Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to answer
any questions that you may have.

[The prepared statement of Carl Blake appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Blake. I appreciate it.
I will now call on Mr. Violante. You are recognized, sir,
for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH A. VIOLANTE

Mr. Violante. Thank you, Vice Chair Bilirakis and Members
of the Committee. Thank you for inviting DAV to testify today.
When the allegations of secret waiting lists came to light
we were outraged, but like you, we wanted to wait for all of
the facts before reaching final conclusions. Today there is no
longer any doubt that the serious problems uncovered by this
Committee and validated by VA's OIG are real and must be
corrected.
Over a decade ago, VA faced similar crisis. In May, 2003, a
Presidential Task Force, or PTF, appointed by President Bush
reported the following, and I will quote from this book, ``As
of July, 2003, at least 236,000 veterans were waiting six
months or more for first appointments or initial follow-up, a
clear indication of lack of sufficient capacity or, at a
minimum, a lack of adequate resources to provide required
care,'' end quote. The PTF concluded there was a mismatch in VA
between demand for access and available funding.
As Mr. Michaud pointed out earlier, at a hearing here in
February, 2004, Secretary Principi sat at this table and
stated, ``I asked OMB for $1.2 billion more than I received.''
One year later, after stating unequivocally that VA's budget
for fiscal year 2005 and 2006 were sufficient, Secretary
Nicholson admitted VA needed an additional $975 million for
2005 and $2 billion for 2006.
Even when VA accurately indicates its needs, OMB passbacks,
a lower number in the final budget. That is why DAV and our IB
partners have testified over the past decade that VA's medical
care and construction budgets were inadequate. In the prior ten
years, the funding provided for medical care was more than $7.8
billion less than what the IB recommended. For next year, we
project it will be $2 billion less than needed.
Here is what the Congressional Budget Office said in a
recent report, and I quote, ``Under current law, for 2015, and
CBO's baseline projections for 2016, VA's appropriations for
health care are not projected to keep pace with growth in the
patient population or growth in per capita spending for health
care, meaning that waiting times will tend to increase,'' end
quote. In addition, over the ten years the funding appropriated
for construction has been about $9 billion less than what was
needed and that is based on VA's only internal analysis.
Mr. Chairman, in 1905 American philosopher, George
Santayana, famously wrote that, quote, ``Those who cannot
remember the past are condemned to repeat it,'' end quote. The
question is: Will we learn from the mistakes of the past?
In our view, the debate over whether there is a mismatch
between demand to VA health care and the resources provided is
a settled issue. Why else would the House vote 426 to 0 and the
Senate vote 93 to 3 for legislation to expand veterans access
to health care that CBO estimated could cost $30 billion for
two years of coverage and up to $54 billion annually after that
if there was already enough money.
Acting Secretary Gibson testified about the progress made
over the past two months, adding more clinic hours, filling
physician vacancies and using temporary staffing resources.
Secretary Gibson also testified that in order to continue this
expanded access initiative for this year and the next three
years, VA will need supplemental resources totalling $17.6
billion. Unlike the proposals in the conference committee, VA's
proposal would have an immediate impact by continuing VA's
expanded access initiative and its purchase care while building
up internal capacity for the future. For these reasons, we
support the supplemental request approach.
Mr. Chairman, DAV, has for decades said the funding
provided to VA was inadequate to meet current and future health
care needs for veterans. Sadly, history has proven us correct.
It is up to Congress and the Administration to take steps
necessary to end the mismatch, provide VA the resources it
needs and work with VSOs to strengthen the VA Health Care
System so enrolled veterans receive high-quality, timely, and
convenient medical care.
That concludes my testimony. I would be happy to answer
questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Joseph A. Violante appears in
the Appendix]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Weidman, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICK WEIDMAN

Mr. Weidman. Thank you very much, Congressman, Mr. Vice
Chairman.
We are a simple bunch and our legislative agenda for the
112th Congress and for the 113th Congress consisted only of
four things. Number one, fix the VA. And what we meant by that
was gobbledygook that meant nothing in terms of adding to
accomplishing the mission.
Secondly is that there be true accountability. When people
lie they get fired. If I lie to our National President John
Rowan, I am toast, and I absolutely agree with that decision.
You cannot run an outfit where people systematically and
unblushingly do not tell the truth.
The third thing is that they have adequate resources, and I
have to agree with my colleagues here, is we have being saying
for a long time that they don't have adequate resources.
And lastly on our agenda is addressing toxic wounds which
hasn't really been adequately done for any generation. It
wasn't done for those exposed to ionizing radiation at the end
of World War II or during the 1950s. It wasn't true of Vietnam
vets with Agent Orange and other toxic exposures. Not true of
Gulf War vets who were exposed to sarin, low levels of sarin
gas and others which, in fact, do have long-term health care
consequences and they haven't addressed that of the young folks
today.
It is something that needs to change in the system and not
an add-on, but change in the way that VA approaches their
mission of veterans health care. It is not a general Health
Care System that happens to be for vets. It has to be based on
military exposures, whether that be all the things that people
talked about here earlier today in terms of spinal cord injury,
visual impaired and blind services, prosthetics, and on and on
and on, and certainly toxic exposures, and that is why we have
such high cancer rates.
I noticed that somebody, and it wasn't us, put it out on
the table, a little card from the American Academy of Nursing.
And where they get this from, the information in this, they are
disseminating it to their members. Why? Because VA is not
talking to private sector medicine about the wounds, maladies,
injuries, illnesses and conditions that stem from military
service based on branch of service, when did you serve, where
did you serve, and when and what was your military occupational
specialty, and, in fact, it should be because 70 percent or 60
to 70 percent of veterans don't go anywhere near a VA hospital
and more would and more do today than did 20 years ago because
the care is better, frankly, once you get in.
But we still don't have the adequate resources and most
importantly, we don't have the right kind of attitude. The
plantation mentality of ``we are going to tell these poor vets
what they need''--no. How about asking the vets, What do you
need? What do you all think? Here is the problem, can we solve
this together? Not just at the national level, but at the VISN
level, that work level, and at most importantly, we believe, at
the VA medical center level.
All too often people have it all backwards. I will use one
example. The White House mandated that everybody do a summit on
mental health last August and September, so they did it. And
they were supposed to meet with stakeholders in the community,
including all the VSOs and set the agenda and work together to
hold the summit.
Well, that is not what happened. They had a pre-determined
message. They invited a couple of people from each VSO and told
us what we ought to think. That is not a summit. That is not a
partnership. And once we change this at the local level, then
we will start to turn it around.
I will say that under the acting secretary, there is a--
winds of fresh thought are wafting through 810 Vermont. It
hasn't gotten out to the field yet, but it is wafting through.
And so people are doing what they should have been doing all
along. Not that we call the shots from VSOs and other
stakeholders, but that they ask our opinion.
As an example, on the scheduling system, some people
weren't going to ask our opinion and the acting secretary made
them listen because we know what it is like because it is our
folks who go through the nonsense. And if you want to change a
VA, you change that particular part of it. Forcing VA to listen
to the stakeholders and to really do patient-centered care or
veteran-centric care. And to do that, you have to respect the
individual veteran and the veterans organizations that--and
other stakeholders.
I want to just touch on resources here for a second. We
have said from the outset that the Millman formula imposed in
2003 was no daggone good. Why? Because it is a civilian formula
that is designed by Millman for PPOs and HMOs and middle-class
people that can afford those. That is not who uses VA.
The average number of presentations at that time was five
to seven presentations of things wrong with veterans coming in
the VA hospitals, and today, among the youngest vets, OIF/OEF,
it is 14 presentations. But the Millman formula figures on one
to three presentations. Now, it doesn't take a rocket
scientist--even I can figure out that you are going to fall
further and further and further behind if you use that to
estimate what the need is going to be. We need to junk that and
go to a more realistic funding based on the needs of the people
in the catchment area.
The last thing I want to comment on, and as an appendix to
today, people have been saying, where are we going to find the
medical professionals? And a number of people inside,
particularly those within the AFGE, have been working on a
program called ``Grow Our Own'' and it is based off the old
medics program, and not just for former medics and corpsman to
become physician assistants, but why not send them to school,
even if they are smart enough to go to medical school and they
give back two years for every year that they are in school.
Then you are growing your own. It is veterans who have served
and who are committed to the system from the heart outward and
we will have enough people for the future.
And so I recommend that to the Committee. I thank you for
the opportunity to appear here today and thank you for your
indulgence because I see I am over.

[The prepared statement of Rick Weidman appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Bilirakis. My pleasure. Thank you for your testimony,
sir.
Now we will recognize Mr. Nicholson for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALEX NICHOLSON

Mr. Nicholson. Vice Chair Bilirakis, Ranking Member
Michaud, and distinguished Members of the Committee, on behalf
of the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, we appreciate
the opportunity to share with you our views and recommendations
on what changes and reforms should be made to the Department of
Veterans Affairs and on VA communication and collaboration with
veterans service and advocacy organizations.
In recent months, revelations about extensive patient wait
times, a manipulation of data, a systematic lack of
accountability, and even preventable veteran deaths within the
VA system have undermined the trust of the American public and
our VA and it has had a particular impact on the trust and
confidence of IAVA's members in the system. While it is true
that many of our members have expressed general satisfaction
with the quality and delivery of health care they receive from
VA, many have also expressed serious frustration with general
access to and direct communication with the VA system.
IAVA is pleased to see some recent changes within the VHA,
but we are eager to see more structural reforms pursued in the
areas of accountability, the adoption of best technologies, and
increased capacity to deal with future needs. Congress has
acted swiftly in the area of accountability and response to the
systemwide VA scheduling scandal by passing the VA Management
Accountability Act. We are pleased to see this legislation move
forward, but our members want to ensure that the secretary
actually uses it once it is signed into law.
We would even welcome an extension and application of
similar authority to Title 38 and GS employees, as well, within
the VA with appropriate due process protections, of course, as
a part of that. IAVA would also like to see VA adopt not only
new, more user friendly technological platforms, especially
those that are veteran-facing, but we believe the organization
needs to begin a shift in the way it looks at its technology
needs and how it goes about acquiring and/or designing those
systems. Compared to the private sector user interfaces that
our members use, the VA's web-based platforms and portals are
frankly a joke to many Iraq and Afghanistan-era veterans.
Finally, our members want to see an increase in VA's
capacity to deliver critical services to veterans, especially
in the realm of mental health care. The shortage of
psychologists, psychiatrists, counselors, case and social
workers, and other mental health professionals and service and
support staff must be quickly remedied. Some of these, and more
other reforms and actions are actions the VA could have pursued
at least partially all along. Unfortunately, the VA's level of
communication, cooperation, and collaboration with new
generation organizations like IAVA over the past five years has
been severely lacking. In fact, prior to the outbreak of the VA
scandal, the current VA access scandal, the former secretary of
veterans affairs had only met with IAVA directly on one
occasion during his entire tenure as secretary.
Much like the VA's attitude towards this committee, if the
prior regime within the VA did not like what they were hearing
from its non-profit partners or those partners refused to toe
the party line, they were shut out from top-level access
entirely.
VA's interim leadership, however, has been much more
communicative with IAVA and other VSOs and veterans advocacy
groups, and the new VSO liaison brought on by VA immediately
prior to the access crisis, has done phenomenal job in working
to repair the relationship between VA and the nation's largest
organization of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans and their
families.
In addition to the above, we also want to take the
opportunity to let members of the committee know that today,
right now, the National Press Club, IAVA is releasing the
results of its 2014 member survey. IAVA's policies, position,
and priorities are driven every year by our annual member
survey and the data this year overwhelmingly revealed that
suicide and mental health care access at the VA are the top
challenges facing this generation of veterans.
More information about the results of our member survey are
available today at IAVA.org and our staff and search team, led
by Dr. Jackie Maffucci in our DC office would be happy to brief
you and your staff on our detailed 2014 findings in the very
near future.
Mr. Vice Chair, we appreciate the opportunity to share our
views on these topics and look forward to working with you and
your staff to improve the lives of veterans and their families
moving forward. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Alex Nicholson appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Nicholson.
Thank you all for your testimony, and I will recognize
myself for questions for five minutes.
First question for the entire panel, Mr. Robert McDonald,
as you know, has been nominated by President Obama to be the
next secretary, permanent secretary. I am sure that we all
agree that of course he will face--he has his hands full to
restore the trust in the VA. What is your opinion of the
president's choice to have Mr. McDonald run the Agency, the
Department as the permanent secretary at the VA? Does his lack
of experience of running a Health Care System concern you?
And we will start with the gentleman--actually, ma'am, we
will start with you, Ms. Jones.
Ms. Jones. The American Legion stands ready to assist
anyone that is appointed as the secretary. Whoever the choice
is, The American Legion has a history of advocating for
veterans and as we stood by the previous secretaries, The
American Legion will continue to stand by and to let Mr.
McDonald know that we are here to assist him with whatever he
needs. The lack of experience--The American Legion has been
around since 1919 and we are going to be here to help, as we
have always done, whatever veterans need.
Mr. Bilirakis. Have you had any contact with Mr. McDonald?
Ms. Jones. I have not, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. What is one piece of advice that you
have for him or an area that you would like him to focus on the
most?
Ms. Jones. Transparency. We would like to see more
transparency so things like the scandal doesn't happen again;
so we know what the VA needs; so we can advocate for those
needs, we would like for the secretary, whoever that may be, to
let us know what is needed and to be transparent. So as long as
we know what we are working with, it can always be fixed. We
can work towards making sure that veterans are taken care of
timely and that they receive quality service.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Gallucci, same question.
Mr. Gallucci. Thank you, Mr. Bilirakis.
The VFW has been supportive of the selection of Mr.
McDonald, the nomination of Mr. McDonald for the position of VA
secretary. We think it is time to do something a little
different. We think the expertise that he brings has the
opportunity to change the mindset of the VA system.
This goes beyond just VA health care. The secretary is
responsible for coordinating the myriad of veterans programs
that millions of veterans rely on, whether it is Post 9/11--GI
Bill, disability compensation, home loan program, and really
think that the corporate mindset might be beneficial for the VA
system.
And to one of your other questions about what do we think
that the VA should focus on, I think from the VFW's
perspective, it would be improved business processes. From what
we have seen and from what we have heard from our veterans, we
know that the system hasn't been patient-centric when it should
be, and that is the VA Health Care System specifically. But we
think by improving business processes and streamlining the way
decisions are made within the VA system, we can improve the
delivery of services to veterans.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Mr. Blake, please.
Mr. Blake. Mr. Bilirakis, we don't typically take official
positions on nominees for secretary, but what I will say,
having said in the confirmation hearing on Tuesday, I was very
encouraged by the things that the nominee, Mr. McDonald, had to
say. He certainly addressed the concerns raised by Ms. Jones
about transparency a number of times. And I am sure--while he
may not have said it to you yet--I am sure that one of the
first things he will tell you is he will give all of you his
cell phone number and expect you to call him and he will call
you at all hours of the night. So he certainly seems to be
willing to be actively engaged with the committee, so hopefully
that will fix transparency.
I think his first priority ought to be culture. I think the
bad actors, the bad attitude, and the bad processes ultimately
stem from the culture that is set. I think Acting Secretary
Gibson has done a good job of trying to change that, but you
can't change that overnight. I think the committees are
debating right now--tools. The question was asked about the
challenges and certainly Secretary Gibson made it clear that
the challenge of firing people is a tough one.
I won't argue with you. If somebody did something illegal,
wrong or immoral or whatever, if it somehow in some way harmed
the health care delivery for veterans, they should be fired.
But that question ignores the fact that Congress put in place
federal rules that make that a difficult process. So if
Congress thinks that that should be changed, then so be it. I
know that the Committee is looking at legislation that will
address that issue, but it is going to take a--and Mr. McDonald
seemed to be committed to changing the culture and I think that
is going to be first in his mind.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Violante, again, give me your opinion of
the secretary and what piece of advice would you give him?
Mr. Violante. I was also at the confirmation hearing and I
was impressed with his responses to the committee's questions,
as well as his oral remarks. I just hope he can accomplish most
of what he said. In my mind, the one important thing that he
said was transparency, and that, I think more than anything
else, we need to see at VA. I don't know that we will ever see
it accomplished, but I think it is a goal that the new
secretary should try to achieve so that we know what is going
on and what needs to be done.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Weidman, what should the secretary focus
on?
Mr. Weidman. I think the most important goal is what people
have already said, and as a means to that, I forget how many
hundred communications folks they have over at the central
office of VA. They are not in the business of communication.
They are in the business of obstructing and obfuscation, and
most of those folks need to be assisted in finding another way
to contribute to the good of the world and you need two or
three really smart press people. Curt--does a better job than
all of them put together, who is the PIO for the committee.
And what it does is that things that ought to be on the web
suddenly become FOIAs, or Freedom of Information Act, and drag
out for months. Example is just asking for job descriptions of
major positions within the VA, which happened to me last year.
It took me five months to get the darned thing. I had already
gotten it another way, but--and one of them, they said they
didn't have because it wasn't available in 810 Vermont Avenue
and that was the job description for the director of the
national center for PTSD.
You don't have a job description? How could that be? And,
of course, it wasn't, but you had some attorney who could be
put to use enabling veterans to get their claims approved, as
opposed to messing around with bureaucratic junk. And that
should be the litmus test, certainly for everybody in VHA, is
how much do they and how much do they contribute to
accomplishing the mission. And at VHA, all of those middle
people, almost all of them, need to go away because they just
get in the way of the mission.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Nicholson, last question: Again, does it
trouble you that Mr. McDonald lacks the health care management
experience?
Mr. Nicholson. It does not necessarily. I mean he has a
phenomenal business background, and like I think Ryan
mentioned, business processes is something that I think, you
know, the VA certainly needs some focus on. IAVA is supportive
of Mr. McDonald. We were not consulted by the White House on
the selection process or the nomination, but he was sort of an
out-of-the-blue pick for us so we had to do a lot of catching
up in learning about him and still are in the process of that,
as is everyone else, I believe.
But we are generally supportive of him. I mean we would
agree, I think, that accountability and transparency are top
priorities, but also tech upgrades, as well.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. I yield back----
Mr. Weidman. Mr. Bilirakis, can I add just one thing?
Mr. Bilirakis. Yeah.
Mr. Weidman. Earlier I noticed in the audience the
Honorable Harry Walters, and when he took--came in in 1982, the
veterans organizations were so mad that everybody was chewing
on nails. And he came in as a businessman, no experience, and
took over the VA, restored confidence in what they were doing,
and straightened out a whole lot of problems, including
assisting Vietnam veterans truly for the first time. So it is
possible, with a background, to be one heck of an administrator
at that time, and today we call it the secretary.
Mr. Bilirakis. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thanks so much.
The Chairman [Presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Bilirakis.
I apologize to the panel. We were having a conference
committee meeting and I would say, Rick, that I will be meeting
with Mr. Walters this afternoon at 3:30 to gain some insight
from his time as the administrator.
Mr. Michaud, you are recognized.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And before I ask my questions, I do want to commend
Secretary Gibson for still being here. It shows that your
commitment to listen to the VSOs--I think this is the first
time that I have ever seen a secretary sit through another
whole panel--so I really want to commend you for doing that. It
shows that you are taking your job very seriously as well, and
hopefully we will see action as well.
For each of the panelists, as you know, Congress
continuously asked the VA about what they need for services.
You heard my comments earlier about Secretary Principi was
actually the first secretary that really showed that disconnect
between what the needs were and what the Administration asked
for.
My question is, to each of you--if you could keep it short,
it would be great--do we need to do an independent audit to
properly plan the VA's budget? My biggest concern has always
been--I have made it very clear over the years--is I don't care
how big the increase it is within the VA budget, is are we
taking care of our veterans? And as you heard the secretary
mention earlier it has always been budget-driven and not
outcome-driven.
So I guess we will start with Mr. Nicholson first. Should
we have an independent audit to properly plan the VA's budget?
Mr. Nicholson. Sure. You know, the first thing that comes
to mind is in a way we already do. I mean we have the
Independent Budget, which many of the VSOs sitting here play a
very prominent role in putting together. I know that Carl is
sort of our community's budgetary expert and we defer to him on
a lot of these issues. But I think it is certainly helpful.
But please keep in mind that we don't have to reinvent the
wheel. Please use resources that already exist and give
credible weight to those as well.
Mr. Weidman. The VA has reached out to some places like the
Mayo Clinic, but, in fact, nobody has really reached out in a
systematic way to all sectors of our society. The one thing we
do know, when the issue is veterans, people will step up from
industry, from the not-for-profit sector, from the medical
sector, et cetera, and we need to tap into that in an organized
way--and including organized labor, by the way--in a way that
makes sense in order to get what we need to get in terms of
designing a system that actually can estimate the needs and
then put it together in a way where people are held accountable
as it moves back down the chain.
Mr. Violante. I disagree with my colleague, what he--with
Rick, what he said earlier about the actuarial model. I mean
when we were still pushing for mandatory funding for VA health
care, we went in a number of times to talk to the VA budget
people and at that time they told us that the model, which was
based on a civilian model was revised to, you know, be specific
for veterans use.
And I believe if there was transparency in the process and
we could see what VA was putting into that model and what comes
out without OMB having a shot at it, that we would be better
off and know exactly what the needs are. Because that is all we
want to know, is what VA needs. I don't care about building an
empire for anyone. I want veterans to be taken care of and the
only thing that is important is to make sure that their needs
are met.
Mr. Blake. First, Mr. Michaud, let me say I'm not sure that
I want the distinction of being recognized as the community
budget expert.
From the perspective of the Independent Budget, what I will
say the difference between what we do and what the
Administration does is--and Secretary Gibson hit this on the
head--managing the budget versus managing the need. We take
whatever information we have available to us, look at what the
actual need is and figure out what we believe the cost is. We
don't take a budget number and try to fix--smash the services
down into the available budget that is given. That is what the
VA is required to do.
You asked about an independent audit and when we advocated
for advanced appropriations, this is one of the ideas that we
had wrestled with, was having a type of independent audit of
the VA budget. The best we came up with in that legislation I
think was the GAO responsibility within that. I am not sure if
that is going to get us to where we want, but that is the idea.
So I think we agree with what your notion is there and we would
like to see it enhanced, perhaps.
Mr. Gallucci. I think the VFW generally agrees with that
concept and we testified to this effect when the Senate hosted
a hearing right when the scandal broke, back in May. And the
real problem is we have assessed what VA's workload could be or
what their problems are, but as we have learned with the
scheduling system, it is software that is decades old and VA,
by their own admission, says they have no accurate measure of
wait times, no accurate measure of wait lists. Thousands of
veterans waiting for initial appointments, based on their
independent review that was recently conducted.
So I think right now being able to even evaluate the need
is very difficult. I have seen it myself, as my colleague Carl
said, he is a patient at the VA. Many of us at this table also
use VA for our health care and I have seen it, waiting for a
specialty appointment and you call in and they say the next
thing that we have is 60 days from now.
Well, what are my options at that point? And that
demonstrates to me, as a veteran, as an end user, that there is
obviously something missing from here. Either capacity isn't
where it needs to be or they haven't fully evaluated what the
need is in their community.
Ms. Jones. The American Legion wants all available
resources used to make sure that veterans are okay. If that
means an independent audit of the budget--absolutely. We want
to make sure that there is enough resources, enough of
everything so that veterans are taken care of and they don't
have to suffer like they are suffering right now.
The Chairman. Dr. Huelskamp.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the ladies and gentlemen that are here today.
I first want to thank Mr. Nicholson for the whistleblower
hotline. I believe that is our association that set that up,
and what is stunning to me--I have served on this committee for
three years--and we have heard from the VA again and again and
usually it was always that things are fine, and then we have
whistleblowers step forward.
I am just curious. Were you all hearing that from your
associations, from your membership about these secret waiting
lists? I never heard that coming from your groups, and so I am
just curious on background of how this can happen. You know, I
was just looking through the Life magazine article for May of
1970 of how that suddenly burst on the scene. Folks were
suggesting that there were problems then and suddenly it
happened, but that is--you know, just a few months ago, all of
a sudden, boom, here it is.
And in this committee we have heard warning signs from
folks inside, but we will talk a little bit about the budget
question. But first question, what you were hearing from your
members and did that match up with what the whistleblowers had
reported to us?
Mr. Blake. Dr. Huelskamp, I will say, as I mentioned in my
oral statement, the one luxury that we have from PVA's
perspective is our site visits that we conduct. So we don't
necessarily have to just rely on what we hear from our members.
We have trained medical staff who go into the SCI centers and
see what is going on there and they see firsthand where the
shortages are; where there is a need for doctors; where there
is a need for social workers, nurses or what have you.
The difference between what has happened with this and what
we do is we have an agreement with VA and we worked those
differences out to come to a resolution that will benefit the
veteran. This is all sort of played out more in the public eye,
which is fine in as much as maybe by drawing attention to the
larger problem, we get real reform and real fixes. But these,
again, are not shocking.
We have seen these. We have identified them in our site
visits----
Dr. Huelskamp. But the secret waiting list, I mean here is
what I saw at one facility. We had the director of the VA at
the VA facility in Wichita on a Friday said everything was
fine, and then within five days they admit that they had secret
waiting lists they knew about. And so my question is--and I
can't go look through the data.
Are you going through looking through the data and actually
talking to the schedulers? Because this is the thing: They went
in and falsified the data and then presented it to us.
I am trying to see how we can have you continue to help
with these visits and how far you can dig into that to help,
enjoy, provide some more transparency.
Mr. Weidman. We have been complaining that they were
underresourced all along, and certainly to the former under
secretary, that you are spending way too much money on people
who aren't direct service providers. Congress--we are not
speculating that that is why Congress gave you more money; that
is exactly what the appropriators told us they were giving us
money for, was more people who were hands-on delivery of
service and you guys are spending on people who never lay a
hand on a patient.
Dr. Huelskamp. Sure. Sure.
And, again, I appreciate that because we get reports, and,
again, if you heard on the other panel, in the last month,
every single bureaucrat from the VA, every under secretary,
every bureaucrat came here and said we have plenty of
resources; it is a cultural problem. It is how we are spending
them. And so either they are totally wrong or you are totally
wrong and we are trying to figure out what we can do about it.
But what Mr. Gallucci said at the end was very interesting
because, you know, how, as policymakers, when the data is
unclear, there is a lack of integrity, how are we supposed to
make a decision to give more money? In the past decade,
roughly, it has been a 250 percent--256 percent increase,
meanwhile the number of veterans are 30 to 40 percent. And
trying to say, well, why didn't I get an MA? That is what is
happening. It went to overhead, rather than direct care.
But what is frustrating to me is when they lie about the
data. They make it up or they refuse to be transparent so we
can't make good decisions and then we hear from the top-level
folks that say the way the Union rules work, we can't get rid
of somebody until we get all of the facts, and right now we
don't have all of the facts when the claims are that we need
more money. We want to make sure that that happens.
One of the other things we heard, which is interesting: Why
can't they stay open until five o'clock? Why can't they do
that? You mean to tell me that they all go home at 4:30? Why
not five o'clock? We just had that report would fix and add
additional resources without making significant changes. Those
are the kind of things that make sense. Appreciate your input,
but I appreciate particularly the whistleblowers who are
bravely shown up and said, Hey, we are going to tell you what
is happening here so we can improve the system.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Violante. I would just like to make a comment about the
fact that secretaries come in here and they say they have
sufficient funds or under secretaries. You know, I have been
doing this for a long time, and with the exception of Secretary
Principi who said that he got less, I mean most of the time
that is what we hear. And, you know, other than three years
during the Clinton Administration when they were flatlining the
budget, Congress agreed with those numbers.
Up until recently, I mean Congress has always provided more
than what the Administration has asked for. You know, they are
part of a team and while it is frustrating to hear them say
they have the resources, I mean I don't think they would be in
their position very long if they told you, as Secretary
Principi did, and at that time we were asking for over $3
billion more when he said that he needed 1.2.
So I would be a little bit leery of asking them that
question and expecting an accurate response unless you put them
under oath, but I mean it is just a concern.
The Chairman. Mr. Violante, are you saying that Secretary
Principi, in fact, did tell the truth?
Mr. Violante. I am saying that he admitted that he asked
for more. What I am saying is at that time we were asking for
almost twice that amount for VA's needs.
The Chairman. So would you say the other secretaries were
not being truthful? This is just Mr. Violante.
Mr. Violante. I mean they are not under oath, so----
The Chairman. They can tell the truth whether they are
under oath or not.
Mr. Violante. Yeah, but when have you heard anyone admit to
you as part of another team that they didn't get what they
asked for, other than Secretary Principi.
The Chairman. Okay. So Mr. Violante said the other
secretaries lied. Thank you, sir.
(Laughter)
The Chairman. Mr. Takano, you are recognized.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Violante, I think I understand what you are saying. I
mean I used to be on a board of trustees and, you know, all of
the administrators all come to me and they all kind of toe the
administration line. It is not a matter of lying or not lying;
it is a matter of that is just the way it is in the
administration. And that would be true of a Republican or
Democratic Administration, you would want loyal people
underneath you.
So, you know, real quickly, you can almost answer yes or
no, would you say that your organizations and your members
basically want to mend, not end the VA, Ms. Jones?
Ms. Jones. Yes, we want to restore the VA and restore the
veterans' trust in VA.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Mr. Gallucci. We absolutely want to restore trust in VA and
build a system that has the capacity to care for the needs of
veterans.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Blake.
Mr. Blake. Yes. Our members want the VA.
Mr. Violante. We want to save the VA, but fix it.
Mr. Nicholson. Absolutely. We are all in favor of mending
and not ending the VA.
Mr. Takano. Let me just turn the other way starting with
you Mr. Nicholson. Mr. Nicholson, does your organization
support the 17 billion supplemental requested by the VA on top
of, you know, recently with Secretary Gibson?
Mr. Nicholson. Sure. IAVA certainly supports giving the VA
more resources and believes that it does need more. Whether or
not 17.6 or 8 billion is the exact number, I don't know, and I
don't believe we know. Our concern with the number is just
making sure that it is well-justified, but making sure that the
VA is well-resourced is a primary concern.
Mr. Takano. I have a short amount of time. I just want to
know in general, I mean, if that is something that is on the
table, if you are supportive or not, Mr. Weidman?
Mr. Weidman. The 17.6 number we are not going to defend
because we have no idea how it became that. The point is that
really--from our point of view--how much is asked for and how
much additional is appropriated; it is tracking how it is used.
You remember when it was in 1999, $319 million appropriated
specifically for Hepatitis C and a year later, they couldn't
tell you what the heck happened to the money.
Mr. Takano. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Violante.
Mr. Violante. We support the approach of supplemental
versus what is going through conference.
Mr. Takano. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Blake. I can't say for sure whether $17 billion is the
appropriate number. I can tell you what the IB has done over
the same period of time. I think the idea of strengthening the
VA through more doctors and more nurses and that type of thing
is part of the approach that needs to be taken.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Mr. Gallucci. I would agree with a lot of what my
colleagues have said. It is not necessarily about a dollar
amount, but what we do support is providing VA the resources
that it needs if they can demonstrate that they need it.
And like I mentioned before, just as end users of the VA,
it seems clear to us and from what we have heard from our
members, that something is needed.
Mr. Takano. Sure.
Ms. Jones. The American Legion supports veterans having
what they need, but we don't have enough information right now
to support or not support.
Mr. Takano. Okay. I take that information very, very--I
appreciate it. I see the conference as fluid and, you know, we
need to really get down to the business of finding out what
that appropriate number is.
Now, the shortage of doctors is something that I have been
very much concerned about. I am most skeptical about an
approach which only funds non-VA--access to more non-VA care is
the solution. I think it is part of the solution. I am
skeptical of us being able to find that there are shortages in
many communities that even this access to non-VA care is not
going to work unless we increase down the line, a supply of
doctors.
Mr. Weidman, I appreciated your sense of let's grow our
own, but even if we send these medics to medical school, we are
still frozen at 1996 levels of graduate medical school
education; the education that is basically what we would call
residencies.
Would you all consider supporting the expansion of, you
know, we have--Dina Titus has a bill that would expand
residencies by 2,000 and let the secretary designate where our
greatest need is, especially in, say, mental health care?
Mr. Nicholson. You know, IAVA would absolutely support
anything that increased capacity at VA, but I think the
important thing to keep in mind is those are going to be
intermediate to long-term solutions. It takes awhile for
someone to go through residency. It takes awhile for
recruitment to happen and for those folks to actually become
practicing physicians or providers within VA.
The support for private sector care is intended to be a
short-term solution to address the crisis going on right now
and that is why we strongly support that. I don't think that it
has to be either/or. One is a short-term solution and one is--
--
Mr. Takano. I agree with you. I think we need to support
non-VA access. I understand that we have 2,000 medical students
presently that aren't matched with residencies. We actually
have people in the pipeline here who could begin their
residencies right now.
Mr. Chairman, I am sorry. I ran out of time.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Takano.
If I could just ask a question, you know, because every one
of you answered, and this is an issue that has been thrust into
the middle of the conference committee and that is the $17.6
billion request. It is not even a request, okay. It is not. It
is an unfunded list.
With all of your resources and all of your people and all
of your expertise, you sit here today and you tell me exactly
what we are saying, is there is not enough clarity to know
whether or not this is a good request or a bad request, too
much money, not enough money. And I don't think that you have
heard a single member of this committee say that they are not
willing to fund what is necessary.
So I just, you know, I want to make sure that folks know
that nobody up here is trying to tear the VA down. We are
trying to get the VA to serve the veterans that each of you
represent and I hope you understand that. But there was a
letter that was signed yesterday and while you may not have
intended for it to say that you supported the entire 17.6
billion, you put the full weight of support of your folks
behind that in the middle of very tenuous negotiations between
the House and the Senate. We just went over and made a very
prudent offer. Unfortunately, the Senate Democrats were not
there. You guys, thank you for holding the fort back here and
covering. Mrs. Kirkpatrick was there.
And I think the reason that we did it the way we did it was
we have not had a public meeting for four weeks and our intent
was to publicly say that the House's offer--I say the House--my
offer, was not cheap on the money in regards to what CBO had
scored. Just so you all know, the offer was, to take up the
Senate Bill, pay for it by putting $10 billion in emergency
funding mandatory up front, a good solid down payment. And also
we said extend that 10 billion out as long as it will go
because I don't believe they will spend it in a year. I just
don't think they will do it. I think it will actually go into
the second year.
And for the second 25 billion, we go through regular order,
which is, Rick, exactly what you were saying just a second ago.
You know, oversight, what is it for?
Each of you, probably not on purpose, has said, we need
more docs; we need more this; we need more that. But I haven't
heard--and you may have said it before, maybe in your
testimony--look for efficiencies within the system. There are
inefficiencies in the system, whereby doctors are only seeing
six, eight, ten patients a day. That is not enough. Mental
health providers that are only seeing patients two hours out of
a day, as my colleague has said, expand the office hours so the
infrastructure that is already in place can be used to
supplement the doctors that are there.
So we are all in this trying to work together and we said
let's do the $25 billion through the normal appropriations
process and look, we are right now negotiating--well, I don't
know--has the Senate passed their vote on the VA appropriations
bill?
The Chairman. The Senate hadn't even passed a VA bill; the
House has. But we want to begin negotiations, and if we need to
interject additional dollars, that is where we should do it. It
is not that we don't necessarily think that the money may not
be needed, it is we don't know and you don't either. So we are
asking for clarity from the VA--the secretary and I have talked
about it--two pages of documentation for a $17-and-a-half-
billion request.
And then we have an under secretary come here yesterday and
when asked particularly about the request, she didn't know how
to answer it. She says, ``Whatever they are calling it.'' We
can't work that way. You wouldn't want us working that way. You
couldn't do your jobs working that way. We have to know what
the money is going to go for. What it is being benchmarked
against so that we get this right.
This is not a partisan issue. It is not partisan. Mike
Michaud, the other members on the democrat side and all of the
Republicans have done everything that we can to make this a
bipartisan issue. I have tried not to walk too far out in front
of my ranking member when it comes to subpoenas or letters or
anything that I do, as the chairman of this committee. And if
he is comfortable signing something, I ask for his signature,
and if he is not comfortable, that is just fine, not a problem.
Because we do come from different districts, we serve in
different caucuses, and I get where that comes from.
But all of a sudden this morning, it is being said in the
press that this has evolved into a partisan negotiation--no, it
has not. No, it is not. It is an American negotiation. It is
for the men and women that you serve. It is for the men and
women that we serve. We cannot fail them and we cannot get it
wrong. We have to get it right, and sometimes it takes a little
longer to get it right, but we are going to get it right. I
promise you that we are going to get it right and we can do it
with your help, every one of you. Because you have all been
great help us to as we have gone through this process.
Mr. Blake. Can we comment, Mr. Chairman?
The Chairman. If I can, let me go to Ms. Brownley. And,
again, I appreciate it. That was my five minutes. Ms. Brownley?
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And based on what the chairman just said, I think that is a
good segway to hear what you have to say in response to some of
his comments. It will be my questioning, so I can start from
either end.
Mr. Blake. Mr. Chairman, I was just going to say I don't
think I disagree with anything that you had to say. If we have
concern, it is that I am not sure there has been enough focus,
other than on the culture of VA. There has been a lot of
discussion about fixing the culture of the VA, and as I said in
my statement, I think that is probably the first thing that
needs to be fixed.
But I am not sure I am convinced that there has been much
of a discussion about what to do about the capacity problems in
the VA.
The Chairman. Will the gentleman yield if you allow him to
yield?
Ms. Brownley. Absolutely, Mr. Chairperson.
The Chairman. Dr. Wenstrup sat right up there a few nights
ago and asked, ``How much does it cost the VA to serve a
patient?'' They couldn't answer the question. We asked the
question, ``What is the typical panel of docs--how much does a
doc see on a daily basis?'' And some people couldn't answer the
question.
So, yes, the focus is on doing whatever we need to do and
that is efficiencies inside and capabilities outside, and that
is why the choice piece may be and you guys--I am going to be
real honest with you--some of you thankfully have not gotten
really spun up about the choice piece when you could have
because a lot of people in the past have said that is a way to
tear the VA down. That is not what we are trying to do and I
don't think that there is going to be this fleeing out of the
system. I think many, many people are going to stay in the
system.
And so we have focused, from an oversight perspective, we
haven't been able to get the answers that we have been asking
for, and I would be glad to share with you the list of
information that we have asked for and have not received. The
secretary gets it every week.
But I agree, and, yes, there has been a lot of focus on the
outside, but there has been focus on the inside, and I yield
back.
Mr. Blake. And, Mr. Chairman, my one point that I would
make about the point that you made with Dr. Wenstrup was about
how much does it cost per patient, what the hell is the
information that they publish in their budget books? There is a
particular line item that says ``priority group one'' and a
cost associated with that patient. Maybe I don't understand
what that means, but I interpret that to mean exactly what the
question was you asked.
The Chairman. Then why can't they answer the question?
Mr. Blake. I don't know. I could have pulled that number
out in a second right out of the budget book.
The Chairman. You need to go work for VA.
Mr. Blake. I would have.
The Chairman. You need to go work for VA.
Mr. Gallucci. From a VFW perspective, we certainly
understand everything that you are talking about Chairman
Miller, but our members are frustrated. I just returned from
our national convention in St. Louis where the membership
passed a resolution insisting that Congress pass that bill and
send it to the president before the August recess.
And the frustration comes from the fact that this was a
major priority two months ago for each chamber to get together,
outline its priorities, get them down on paper and start moving
on it. And what our members have told us is that they don't see
progress. In fact, what they have seen is a narrative changing
where it used to be about caring for veterans and now it is
about costs.
The Chairman. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Gallucci. I am sorry?
The Chairman. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Gallucci. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. We had a meeting today for the first time in
four weeks and the Senate boycotted. We were trying to tell the
American people exactly what we were doing; quit trying to
negotiate behind closed doors. Do this in public so people know
what is going on.
I will tell you this: There has been a tremendous amount of
work that has gone on behind the scenes in an attempt to
negotiate this, and I think everybody has said the intent is
not to leave unless this is finished, and we appreciate the
urgency with which the VFW expressed in their resolution, but,
again, there has been a lot going on and today we hold a public
meeting and the Senate boycotts. I yield back.
Mr. Gallucci. Mr. Chairman----
Ms. Brownley. I yield my time to Mr. Walz.
The Chairman. And I didn't mean to take Ms. Brownley's----
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Ms. Brownley. We are using your time
on this.
Mr. Walz. This is a bipartisan effort, but--and the
chairman and I are friends and he knows me well enough, he
knows that nobody does passive-aggressiveness like
Minnesotans--so to characterize that the meeting was--as a good
Minnesotan, I was actually in bed before notice of that meeting
was even put out. And then when I asked this morning about what
was going to be put out at that, we weren't given that.
That is not a conference report, Mr. Chairman, and you are
a friend of mine, whom I trust.
The Chairman. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Walz. I will yield to you from Ms. Brownley. This is
our time to be honest and----
The Chairman. I will be very honest with you. All right.
Let's go all the way back to the very beginning of how this
conference started, all right?
The last conference committee that was held, many of you
were probably here in 1999, the Senate chaired that conference,
so it comes to the House to chair this conference, all right?
And at the beginning of the conference, there was some
discussion between myself and Mr. Sanders as to who was going
to chair and I said, ``Let's be co-chairs, all right, let's be
co-chairs.''
I asked the senator earlier this week could we do this
yesterday and he said nope, didn't want to do it yesterday. All
right. We were trying to negotiate all day yesterday, trying to
figure out when we could do this and I was told time and time
and time again that I better not unilaterally call a meeting.
Now, as the House position that should be the chair of the
committee and for Senator Sanders to make a good effort to stop
us from having a public meeting, after a good effort from my
part to make him co-chair, and sitting down at this hearing, I
did share what the offer was with the chair and I asked him to
share it with everybody here. It is not a conference report; it
is an offer.
It is on one page. Our offer is on the same amount of paper
that VA's justification to $17.5 billion is on. So it wasn't
done as a partisan move.
Mr. Walz. Was any of that conveyed to us? I mean----
The Chairman. We met at 9:30----
Mr. Walz. And I had with the secretary sitting in front of
us----
The Chairman. We met at 9:30. Look, it was an offer. It
wasn't intended to be a House offer. It really wasn't, because
I know that you can't do that, but it was just to say the House
is prepared to put money--$10 billion has been in the
negotiations from probably the second day, hard money.
Have you seen it in the press one time? Probably not. What
you see is the House is trying to do it on the cheap. And so it
was an attempt to bring it forward and say, look, here is where
we are, the House position is that it is difficult to fund any
of the $17.6 billion without more justification. In the offer I
think we put 102 million in to finish out through the end of
2014. I will go ahead and notice I wrote a letter to the
senator and I asked him, you know, be prepared to meet on
Monday. Don't know when and don't know where, but just so
everybody knows, we will be back in time, it will be in time
for everybody to be back here.
But, you know, what has happened is by negotiating behind
closed doors, and we have gotten pretty darned close, you know,
this whole thing, I just saw them report it in the meeting a
little while ago that this thing is doomed. No, it is not. It
is not doomed. As long as we work together in trying to resolve
it.
But I didn't want to put you in a position to say you are
making us decide whether we want it or we don't. This was an
offer from me, from me, and I get it. Yeah, I could have told
you I didn't know until probably eight o'clock last night what
the offer was actually going to be. I just knew that it needed
to be done in public and that is why we did it the way we did
it and it only lasted 15 minutes.
Mr. Walz. Well, my commitment to you, Chairman, is to do
this together because I think what these folks know and the
public knows, they don't care if it is the Senate's fault or
our fault; it is our responsibility. They have seen this song
and dance. We have got to get it done and I stand with you to
get it done.
Mr. Michaud. Thank you.
And as the Chairman mentioned----
Mr. Walz. Who has yielded to you?
Mr. Michaud. No one.
Ms. Brownley has.
The Chairman. You are out of time. (Laughter)
Mr. Michaud. You know, I did lean over to the chair earlier
and asked him what his proposal was. I am an optimist. The
bottom line is now we know what the chairman's proposal is. We
also know what the chairman's proposal is on the Senate side,
which we have never seen in black and white either, so I think
now we know where you both are coming from and hopefully we
will be able to work in a bipartisan manner to get this thing
done.
And I am not interested in blaming anyone. My concern has
always been how do we take care of the veterans that we have to
take care of and I hope that both sides, that everyone on the
conference committee will focus on that particular issue, as
well.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I just say we probably ought to
give Ms. Brownley her five minutes back.
The Chairman. Without objection. Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just to chime in on this conversation, I agree that we--
this must not--should not be--must be a bipartisan approach to
this and we must collectively solve this problem.
And I will say that when the House passed the bill almost
unanimously and when the Senate passed the bill almost
unanimously, I think the expectation is we would go to
conference and resolve the smaller differences and move
forward, and I just don't want to take a large step backwards.
But I think we are making progress. There is movement here, so
we are making progress. We have got to continue to work to make
sure that we do, indeed, have the resources to make sure that
we can serve our veterans well once and for all.
And we all know that this has been a problem that has not--
this crisis has been specific in terms of wait times, but we
know that we have had issues with capacity and our ability to
serve our veterans in the proper way for a very, very long time
and this is our opportunity, I believe very, very strongly, for
us to move forward, and to once and for all, to be able to
really try to make a difference in how we serve our veterans
throughout our country.
I wanted to ask specific question. I think Mr. Weidman, I
think it was in your testimony where you talk about the fact
that you believe that the current leadership and the change in
culture and the change in leadership is beginning to permeate
at the upper levels, but it is not necessarily permeating
throughout the VISNs and the VA hospitals across the country so
forth and so on. And I think, obviously, that has to happen--
for culture to change, that has to happen. I am wondering if
there is anything that you believe we should be doing to assist
the VA to making sure that that communication does get to the
VISN level, to the hospital level, to the CBOC level, at every
corner throughout our country where we are serving our
veterans. Is there anything that you think that we should be
doing?
Mr. Weidman. I suggest that you get your district staff
together with your veterans advisory committee and I know that
most of you have them, and give them a copy of Acting Secretary
Gibson's memo that you will meet with the VSOs every month and
you will jointly put together the agenda for those meetings.
Because we are getting back--I know the memo got out there, but
people aren't responding and our folks ain't hearing much, and
it is--the--best persons you have at the VA are the veterans in
your district, ma'am. And if you give them the right
information, they will pick up the ball and start to run with
it, and if it is real wrong, they will go to the press.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you for that.
And, Mr. Blake, you are the budget guy, the annoyed budget
guy here, and the VSOs, I mean you have done--you must have
done a needs assessment of what the VA needs and what it costs.
I mean do you have that information?
Mr. Blake. I do. If you prefer, I have it. It is a lot of
numbers and gobbledygook. I think Mr. Weidman said that. I
would be glad to share it with your staff.
You know, we are fortunate that we--every year we meet with
John Towers and Nancy Dolan and the staff of the committees and
we put out the same invitation to the legislative assistants
for all of the offices to discuss this very issue, to discuss
what we recommend.
Ms. Brownley. Well, can you, based on your needs
assessment, can you give me a ballpark figure of what you think
the needs are budgetarily, to meet those needs?
Mr. Blake. For this year or overall? I can't project them
in the way that the VA just said they need $17 billion out
through 2017.
What I can tell you is the IB recommendation is
approximately for all medical care about $2 billion more than
what the VA recommended for fiscal year 2015, which will be
starting soon and something less than a billion dollars or
approximately--don't quote me on that--approximately a billion
dollars more for fiscal year 2016 as an advance.
What I will also say is over the last ten years, the
difference between what the IB has recommended overall for
medical care is $8 billion more than what has been
appropriated, and I can tell you that for the most part, what
has been appropriated is virtually equal to what has been asked
for by the Administration. There has not been a whole lot of
difference between those two.
So basically over that period of time, what I would suggest
to you is if that kind of commitment had been made over that
period of time, maybe it would have incrementally built
capacity in. I think part of what is hard to stomach about $17
billion right now is--and this gets to the chairman's concerns
about spending resources appropriately and all that--can they
really spend $17 billion in such a short period of time
appropriately to get the right staff in the right place doing
the right thing, and that is the concern.
Whereas, if it had been done incrementally over a greater
period of time, in a perfect world it would have been done
correctly, at least.
Ms. Brownley. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Cook.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Appreciate everyone here. I try to keep up with many of the
organizations. The four of you, I pay my dues and I get my
magazine. I always make my joke about the calendars, but I
won't. I am going to ask you the same question that I have
asked other veterans organizations and I will probably ask it
if I am still around in six months or what have you.
You know in a military environment whether a unit is combat
ready or not combat read. It is very, very simple. As of today,
is the VA combat or mission ready or not mission ready? Mr.
Nicholson, do you want to start?
Mr. Nicholson. I'd say it is not fully mission ready,
absolutely not.
Mr. Cook. Sir.
Mr. Weidman. At least half of the hospitals aren't mission
ready.
Mr. Violante. I would say they are not mission ready, but
they are moving in that direction.
Mr. Blake. When I was in the army we had X and circle X for
maintenance concerns and I would say that a lot of places are
circled X.
Mr. Gallucci. I would agree, not mission ready, and I think
that the veterans who have contacted us share that concern.
Ms. Jones. Not mission ready, and we have seen evidence of
that throughout the crisis across the country, not mission
ready.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
Your organizations, you have a lot of credibility. You have
a lot of credibility throughout the United States with this
panel. Do you rate different hospitals by region, one, two,
three, four, five, and do you give a reason why one is, you
know, great care, fully staffed, what have you?
And before you answer, the reason is coming from a military
environment, whether you like it or not, you are always rated--
fitness reports--everyone here, we get--somebody scores us on
this bill. It is just a way of life, but it almost is, you
know, you call attention to that.
Back when I got out of the Marine Corps and became a
professor and they had this--I tell everybody,
rateyourprofessor.com and it was like, oh, boy, who is
disgruntled this week or who loves me this week? I probably
gave everybody eights, but--no, I won't go into that.
But do you think or do you right now rate hospitals? Do you
rate other aspects of VA and publish them in your magazine,
sir?
Mr. Nicholson. IAVA does not. We don't have the capacity.
We are a smaller--we might be--but we are a small organization
and don't have the staff and resources the others do.
Mr. Cook. Okay.
Mr. Weidman. We do not, sir.
Mr. Cook. Okay.
Mr. Violante. DAV does not.
Mr. Blake. We don't rate, but we certainly evaluate the SCI
centers specifically, and while we don't publish a list, I am
sure I can put that question to senior executives that oversee
that and they can list every SCI center in the VA system in
rank order from best to worst.
Mr. Gallucci. We do not rank hospital systems.
Ms. Jones. The American Legion doesn't necessarily rank the
systems, but our system saving team and task force go out to
different facilities across the country and we provide--do site
visits. We look at each individual hospital to see what is
going on and we hold a town hall meeting, as well, to talk to
the veterans in that local community to understand their
concerns as well and then we meet with leadership.
Mr. Cook. Okay. The reason I brought that up is obviously
in the previous panel and I had to meet with some folks' trust
and confidence, and you know, I was very honest, I have
problems with trust and confidence in the VA. I got a lot of
trust and confidence in you guys, and maybe because we go back
a long ways and what have you, and you have helped me. So I am
not trying to get you involved in a situation like this, but
you do have credibility and you got--at least with me, and so
it is something to consider.
Now, Mr. Weidman, I want to ask you about Vietnam veterans.
You know one of the issues I have, and maybe because I am a
Vietnam veteran, I always felt that, you know, after the
paralyzed veterans, people that needed care right then and
there, that I always felt like the VA was, ah, Vietnam
veterans--and this is something that the Vietnam veterans told
me--that, ah, you guys are at that stage, you are probably
going to be dead before you get seen for an appointment let
alone treated.
And I am wondering and I actually do think because of the
age factor and they probably have more debilitating illnesses
and what have you, and--but I am very, very concerned whether
that is a perception with your organization that--and this is
based on the history of what happened years ago where the
country turned its back because, oh, you served in Vietnam, you
are a baby killer, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So I am specifying exactly if you could address that issue.
Mr. Weidman. Well let me just say that because of that our
founding principal is really very straightforward and very
simple. Never again will one generation of American veterans
abandon another, and we don't, and so we have put a lot of
resources, even though where by choice, a bunch of old guys and
gals----
Mr. Cook. Easy now, I am one of those.
Mr. Weidman [continuing]. But we do a lot of things for the
younger vets and we do things for our fathers' generation, even
though they basically told us to go pound salt.
Now having said that much of the care at the VA is--most of
it is good, some of it is very good, and sometimes excellent.
The problem in the perception that we are getting back from our
members is, particularly when it comes to PTSD and
neuropsychiatric wounds, that they are being pushed out.
And, you know, on a triage I was a medic with the 196
Americal, and the hardest thing I have ever done in my life is
have to triage for real under fast changing circumstances. And
maybe they are triaging, but that is--the way in which we
regard that is, if you don't have the resources you need in
order to do all the job ask for it, and if they don't give it
to you, and this begins at the clinic level, then hospital,
then VISNs, then national, and they don't give it to you shame
on them, but if you don't ask shame on you.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
I yield back, and thank you for what you do here.
Appreciate it.
The Chairman. Thank you, Colonel.
Ms. Titus, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think we all agree there are serious problems at the VA,
but I was very glad to hear you answer Mr. Takano's question,
mend it not end it, and I appreciate the chairman saying that
we are not out to do away with the VA, but I especially
appreciated a very articulate statement that you made, Mr.
Blake, okay, expressing some concerns that I share with you
about this push to privatize.
Now, I can't help but believe that this is part of an
agenda, by some, not by all, but just to kind of dismantle the
federal government and leave citizens, in this case veterans,
out there to fend on their own in the so-called private sector.
Now if you look at what is happening here with the private
care and the push to private care maybe this is a short-term
fix as one of you mentioned, but specifically some of the
concerns I have about that are things that we need to address
before we go pell-mell down this direction.
One of them is just as you raise, there are concerns that
doctors and hospitals as they admitted themselves don't have
the culture of the VA, they don't have the expertise of the VA,
they aren't used to dealing with the kind of problems that
veterans have, whether it is PTSD or Agent Orange. So if we
push them out there into the private sector we don't know that
the quality of care is going to be any better.
Second, this committee asked over and over, give me the
hard facts, give me the numbers, give me this, and yet there is
no evidence out there to show that if you put patients in the
private practice that it will be cheaper, faster, or better. In
fact we just don't have that information. In fact if you looked
at kind of a roughly parallel situation like Medicare Advantage
you would find that the evidence is actually to the contrary.
The third thing, and Mr. Takano mentioned this too, is the
lack of doctors in many parts of the country. I am in Las
Vegas, there is rural Nevada, we just don't have physicians, we
are at the bottom of every list for different specialities, and
also just general practitioners, and so if we send them out to
the private sector that doesn't mean they are going to get it
faster or even they are going to be able to find the care. Yet
if we pass this conference bill that is going to be the
national news, veterans sent to private care, veterans can now
use private care. Well that is just not going to be true.
And I wonder, how are you going to tell your members what
to do now under this new scenario? Anybody?
Mr. Gallucci. Well, I think first and foremost one of the
important things to look at in the access and accountability
bill is that we have far too many veterans waiting far too long
for care.
I am a strong defender of the VA system. To be perfectly
honest I probably wouldn't be in this position if it weren't
for the help that I received from the VA system when I returned
from Iraq. That being said as a patient in the VA system I have
also had appointments cancelled on me. I have had--I have shown
up to clinics where they have said, well, we can't see you
today. I have had months long waiting periods for appointments.
And I am just one example.
I guess the problem is we need to balance it correctly.
Outside care can be appropriate at times, but we can't use it
as a catch-all, as I outlined in my testimony, or a supplement
for the competencies that the VA has, especially on issues like
combat-related mental health care, prosthetics, or any other
speciality services as my colleague, Rick Weidman, said related
to toxic exposures in the war zone.
Mr. Violante. You know, and you are exactly right about
private care. I have a secretary in my office who went into a
doctor almost four weeks ago now, she needs surgery, the doctor
recommended she have two appointments that she needed to make
before she can have the surgery. One was scheduled at that time
for this past Tuesday, the other one for in August. And so she
needs to have both of those appointments met before she can go
in for her surgery. So she is waiting over probably eight weeks
in order to do that. So private sector isn't much better.
You know, it is frustrating because we have the acting
secretary putting forth a plan that would insure that we had
the capacity at VA and build up, you know, the number of
doctors that need to be there, plus take care of veterans on
the outside when necessary for an amount that is a fraction of
what CBO has a cost estimate on for the bills pending in
conference. I mean they claim 30 billion for the first two
years and another additional 54 billion after that. And I mean
that is what I don't understand is why we are, you know,
condemning VA and their numbers when CBO is saying it is even
going to be more than that. It is just frustrating.
Ms. Titus. Mr. Miller.
Mr. Blake. Ms. Titus, I would say this. You know, from the
perspective of a PVA member it doesn't matter what bill you
pass, because at the end of the day the only and best option
for our members is the VA. There really isn't another option
out there. Yes, there are places out there that can meet some
need they have, but there is no real option.
It is almost unfair to answer that question a little bit,
but what I would say is, we have never said they shouldn't be
contracting out for any--or purchasing care at all, in fact I
think we have many times that the VA had done a terrible job of
using that authority in the past. They are now seemingly moving
more in a judicious manner to do that under their accelerated
access to care initiative, you know, they have got NVCC now,
they have PCCC, all these different things, so there is
certainly an avenue to go there.
One of the concerns, and you mentioned this about the
doctors that are out there in the private sector, one of the
hearings--one of the oversight hearings, I am not sure if it
was one of the midnight hearings or one of the daytime hearings
this committee had, but Mr. Ruiz made a point at one of the
hearings that when they did an analysis of his district,
granted his district is pretty rural, but it is not unlike a
lot of districts in this country, when they did an analysis of
his district they discovered that there was approximately 1
physician for every 9,000 people in that district.
Ms. Titus. Uh-huh.
Mr. Blake. I would suggest that is probably an underserved
district by in large, and there is probably a lot of other
places in this country. There are a lot of underserved veterans
in many of those same areas, so what happens when you put them
into that situation?
Ms. Titus. Exactly.
Mr. Blake. So there is certainly a concern there.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And also it is 17.6
billion over and above the CBO score, so the fact that it is a
lower number I understand that, but it is 35 billion plus 17.6.
Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I think and that is a valid point. I think all of us
where you get it, we are trying to separate adequate resources
from effective use of those resources and we are calling for
both, and if we conflate the two together we end up going in
the wrong direction.
But I would like to point out though, and I don't know if
this has happened since I have been here, it may have, but it
is certainly for me gratifying. Oftentimes we see people up
here testifying and you guys standing behind them, both
figuratively and literally standing behind them as veterans,
the acting secretary stayed throughout this whole thing, and I
don't know if any of us have seen that before, but I want to
make note that actions speak loudly to all of us. As we know
words are cheap, especially sometimes around here.
This is a pivotal moment that we are at, pivotal. The
decisions that are going to be made as I said over the next
weeks and months are going to I think could have decades long
impact. I think you are absolutely right to flex your--the
ability of pressure points to get situations done, but keep in
mind, and they are right to have those when you can turn up the
heat or whatever, but now there is going to be a race to get
something done by next Friday. And getting it done and getting
it right are not necessarily synonymous.
And so my concern is as we work together and as we bear
down on this, because there is no question that we all want to
get it right, the spats you are seeing here are actually fairly
healthy in this committee, they are aired openly, they are
there. I need all of you to think deeply, and as you are doing
is how do we get to that point? Because here is my biggest
fear. We pass something, everybody goes home in August and
pounds their chest, there is more money in the system or
something, and now the VA is taken care of.
I would go back to what Mr. Nicholson said, we have got to
multitask here. His point on suicides is, the chairman and I
just introduced the Clay Hunt Safe Act, which I would say is
critically important going forward, and if now, oh, the VA work
is done and we will move on to the next crisis of the day or
whatever it would be and forget that.
We need to make sure that we are looking at the long game.
We need to make sure we are looking at that national veteran
strategy, and we need to figure out a way--and you guys have
said this too--Alex, when you said you weren't consulted on who
the next secretary was going to be, don't feel left out, I was
not either, so--and that--and I bring to that not necessarily
facetiously, I bring it to the point is you said it and I think
Carl it might it have been you who said it, we are all
responsible for this, and you took responsibility as an
organization and I take responsibility.
The question I have is, I am okay taking responsibility
until I have no teeth to effect what is being done. And I would
suggest to you and try and figure this out, this committee is
your entry point into this system in many cases. You are right,
MILCON VA Appropriations, heck, I don't even know who is on it.
I mean that is what happens on that. Good luck getting in over
there or having Armed Services come over here.
So I am making the suggestion, been making the suggestion,
I will take responsibility, but why does the second largest
agency in the federal government have one of the smallest
committees? How come we don't have the resources to do more on
that? How come we don't have the ability to get out there? And
how come we are not adding you in as partners with the VA?
So I think as you look at this major reform, as you look at
what the long-term implication is, don't forget that if the
peoples' influence is going to be felt it is going to be felt
through this committee, and we have to have the resources, we
have to have the ability, and we have to have your backing as
partners to getting this done.
So with that being said I am just going to leave it all to
you. What do all of you hope to see come out of the conference,
and it will get done. Chairman Miller's leadership, Mr.
Michaud's leadership, they will work with Senator Sanders, we
will get this thing done, but has to, what is the redline that
has to come out of that? What has to be done before we go home?
Because as Mr. Gallucci as your organization said, don't worry
about coming back if you don't do it. If we are going to come
back what do we have to get done next week?
Mr. Gallucci. Well thank you, Mr. Walz for the question.
Yes, what we put out was very strongly worded and our members
are very frustrated by what we have seen. And we certainly echo
the frustrations of Chairman Miller and the rest of the
committee in how we get to a quality product.
I think from the membership--from the perspective of the
VFW what we want to see come out of this is an adequately
funded--or adequately resourced--I don't want to say funding,
that is--adequately resourced VA health care system capable of
delivering health care in a timely manner to veterans, and when
it is incapable of delivering that timely care to veterans that
they have the resource and protocols in place to delivery it
through either contract care or just through non-VA care
coordination.
And in addition to that the accountability side would be
that VA has the ability to properly sanction and fire poor
performing employees and replace them in a timely manner.
There has been a lot of talk about that front end, about
how many people have you fired, how many people have you fired?
Well, I outlined it in my testimony and I have been talking
about this for the last two months, I think VA makes tradeoffs
many times in the way that they evaluate their employees. If
you can't hire a quality replacement in a timely manner why--
are you really going to give a poor performance review to
somebody or try to fire somebody when you can't replace them or
when there is the threat of them leaving? If you have a
clinician seeing two patients when they should be seeing five
are you going to fire them when you know it takes another year
to replace them? And then those two patients go without care.
Mr. Walz. My time is up. Maybe if we come back around on a
second round I will get the answers to this to each of you,
because it is important for us. I have got to know what--at the
end of the day we are going to vote yes or no, and we have got
to know what we are going to do.
The Chairman. Mr. O'Rourke, five minutes.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I first want to thank each of you for being here and I want
to thank you and your organizations for helping me as a new
member get up to speed and better represent the veterans that I
serve in El Paso. Your feedback on bills that we will be voting
on, on bills that we are offering has been instrumental, they
have improved the legislation that we have been working on, I
have been making better decisions for your feedback. So I want
to thank you.
And I especially want to thank Ms. Jones and the American
Legion. As we were discovering how awful the crisis in El Paso
was about the gap in coverage, about the wait time for
disability claims, and then the wait time on appeals for
disability claims, and we are hoping to get some kind of
response from the VA, which since then has come. You and your
organization stepped in to fill the gap, literally set up a
command center and saw hundreds and thousands of veterans
there, connected them with benefits, connected them with care,
and I cannot thank you enough for doing that. So really
appreciate what you are doing.
Let me follow up on one of the achievements that the
secretary cited and that I am very grateful for, which is
removing that 14-day deadline and moving it back to 30,
accelerating access to care, putting money into the local VAs
to make sure that we could access that. And by that same model
and thinking about El Paso where I mentioned earlier if you
were here that we had nearly 20 full-time vacancies in mental
health, we have 20 full-time vacancies today. We had a
commitment from our VA director and Dr. Jesse and Dr. Petzel
before him that we would have those filled by the end of this
month. We just checked in this morning, they will not be
filled.
PTSD, mental health care, being able to help somebody who
is in need and who may be a danger to him or herself or to a
spouse or loved one or the community and at best may just be
suffering without help is a critical unmet need within the VA,
certainly in El Paso, but I understand throughout the country.
Guide me through this idea proposed by a panel week before
last that the VA focuses and prioritizes and becomes excellent
in care for PTSD, TBI, prosthetics, the kinds of combat and
war-related injuries that we are seeing from all of our
engagements, especially post 9/11, and refer other care that is
not combat or war-related out into the community. In other
words give me the ability to say to the veteran in El Paso, if
you have PTSD you are going to come to the El Paso VA, you will
be seen quickly, you will get the best care, you will have
consistency in care, you will see a psychiatrist, you will have
access to medication. I can say none of those things right now.
And part of my suspicion is that we are trying to do too
much, and whether it is 17 billion or 30 billion we cannot
spend enough to sustain a system that is today serving 9
million veterans it will be many more years from now.
Walk me through my thinking and how I could approach this
idea and problem of balancing, creating excellence within the
VA with accessing resources in the community. And I will start
with Ms. Jones and work down the line for anyone who would like
to respond.
Ms. Jones. You know, I think if we can answer that question
and walk you through it we wouldn't absolutely have to be here
today. That is an excellent question. There is so much that
needs to be done. As a matter of fact the American Legion, we
have a TBI, PTSD committee full time to research PTSD and TBI
and what needs to be done next. There is so much the veterans
needs, especially as evidenced while we have been out, you
know, across the country talking to veterans who have been in
crisis.
I think that there are times when veterans need to be--when
purchased care is necessary, depending on the veterans, how far
they live away, what their conditions are, whether it is
advantageous to the veteran to be seen outside the VA that
particular time. It may be harmful for them to drive in. All of
those things taken into consideration.
I think what has to happen is the VA has to become experts
in every area that veterans--where veterans need things. TBI,
PTSD, women veterans' issues, all kinds of speciality clinics.
Veterans have conditions that need to be taken care of and they
need to be able to come to the VA and expect excellent care in
all areas from the VA.
We cannot use purchased care as a substitute for what the
VA needs to do. That is a cope out. The VA needs to be able to
do excellently what they have been created to do.
Mr. O'Rourke. Anyone else want to comment on essentially
offering fewer services but doing them better and referring the
remainder out into the community? I have about ten seconds
left, so with the chairman's indulgence maybe we can go over a
little bit, but----
Mr. Blake. I would say this, Mr. O'Rourke----
The Chairman. Five seconds.
Mr. Blake. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke, I rest.
I would say this, you know, let us not forget that the VA
is a fully integrated health care system and all of the
components of it support one another, so if one of our members
who has a spinal cord injury needs primary care he gets primary
care in the VA and he needs that to be good care, and you can't
just send that SCI veteran out. If they need audiology, which
is kind of a basic service, which seemingly could be purchased
in the community, that should be provided in the VA. If they
need orthopedics, which is very common, the expertise should
reside within the VA, because those things all prop one another
up and that veteran depends on all of those things over the
course of their life.
The concern becomes if we send them out for primary care,
audiology or what have you, is that care really being
coordinated, is the VA managing it, are we keeping track of
what is going on so that all of the aspects of that veteran as
he is being treated are being properly managed? And if you
start sending out pieces you loose a lot of that I think, and
then you ultimately put the overall and long-term health of a
veteran, particularly veterans with the most complex needs, in
jeopardy.
Mr. O'Rourke. Great. Great feedback. Thank you. Thanks
again. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Walz, you had an additional question you
wanted to ask?
Mr. Walz. Just if anyone wanted to follow up on. We are
going to make a decision next week, what do we have to come out
with?
Mr. Blake. Mr. Walz, I would say this, you know, I had kind
of resigned myself to something was going to pass, and truth is
paralyzed veterans of America in particular has some concerns
with the Choice Act and those provisions.
The great irony of this is, both of the committees went
into a conference with the most--probably the most difficult
part of legislation virtually mirroring each other, the rest is
some other provisions in the Senate bill, but the heavy lifting
has been done because you went into a conference with bills
that are very close to one another, and somehow you are going
farther and farther apart on your own. I don't even know how
that happens. It is just amazing.
So I kind of assumed that the Choice Act or whatever the
final name is going to be was going to pass. My concern is not
that bill because we just assumed it, my concern is what
happens next? I don't want this to become the end of the
debate, and Mr. Chairman, that is why I made the point, we need
to--we don't want to thump our chest you said. If we go home in
August and everybody is going to say look at the great things
we have done for veterans and lead into the election and
whatever and we forget that there are still serious problems
that have to be addressed in the VA.
So it is not just about what comes out of legislation,
because I just assume you are going to pass legislation pretty
much like it looks. It is going to be what are we going to do
after the fact?
Mr. Weidman. As long as something gets done. And I think
that we are under tremendous pressure just like all of you are
under tremendous pressure to enact something, and to start to
really truly address it, but really truly addressing the crisis
is in terms of it not being repeated anytime soon is going to
be several years of effort. Not just of funding, but of effort,
to rebuild a management structure that you can have faith in.
And every time I talk to VA employees they say, well what do
you think about it? I said, I think this is before all this
blew up, that we need VA management as good as most of the
clinicians and workers within VA and we don't have it, and we
haven't had it for a long time. Didn't begin with this
administration. And so that really needs to get really the
primary focus.
One last thing, and Ms. Brownley has left, there is no
fixing it once and for all. It is not a widget. It is an
institution of people that will change as the needs of the
people change and as the Nation itself changes. And so we
regard it much more as a garden that you need to continue to
plant and fertilize and weed, and the weeding hasn't been done
in management in a long time and that is what needs to be done
now.
Mr. Violante. Mr. Walz, my concern is again as my
colleagues have said, this is a temporary fix. I think we are
heightening the expectations of veterans and not going to be
able to meet those expectations, and I think in the end I think
we could even be weakening VA instead of making it strong, and
we need to make sure that in the end VA is stronger and that
they are able to fulfill their mission to the veterans.
Mr. Nicholson. And can I say just briefly that my biggest
concern with the conference right now is the House and the
Senate passed several really good bills, and you went into the
conference with our understanding being that the jurisdiction
of it was going to merge those two bills, to make some tweaks,
and pass it out. Now everything--it seems like everybody and
their brother is wanting to throw in extra things because they
see this as one of the only if not the only moving trains on
vets issues perhaps before the end of the Congress.
Now if you all could focus on, and you certainly have our
support in doing so, merging and tweaking and finalizing what
you passed and getting that done and not throwing in all these
other provisions that people, you know, want to put on the
moving train, the 17 billion extra. I mean I think if you guys
could pass what you have in front of you now within the
jurisdiction of the conference committee and then--in my
opinion--and then tackle the supplemental that we would come
out with something for sure, whereas, if we are adding in
everything else and considering everything else and then having
to fight over and discuss whether or not to pay for it and how
to pay for it, et cetera, we may end up with nothing. And if we
go into August and this doesn't get done and a new secretary is
confirmed and then he comes in and he wants to make adjustments
to the 17 billion or maybe add another 17 billion who knows
what we are not going to get anything done.
So I would rather see you all finish what you started with,
get that done, and then move on to step two and three.
Mr. Walz. Well, I appreciate that, and I think that has
been my position that we triage this, we deal with the access
to crisis care, we work with you as you are getting there, we
start to deal with some of those, and then we breath a little
bit, we have a long-range vision, we put that in place, and we
continue to follow through. Because I too have as you have all
expressed have this great fear, and you know how this is going
to go, it is going to be well you are already done with this,
this is your one bite off the apple, it is done, don't come
back asking for anything, don't do this.
And, Rick, I always say with the VA and health care it is a
journey, not a destination, we need to keep moving forward. But
there is a danger because I hear from people if we don't do
this and we don't do it now the window will close and wouldn't
get done. I think they are missing the passion of the American
people to get this right and sticking with us. This is our
time.
So a little bit of patience, an awful lot of collaboration
continuing this on, and the help from you would be is, help us
keep the realistic expectations on that, don't have the all or
nothing by next Friday but have danged sure better do something
you better do and you better get some results out of, and then
keep the momentum to keep moving forward.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Walz.
I appreciate the panel for being here today and precisely
what occurred last week when the $17.6 billion was injected
into this conversation is when things started going sideways.
We were very, very close to resolving our differences, and
Senator Sanders feels that the only time that he will ever be
able to get this money done is in this bill, and I have assured
him that that is not the case, that if VA can make the case for
the dollars in certain areas that they are asking for that we
will go to work to see that they get those dollars.
Unfortunately he has convinced other people that this is the
only way to get this $17.6 billion put into this emergency
bill. That is not the case.
The House had actually narrowed the scope down in our bill
to access and to accountability. Ours was more narrowly crafted
than what the Senate had, but we were giving and taking, adding
things in, taking things out, the House was receding to
positions that the Senate had.
So again, as I understand Senator Sanders has just held a
press conference, I can't believe he unilaterally held a press
conference without letting me know he was holding a press
conference or asking for my permission, but he did, and I think
that the thing is we are not done. We did not give a take it or
leave it offer. We just want to make sure that those that are
on the conference committee understand that the House is not
trying to say everything has to be paid for. We are going for
the same number. The House has actually gone to the Senate
number. We did that when the CBO came out with the second score
instead of holding to our number, which was higher because we
had a 14-day trigger, we went to the 30-day trigger.
And so understand, just as Mr. Walz has already said,
getting this done right is important. It is critical. And that
is what we are committed to doing, and I have assured everybody
on the conference committee that if it takes staying through
the weekend this weekend I am prepared to do that. I was
supposed to be at Normandy for the 70th anniversary as the
chairman of the committee that has oversight over the American
battle monuments, and I did not go because I stayed here to
help negotiate this bill. I stayed in Washington an entire
week. And so I am committed as are all the members of this
House committee to making sure that we get it right, and with
your help we will, and we will get it done in a timely fashion
that serves the veterans.
Remember, the veteran is the most important thing, not VA.
And with that we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:03 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
APPENDIX
Prepared Statement of Jeff Miller, Chairman
Good morning.
I would like to welcome everyone to this morning's oversight
hearing entitled, ``Restoring Trust: The View of the Acting Secretary
and the Veterans Community''
Today, the Committee will examine what steps we need to take to
help the Department of Veterans Affairs back on track to meeting its
core mission--to provide quality health care to our veterans. Since the
beginning of June we have held almost a dozen Full Committee oversight
hearings, some going into the early hours of the morning, to do a top
to bottom review of VA and to delve into how we arrived at the current
crisis.
It is time for this Committee, the Department, Veteran Service
Organizations, and other stakeholders to come together to get it right
for those who selflessly served this country. While I hope to focus on
the major themes we've covered and receive updates from VA on the
topics we have covered in the last few weeks, I can promise the
Department and Committee Members that as we move forward to mend VA's
broken system, the oversight done by this Committee will continue.
Mr. Secretary, in your written statement, you state that ``the
status quo in our working relationship must change,'' and that ``the
Department will continue to work openly with Congress and provide
information in a timely manner.'' First, I agree that the relationship
between VA and this Committee must change. We must go back to the way
business used to be handled for decades when Members and staff could
communicate directly with VA senior leaders about the routine business
we conduct with VA. But using the phrase ``continue to work openly''
is, in my opinion, not a reflection of the current reality we are in.
Members of this Committee, other Members of Congress, and our staffs
are still being stonewalled to this day.
For example, the day after our July 14th VBA hearing, our
colleague, Mr. Jolly personally spoke to Kerrie Witty, the Director of
the St. Petersburg Regional Office, and asked for information regarding
the firing of Mr. Javier Soto, a whistleblower who testified at that
hearing. Mr. Soto had raised very serious concerns on both retaliatory
action and mismanagement at the St. Petersburg Regional Office, and it
is incumbent upon this Committee to investigate those allegations.
Instead of being open and honest about the process about Mr. Soto's
removal, VA has equivocated, stonewalled, changed its story, and
obstructed Members of this Committee in what appears to be an attempt
to cover up VA's retaliation against Mr. Soto. And this is not the
first time this Committee has received a back and forth response from
VA. I am prepared to subpoena the relevant documents related to the
Soto firing as well as employees of the St. Pete RO and Central Office
if we do not get a prompt compliance with our multiple requests.
Secretary Gibson, I could not agree with you more that the
Department needs to earn back the trust of veterans, their families,
Members of this Congress, VSOs, and the American people through
deliberate, and decisive, and truthful action. The recent scandals that
have tarnished our trust in the VA, are a reflection of a broken system
that didn't just develop overnight, nor can it just be fixed overnight.
The Department cannot continue to reward failure, or turn a blind eye
to illegal and unethical practices, or ignore incriminating IG and GAO
reports. Upon stepping up as Acting Secretary, you have stated that
there must be change and accountability, but I still have yet to see
where the Department has drawn the line and brought bad actors to
justice.
We have shown through many of our hearings that one contributing
factor to the current crisis is that VA has clearly lost sight of its
mission and that extra funding didn't go to improvements in patient
care but toward ancillary pet projects and an ever growing bureaucracy.
According, to an article by former Under Secretary of Health, Dr. Ken
Kizer, in the New England Journal of Medicine, ``VHA's central-office
staff has grown from about 800 in the late 1990s to nearly 11,000 in
2012'' further illustrating VA's shift of focus to building bureaucracy
as opposed to fulfilling its duty of providing quality patient care. VA
needs to return to what it was intended to be, a patient-centered-care
agency for our veterans.
As I said before, the problems at VA cannot be fixed overnight, and
it cannot be fixed by simply throwing more money at those problems. To
date, VA has been given every resource requested by the Administration.
Every year during our budget oversight hearings we have asked the
Secretary if he had enough to do the job, and every time we were told
unequivocally ``yes''.
This is why when Acting Secretary Gibson said last week that an
additional $17.6 billion was needed to ensure that VA is able to
deliver high quality and timely health care to veterans, it came as a
shock to many and raised obvious questions. Where exactly did this
number come from? What assumptions underlie this request and are they
valid? What effort was made to look within existing resources to meet
this new resource need? I know many of my colleagues would agree that
after multiple oversight hearings done by this Committee, our internal
investigations, outside investigations, and countless accounts made by
whistleblowers-VA's numbers cannot be trusted. VA's determination that
10,000 additional medical staff is needed is also surprising when in
the Secretary's written statement it states that VA doesn't ``have the
refined capacity to accurately quantify its staffing requirements.'' If
they don't have the ability to accurately predict staffing needs then
how do we know that 10,000 more bodies is what is needed? Again, VA's
numbers are something I believe many of us call into question, and I
believe a better understanding of where these numbers were pulled from
is needed.
I would also remind members that we also don't have any type of a
grasp on how the Department is going to spend the new funding they have
requested. The President's FY 2015 budget request for the department is
over 1300 pages long. [SHOW BUDGET BOOKS HERE] The request we received
from VA is five pages . . . just five. Clearly not the type of
justification anyone would expect for $17.6 billion dollars.
Our veterans certainly deserve the best, but just throwing billions
upon billions of dollars into a system that has never been denied a
dime will not automatically fix the perverse culture that has
encompassed the Department. Real change needs to be made in the
management at the Department to refocus on the core mission and in the
priorities of the VA. VA can no longer consider itself a sacred cow
that is not subject to the rules of good government and ethical
behavior. Veterans are sacred. VA is not.
Ultimately, we are talking about a system that has a long road
ahead of it before it can get back to an organization deserving of our
veterans and the sacrifices they've made. I hope that today we receive
the needed insight from our Veteran Service Organizations. They and
their members are on the ground and need to be partners as VA tries to
rebuild the trust it has lost. I hope that together we can bring about
true change to this broken system, and change the corrosive culture
that has encompassed the Department of Veterans Affairs for far too
long.
With that, I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Michaud, for his
opening remarks.

Prepared Statement of Mike Michaud, Ranking Member
Good Morning, and thank you Mr. Chairman for holding today's
hearing--and for leading our rigorous oversight these past few months.
It's been a long road getting here. The hearings we have held over
the past few months have yielded difficult, disturbing, but
ultimately--important--information.
With each hearing, we heard of a different aspect of the Department
of Veterans Affairs that just isn't working. We heard about some
challenges--like the claims backlog and technology issues--which we
have been confronting for quite some time now. We learned of others--
like how the VA treats whistleblowers, and the reliability of the data
VA reports--that were new.
The VA has a good product. When veterans get in to see a VA doctor,
they like the care they get. When veterans get an eligibility rating
and start receiving VA benefits, they find those benefits useful and
helpful.
But, the business model for producing, delivering and supporting
the VA product is fundamentally broken. We have heard this time and
again over the course of these hearings. There is a clear cultural
problem at the VA. There are scheduling failures and technology
problems. Inconsistent office practices lead to backlogs that appear to
be tackled at the expense of other services.
VA is a sprawling agency that offers critical services to millions
of veterans. It's clear to me that we need a business-minded approach
to reform the agency. More of the same isn't going to solve the
underlying problems. Tweaks and band-aids around the margins aren't
going to sustain the system. We need a new model, a new approach, a new
way of thinking about and looking at the Department. We need immediate,
short-term fixes. But we also need a long-term vision and a new
approach to the business of VA.
I'd like to thank Acting Secretary Sloan Gibson for joining us
today, and for his efforts over the last few months. Mr. Gibson, you
stepped up to the plate at the most challenging moment in the VA's
history, and you owned the problems the organization was experiencing.
I thank you for your increased efforts to communicate with us here on
the Hill, for your dedication to our nation's veterans, and for
exhibiting the courage to be the face of the VA during this difficult
time.
I'd like to similarly thank Bob McDonald, who I hope will soon be
confirmed as the next VA Secretary. I'm meeting with Mr. McDonald
tomorrow and I'm looking forward to discussing with him his vision for
reforming the VA, both in the short-term and the long-term. Like Mr.
Gibson, Mr. McDonald is exhibiting extraordinary courage and commitment
for taking on this role at this moment in time.
I'd also like to thank our Veterans Service Organizations for
joining us today. You have been strong and relentless advocates for the
well-being of veterans. You have done an excellent job holding all of
us--in Congress and at the VA--accountable. You are key stakeholders.
You need to be actively engaged in the process of long-term reform at
VA. Thank you for joining us today, and I look forward to continuing to
work with all of you.
And with that, I thank you Mr. Chairman and yield back my time.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Corrine Brown
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for inviting the Acting
Secretary here today.
Mr. Secretary, it seems so long ago since you first testified in
front of this Committee. It was only 3 and a half months.
At the time you were the Deputy Secretary and I feel that you have
acquitted yourself very well in your time at the VA.
I do hope you will stay on at the VA and help guide the Department
through the rough times to come.
The VA operates 1,700 sites of care, and conducts approximately 85
million appointments each year, which comes to 236,000 health care
appointments each day.
The latest American Customer Satisfaction Index, an independent
customer service survey, ranks VA customer satisfaction among Veteran
patients among the best in the nation and equal to or better than
ratings for private sector hospitals.
I am confident in the health care our veterans in Florida are
receiving. With eight VA Medical Centers in Florida, Georgia and Puerto
Rico and over 55 clinics serving over 1.6 million veterans, veterans
are getting is the best in the world.
Over 2,312 physicians and 5,310 nurses are serving the 546,874
veterans who made nearly 8 million visits to the facilities in our
region. Of the total 25,133 VA employees, one-third are veterans.
In 2013, 37,221 women received health care services at VA hospitals
and clinics in Florida, South Georgia and the Caribbean--more than any
other VA health care network nationwide. This means that more than 75%
of women Veterans enrolled for VA health care in VISN 8 were seen by
providers in 2013.
I am especially pleased at the new Jacksonville Replacement
Outpatient Clinic that was recently opened. The two-story, 133,500
square foot clinic provides state of the art technology and increased
specialty services including diagnostics, improved laboratory
facilities, expansion of women's services, minor ambulatory surgical
procedures, expanded mental health tele-health services and additional
audiology.
When opened, the Orlando VA Medical Center will include 134
inpatient beds, an outpatient clinic, parking garages, chapel and
central energy plant. Currently, the 120-bed community living center
and 60-bed domiciliary are open and accepting veterans.
While this committee and many others concerned with the well-being
of our veterans have been quick to point out what they think are some
of the most horrible crimes in the history of man that have supposedly
occurred at your department.
However, once this House passes the Conference report updating the
policies of the VA and hopefully addressing the wait times our veterans
have had to deal with, the real work begins. Your agency will have to
work twice as hard to address not only the health care of the veterans
but the culture that permeated the department.
How do you fix that? That is something you will need to work out.
This committee will stand ready to offer suggestions as to how to work
better for our veterans.
It is important that you keep the channels of communication open
between not only your office and this committee, but your office and
the Medical Centers.
You have visited many Medical Centers during your short tenure as
the head of the VA. I am pleased you came to Gainesville. I look
forward to many more visits over the coming years.
The VA provides quality timely health care to our veterans. We have
a duty to make sure that all those who have defended this country when
called upon and receive the care they have earned through their
service.

Questions:

Mr. Secretary:
How do you feel about putting VA into wings of private or community
hospitals, where all involved can share resources?
In my time on this committee, the mission of the VA has expanded
from just providing service connected care for the veteran to holistic
care for the veteran and his or her family.
This is a good change, but it comes at a price. How do you propose
to continue this mission knowing the issues the VA faces at this time?

Prepared Statement Hon. Sloan D. Gibson

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and Distinguished Members
of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss with you changes within the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA). We at VA are committed to consistently providing
the high quality care and benefits our Veterans have earned and deserve
in order to improve their health and well-being. We owe that to each
and every Veteran that is under our care.
The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) operates the largest
integrated health care delivery system in the United States. VHA has
over 1,700 sites of care, including 150 medical centers, 820 community-
based outpatient clinics, 300 Vet Centers, 135 community living
centers, 104 domiciliary rehabilitation treatment programs, and 70
mobile Vet Centers. VHA conducts approximately 236,000 health care
appointments every day and approximately 85 million appointments each
year. Over 300,000 VHA leaders and health care employees--many who also
are Veterans--strive to provide exceptional care to nearly 6.5 million
Veterans and other beneficiaries annually. While there are things that
VA does very well, there are also areas that need improvement.

Issues VA is Facing

We have serious problems. First and foremost, Veterans are waiting
too long for care. Second, scheduling improprieties were widespread,
including deliberate acts to falsify scheduling data. Third, an
environment exists where many staff members are afraid to raise
concerns or offer suggestions for fear of retaliation. Fourth, in an
attempt to manage performance, a vast number of metrics have become the
focal point for staff instead of focusing on the Veterans we are here
to serve. Fifth, VA has failed to hold people accountable for
wrongdoing and negligence. And last, we lack sufficient clinicians,
direct patient support staff, space, information technology resources,
and purchased care funding to meet the current demand for timely, high-
quality healthcare.
Furthermore, we don't have the refined capacity to accurately
quantify our staffing requirements but are actively working to assess
these needs. As a consequence of all these failures, the trust that is
the foundation of all we do--the trust of the Veterans we serve and the
trust of the American people and their elected representatives--has
eroded.
I apologize to our Veterans, their families and loved ones, Members
of Congress, Veterans Service Organizations (VSO), and to the American
people. We can and must solve these problems as we work to earn back
the trust of Veterans.
We have to earn that trust back through deliberate and decisive
action--and by creating an open and transparent approach for dealing
with our stakeholders to better serve Veterans.

VA Key Priorities Going Forward

To begin restoring trust, we have focused on six key priorities:

1.  Get Veterans off wait lists and into clinics;
2.  Fix systemic scheduling problems;
3.  Address cultural issues;
4.  Hold people accountable where willful misconduct or
management negligence are documented;
5.  Establish regular and ongoing disclosures of information;
6.  Quantify the resources needed to consistently deliver
timely, high-quality health care.

Current VA Actions

VA has taken a number of actions already to address its key
priorities related to scheduling and wait times:

Between May 15 and July 15, 2014, we have made 571,163
referrals for Veterans to receive their care in the private
sector. VA made roughly 463,567 referrals during this same time
period in 2013. Therefore, in comparison to last year, we had a
107,596 referral increase over this same time period. On
average, each referral to private sector care produces seven
visits or appointments for care. So here, we would expect the
107,596 additional referrals to result in approximately 753,172
visits or appointments for care in the community over and above
the level of a year ago during this same time period.

VHA facilities are adding more clinic hours,
aggressively recruiting to fill physician vacancies, deploying
mobile medical units, and using temporary staffing resources,
to provide care to more Veterans as quickly as possible in our
healthcare facilities. VA is addressing VHA's antiquated
medical appointment scheduling system with VSOs actively
engaged in the process. We have developed a three-part plan to
improve VHA's scheduling system:

First, VA has just awarded a contract to both fix and
enhance the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology
Architecture (VistA) Scheduling Legacy Software. This work will
proceed over the next 12 months, providing much needed support
for schedulers.

Second, VA is actively working on scheduling ``apps''
that are expected to roll out over the next 6 to 12 months. For
example, one will replace the blue- screen roll-and-scroll with
a point and click user interface.

Finally, VA aims to acquire a comprehensive ``commercial
off-the-shelf'' state-of-the-art scheduling system to markedly
enhance capability. VA is making steady progress toward the
comprehensive solution called Medical Appointment Scheduling
System (MASS). On June 18, 2014, VA hosted pre- solicitation
``Industry Day'' meetings with technology vendors to discuss
the Department's upcoming scheduling system acquisition. This
Industry Day presented an important opportunity for VA to
communicate directly with potential vendors on all aspects of
the upcoming scheduling system acquisition.

In addition, VA conducted a live scheduling system architecture
question and answer session to ensure potential solutions seamlessly
interface with VA's VistA electronic health record. Written responses
to VA's request for information are being evaluated now in advance of
publication of VA's final Request for Proposal. After selection, VA
anticipates working with one VA site in 2015 to create software
interfaces with MASS and a repeatable implementation pattern before
beginning a system-wide implementation in 2015. Briefings and
discussions have also been held with VSO leaders to solicit their
input.

We are putting in place a comprehensive external audit
of scheduling practices across the entire VHA system and
working on using an outside private entity to do the audit. We
will begin those audits early next fiscal year.

I have directed every Medical Center Director to
conduct in-person visits to all of their assigned facilities.
In-person site inspections include observing daily scheduling
processes and interacting with scheduling staff to ensure all
scheduling practices are appropriate. VISN Directors will also
conduct similar visits to at least one medical center within
their area of responsibility every 30 days, completing visits
to all medical centers in their network every 90 days. To date,
over 1,100 of these visits have been conducted.

We are building a more robust, continuous system for
measuring patient satisfaction by establishing a new program to
provide real-time, site-specific information on patient
satisfaction, including satisfaction measurements of those
Veterans attempting to access VA health care for the first
time. VA has now begun using its longstanding Survey of Health
Experiences of Patients (SHEP) program to provide facility-
specific monthly updates about access as experienced by
Veterans--including how easy or difficult it is to obtain
routine appointments, urgent appointments, and same-day answers
to their medical questions. We plan to expand our capabilities
in the coming year to capture further Veteran experience data
using telephone, social media, and on-line means. Our efforts
will include close collaboration with VSOs, with whom we have
already met to begin planning our efforts. We also will learn
what other leading health care systems are doing to track
patient access experiences.

I have personally visited 13 VA Medical Centers in the
last seven weeks to hear directly from the field on the actions
being taken to get Veterans off wait lists and into clinics.
Those visits to Phoenix, Arizona; San Antonio, Texas;
Fayetteville, North Carolina; Gainesville, Florida; Baltimore,
Maryland; Washington, DC; Columbia, South Carolina;
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Augusta, Georgia; Jackson,
Mississippi; Albuquerque, New Mexico; El Paso, Texas, and St.
Louis, Missouri have been invaluable to me, both from the
perspective of speaking to Veterans, local VSOs and VA
employees, and seeing firsthand what the scope and nature of
the issues we face are, as well as the perceptions of those who
receive our care and those who deliver it to Veterans.

The 14-day access measure has been removed from all
individual employee performance plans to eliminate any motive
for inappropriate scheduling practices or behaviors. In the
course of completing this task, over 13,000 performance plans
were amended.

VA is posting regular data updates showing progress on
its efforts to accelerate access to quality health care for
Veterans who have been waiting for appointments. The first data
release was on June 9, 2014. These access data updates will
continue to be posted at the middle and end of each month at
www.VA.gov to enhance transparency and provide the immediate
information to Veterans and the public on improvements to
Veterans' access to care. We know that we must not only restore
the public's trust in VA, but more importantly, we also must
restore the trust of our Veterans who depend on us for care.

Where willful misconduct or management negligence is
documented, appropriate personnel actions will be taken--this
also applies to whistleblower retaliation. At VA, we depend on
the service of VA employees and leaders who place the interests
of Veterans above and beyond self-interest, and who live by
VA's core values of Integrity, Commitment, Advocacy, Respect,
and Excellence. Accountability, delivering results, and honesty
are also key to serving our Veterans. Those who have not
performed and have not delivered results honestly, will be held
accountable.

I have frozen VHA Central Office and VISN Office
headquarters hiring--as a first step to ensure we are all
working to support those delivering care directly to Veterans.

VHA has dispatched teams to provide direct assistance
to facilities requiring the most improvement, including a large
multi-disciplinary team on the ground, right now, in Phoenix.

All VHA senior executive performance awards for fiscal
year (FY) 2014 have been suspended.

VHA is expanding our use of private sector care to
improve access to health care for Veterans who are experiencing
or who may experience excessive wait times for Primary,
Specialty, and Mental Health Care. VHA is now operationally
monitoring the effectiveness of our sites' use of non-VA care
to ensure Veterans are receiving their timely care by looking
at (1) the time stamps for consultation, (2) the authorization
of referral, (3) the appointment completion, (4) the return of
clinical documentation, and (5) the referral closeout.

I sent a message to all 341,000 VA employees, and have
reiterated during every visit to VA facilities, that
whistleblowers will be protected. As I have stated in the past,
we depend on the service of VA employees and leaders who place
the interests of Veterans above and beyond self-interest. We
are committed to ensuring that our employees have a voice
without fear of repercussion. We are deeply concerned and
distressed about the allegations that employees, who sought to
report deficiencies, were either ignored, or worse, intimidated
into silence. We will not tolerate an environment where
intimidation or suppression of reports occurs. We will not
tolerate retaliation against whistleblowers.

VA Personnel Updates

In the area of leadership, we have taken immediate action in areas
where we are allowed without the confirmation process, to bring in
professionals to help us in the immediate future:

First, I named Dr. Carolyn Clancy interim Under
Secretary for Health (USH). She will spearhead our immediate
efforts to accelerate Veterans' access to care and restore the
trust of Veterans.

Second, Dr. Jonathan Perlin, a former USH at VA,
currently on leave of absence from his duties as Chief Medical
Officer and President, Clinical Services for Hospital
Corporation of America, has begun his short term assignment at
VA as Senior Advisor to the Secretary. Dr. Perlin's expertise,
judgment, and professional advice will help bridge the gap
until VA has a confirmed USH.

Third, Dr. Gerard Cox has agreed to serve as Interim
Director of the Office of Medical Inspector (OMI); a Navy
medical officer for more than 30 years, and a former Assistant
Inspector General of the Navy for Medical Matters, Dr. Cox will
provide new leadership and a fresh perspective to help
restructure OMI and ensure a strong internal audit function.

And last, as we complete reviews, fact-finding, and
other investigations, we are beginning to initiate personnel
actions to hold those accountable who committed wrongdoing or
were negligent in discharging their management
responsibilities.

To support this critical work, Ms. Leigh Bradley has begun a four-
month assignment as Special Counsel to the Secretary. Ms. Bradley is a
former General Counsel at VA and, most recently, a senior member of the
general counsel team at the Department of Defense with direct
responsibility for the ethics portfolio.

Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA)

Thus far, I have focused largely on problems and corrective actions
related to VA's delivery of health care. However, that is only one
aspect of our sacred obligation to care for Veterans. I also take
seriously our commitment to providing timely, accurate benefits, in the
programs VBA administers and maintaining the integrity of our data
systems and claims processes. We understand that recent investigations
by the independent VA Office of the Inspector General (OIG), media
coverage related to those investigations, and issues raised at
Congressional hearings have called into question whether the
compensation and pension data and systems within VBA can be trusted.
VBA has a comprehensive program of quality assurance at both the
local and national levels and extensive data quality controls built
into its processing systems. VBA data is held at the national level--
not on local data systems--and it is updated and protected every night
with controlled access. We also have a dedicated analytics team that
constantly reviews the workload data, looking for anomalies within the
system so management can respond quickly. However, based on the
improprieties recently identified, we are taking action to add more
checks and balances as we work to improve delivery of earned benefits.
I have directed that an expert team be assembled to determine possible
scenarios where an individual might find a way ``around the system''
and decide if further controls are needed. Under Secretary Hickey has
directed a 100-percent facility and desk audit of mail and
documentation at all 56 regional offices. The purpose of the review is
to ensure records management compliance and proper control, storage,
and maintenance of claim mail and other benefit-related documents. VBA
is applying for ISO 9001 certification--considered the ultimate global
benchmark for quality management. This will provide external validation
and additional quality assurance of VBA's data. If an individual
employee is found to have ``worked around'' the standard claims
process, VA will immediately take necessary actions, including
proactive referral to the OIG. In addition, VA will continue to provide
publicly-available performance data on benefits through VBA's Monday
Morning Workload Reports each week at www.vba.va.gov/reports.

Resource Requirements

I believe that the greatest risk to Veterans over the intermediate
to long-term is that additional resources are provided only to support
increased purchased care in the community and not to materially remedy
the historic shortfall in internal VA capacity.
Such an outcome would leave VA even more poorly positioned to meet
future demand.
We have been working closely with the Office of Management and
Budget for several weeks to develop the request for funding. While the
amounts under consideration are large, in the context of VA's size,
scope, and existing budget, they represent a moderate percentage
increase in annual expenditures. Furthermore, a substantial portion of
the funds required are non-recurring investments in space and
information technology that would not be reflected in long-term run
rates.
Resources required to meet current demand covering the remainder of
FY 2014 through FY 2017 total $17.6 billion. This funding would address
challenges such as clinical staff, space, information technology, and
benefits processing necessary to provide timely, high-quality care and
benefits.

Working With VSOs

I appreciate the hard work and dedication of our VSO partners--
important advocates for Veterans and their families--our community
stakeholders, and our dedicated VA volunteers. I have conducted more
than 15 meetings and calls with senior representatives of VSOs and
other stakeholder groups to solicit their ideas for improving access
and restoring trust. Just 2 weeks ago, I met with the leadership of 26
Military Service Organizations (MSO) and VSOs to reaffirm VA's
commitment to work together to address the unacceptable, systemic
problems in accessing VA health care. During this meeting, I updated
the organizations' representatives on VA's work to restore Veterans'
trust in the system and on VA's progress in reaching out to get
Veterans off of waiting lists and into clinics.
MSOs and VSOs are VA's valuable partners in serving Veterans and
continuing to improve the Department. I am grateful for their ideas on
how VA can improve Veterans' access to care and services. VA
particularly appreciates a longstanding and ongoing partnership with
the excellent Veterans organizations that focus on specialized services
and rehabilitation programs to ensure that VA continues to give
priority to providing these services and programs for disabled Veterans
(e.g., spinal cord injury, blind, amputees, polytrauma). In addition,
we embrace partnerships with all of the service organizations that help
us to keep our compass pointed in the right direction. I meet regularly
with MSOs and VSOs to share information and solicit their input.
Similarly, I have directed medical center Directors to meet with
their local MSOs and VSOs on a monthly basis to ensure we have the
benefit of their perspectives from the local as well as the national
level.

Working With Congress and the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs

I also respect the important role Congress and the dedicated
Members of this Committee play in serving our Veterans. I look forward
to continuing our work with Congress to ensure Veterans have timely
access to the quality health care they have earned.
As I stated to you when I appeared before the Committee in April,
for the benefit of our Veterans, the status quo in our working
relationship must change. My perspective then was that we as a
Department must and can do better--and my assessment has not changed. I
remain convinced that our Veterans are best served when the Veterans'
Affairs Committees and the VA work together in a collaborative and
constructive manner.
The Department will continue to work openly with Congress and to
provide information in a timely manner. VA's participation in 18
congressional hearings in June and July demonstrates our commitment in
support of Congress' oversight role. I specifically acknowledge the
need to improve the timeliness of our responses to congressional
inquiry. We will continue our efforts to improve and to build our
relationship with Congress in order to restore trust.

Conclusion

We understand the seriousness of the problems we face. We own them.
We are taking decisive action to begin to resolve them.
The President, Congress, Veterans, VSOs, the American people, and
VA's staff all understand the need for change. We must--all of us--
seize this opportunity.
We can turn these challenges into the greatest opportunity for
improvement in the history of the Department.
I believe that in as little as 2 years, the conversation can
change--that VA can be the trusted provider of choice for healthcare
and benefits.
If we are successful, who wins? Veterans will be the clear winners
if we can meet, overcome, and prevail in the challenges and issues VA
is facing. That includes the growing number of Veterans that turn to VA
for healthcare each year; the 700,000 Veterans who are currently
diagnosed with PTSD; the million Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans that
have turned to VA for healthcare since 2002; and, the average Veteran
who turns to VA for healthcare who is older (50 percent over age 65),
sicker (many have multiple and serious chronic conditions), and poorer
(60 percent have less than $20,000 income), than average patients in
the private sector.
Those are the Veterans who will win when VA becomes the trusted
provider of care and benefits. That is what, and where, we want to be--
in the shortest time possible. Our ability to get there depends on our
will to seize the opportunity, challenge the status quo, and drive
positive change.
I appreciate the hard work and dedication of VA employees, the vast
majority of whom care deeply about our mission, want to do the right
thing, and work hard every day to care for Veterans. As well, I
appreciate our partners from Veterans Service Organizations, our
community stakeholders, and dedicated VA volunteers.
Last, I deeply respect the important role that Congress and the
members of this committee play in serving Veterans, and I am grateful
for your long-term support.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9381.011

Prepared Statement of Ryan M. Gallucci

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
On behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States (VFW) and our Auxiliaries, I would like to thank you
for the opportunity to testify today on the current state of Department
of Veterans Affairs (VA) health care and steps the VFW believes we need
to take to restore trust and confidence in the VA health care system.
The recent events at the Phoenix VA Medical Center, the subsequent
national audit of all VA facilities, and repeated whistleblower
accusations of impropriety within VA have all shed light on major
issues facing the VA health care system as it seeks to deliver timely,
quality health care to our nation's veterans. Over the past three
months, we have seen a VA Secretary and numerous deputies resign. We
have also seen a newly-minted Acting Secretary working diligently to
understand the situation on the ground at VA health care facilities
across the country, seeking to expose systemic problems and prescribe
corrective action.
The allegations made against VA over the past three months are
outrageous, and the 1.9 million members of the VFW and our auxiliaries
are rightfully outraged. However, the VFW also worries that the loss of
trust among the veterans' community has the potential to be more
harmful to our nation's veterans than much of the impropriety about
which we have recently learned.
At the center of the recent scandal is the inability of veterans to
receive timely care from VA. For more than a decade, the VFW has warned
both VA and Congress about the potential dangers of long wait times and
improper scheduling procedures. After Phoenix, we now know that these
potential dangers were all too real.
When news of the scandal broke, the VFW knew that it had to
intervene directly on behalf of veterans. We had no time to wait for VA
to sort out its affairs through traditional channels, which is why we
readvertised our health care help line, 1-800-VFW-1899, where veterans
could turn for direct intervention on the VA health care concerns, or
simply share their experiences to benefit their fellow veterans. Over
the first two months of the outreach campaign for the VFW help line, we
received more than 1,500 comments and complaints from our members, most
of whom reported negative VA care experiences. The VFW worked directly
with VA leadership to help resolve more than 200 critical health care
issues most often related to oncology, gastroenterology, cardiovascular
health or mental health.
In addition, the VFW sorted through all 1,500 comments to evaluate
the current state of VA care and make specific recommendations to
ensure VA never faces these problems in the future. For our testimony
today, we will focus specifically on scheduling inefficiencies, non-VA
care coordination, and the culture of accountability.
According to many of the veterans who contacted the VFW over the
past two months, the major issue facing the VA health care system is
timely access. Even veterans who relayed positive health care
experiences still shared significant concerns over appointment wait
times.
While some have sought to focus solely on the issues of access,
appointment scheduling and care referral processes, the VFW has
recognized that access to care is clearly linked to quality health care
outcomes and customer service. Veterans who contacted the VFW often
pointed to delayed diagnoses, worsening health conditions and hurried
screenings for potentially serious health conditions when they could
not receive appointments in a timely manner.
As the strain on the VA health care system continues to grow, the
VFW's evidence also demonstrates that staff attitudes are rapidly
deteriorating as veterans report doctors who shrug off serious symptoms
during routine screenings and phone operators or clerks who treat
veterans with contempt. It would be easy to single out these employees
and blame them individually for their poor attitudes, low morale, and
inadequate customer service. However, given the systemic scope of
similar allegations across multiple VA health care facilities, the VFW
believes that such poor staff attitudes indicate that the system is too
strained to properly handle all of the veterans who require care.
After all of the recent scrutiny of the VA health care system, the
VFW believes that we understand the problems now facing VA. However, we
also recognize that there is no silver bullet solution to the current
crisis. To the VFW, improper resourcing, archaic accountability
standards, outdated technology, and inconsistent business practices
have all contributed to the current crisis.
As we seek to resolve these issues, we must be careful not to
dismantle the VA health care system or abdicate VA of its
responsibilities to care for veterans. The VFW believes that the VA
health care system is far too important, and many of its veteran-
specific services cannot be easily duplicated in the civilian health
care sector.
To the VFW, outdated appointment scheduling and tracking technology
is central to the current crisis. Built and implemented in the 1980s,
VA's appointment-scheduling software has not changed much over the
years--except for the occasional patches and work-arounds designed to
gather new information. Moreover, VA's systems that track incoming
patients and specialty consults are only loosely linked to the
scheduling system, meaning VA scheduling is rife with inaccuracies,
allowing patients to easily slip through the cracks. VA has asked
repeatedly for a new scheduling system, but IT funding shortfalls have
made it nearly impossible to take the major steps of replacing a
system-wide software platform.
VA also acknowledges that this antiquated, patch-work system makes
it impossible to properly monitor the supply of available appointments.
This means that VA cannot adhere to private industry wait time
standards and also exposes the scheduling system to rampant fraud and
manipulation, as evidenced by repeated VA memos to health care
facilities chastising those who seek to game appointment scheduling.
This also makes it nearly impossible for VA to manage the workload for
its clinicians, meaning that some clinicians may be overworked, while
others may be under performing. In either case, veteran care quality
suffers.
One veteran who recently contacted the VFW shared his experience
trying to transfer into the Salt Lake City VA Medical System. He told
the VFW that when he tried to enroll, VA said it would take at least
six months to see a primary care doctor. After six months, VA contacted
the veteran again to inform him that it would take another six months
to get an appointment. When the veteran followed up with VA, he was
informed that he was disenrolled since he had not seen his primary care
physician in more than a year. This is a clear failure of VA scheduling
protocols and business practices. We have to do better. This is why the
VFW calls on Congress to immediately provide VA with the resources
necessary to acquire a modern and sustainable appointment-scheduling
system that will allow patients to easily access appointments and allow
VA to finally measure its workload and adapt accordingly.
Since the scandal broke, some in Congress have presented non-VA
care as the best solution to ensure veterans can receive timely care.
The VFW acknowledges that VA must fully leverage its authority to
provide non-VA care to veterans when VA cannot provide direct care.
However, VA still must have the responsibility and the resources to
properly coordinate non-VA care and ensure that such care is delivered
properly. The VFW also worries that the civilian health care system
lacks sufficient capacity to deliver comparable care in a timely
manner.
Earlier this week at the VFW National Convention, I had the
opportunity to speak with a veteran's caregiver who recounted a recent
nightmare in receiving non-VA care. The veteran who needed a seemingly-
routine knee surgery was sent to a major outside health care provider
for the procedure, since VA was backlogged for nearly two years to
conduct the procedure in-house. While VA coordinated the care on behalf
of the veteran, what followed was a bureaucratic nightmare for the both
the veteran and his caregiver once the surgery was performed.
After the non-VA provider performed the operation, the veteran was
quickly discharged and told that the civilian provider had no further
responsibility for his convalescence. The facility discharged the
veteran without providing a simple prescription for pain management
associated directly with the procedure. In fact, the veteran and his
caregiver had to immediately go from the non-VA facility to VA to
receive proper convalescent medication and the requisite prosthetic
devices that the veteran would need for recovery.
While the VFW understands that VA may have been best suited to
provide both the medication and the necessary prosthetics, this was not
properly communicated to the veteran prior to the procedure. Moreover,
the veteran caregiver reported that the non-VA facility was inflexible
in providing basic recovery services to the veteran while still in
their care.
To the VFW, this is a prime example of why outsourcing VA care is
not a catch-all solution to the current crisis. Must VA outsource care
when they cannot deliver it in a timely manner? Absolutely. However, VA
must continue to serve as the guarantor of such care, and it must be
responsibly coordinated to ensure veterans have positive health
outcomes.
The VFW has been fully supportive of VA's efforts to revamp its
delivery of non-VA care through the creation of Non-VA Care
Coordination (NVCC) teams and the implementation of the Patient-Centric
Coordinated Care (PC3) program. NVCC teams are charged with
coordinating non-VA care on behalf of veterans who cannot receive
adequate care from VA. While the VFW supports the concept of NVCC,
Congress must ensure that NVCC teams are properly staffed with
professionals capable of making responsible, timely health care
decisions. PC3 is VA's new program designed to deliver coordinated non-
VA specialty care through established civilian health care networks.
PC3 is a program that the VFW believes can make a difference, but we
caution that Congress must have proper oversight of how PC3 works and
whether referrals through PC3 can deliver timely care.
While VA must properly leverage non-VA care, the VFW also
recognizes that the challenges VA faces in tracking and scheduling
appointments immediately affects VA's ability to refer veterans to non-
VA providers in a timely manner.
The VFW also worries that accountability issues within VA present
major, multifaceted problems. While the VFW has supported legislation
to ensure the VA Secretary can easily sanction executive-level
employees, we also acknowledge that accountability is a major issue at
all levels in VA's chain of command. To the VFW, allegations of under
performing and apathetic employees is likely the result of a
bureaucratic culture in which VA cannot efficiently reprimand or
terminate poor-performing employees; or hire quality new employees in a
timely manner.
When then-VA Secretary Eric Shinseki was pressed by the Senate over
how many employees he had fired under his watch, Shinseki acknowledged
that very few of the 3,000 employees reprimanded had a significant
adverse personnel action taken against them, such as demotion or
termination. Moreover, VA has repeatedly acknowledged that the hiring
process for new employees takes between six months to a year.
This prompted the VFW to ask whether or not VA managers make trade-
offs in evaluating employee performance. The VFW believes that if VA
has a poor-performing employee, the current system incentivizes
retaining that poor-performing employee in lieu of initiating the
laborious process of terminating the employee, then finding a quality
replacement.
The hiring process makes it even more difficult for VA to properly
staff its facilities. Veterans have consistently reported to the VFW
that staffing shortages and high turnover, even among clinicians, has
contributed to current access issues. To make this situation worse, VA
simply cannot compete with the private health care sector when it seeks
to hire new clinicians. Private health systems can hire new clinicians
in a matter of days and weeks. So even if a doctor wants to work for
VA, the VFW recognizes that many doctors cannot wait six months to a
year for VA to follow through. If VA cannot quickly fill its vacancies
with top talent, we cannot expect VA to properly reprimand poor
performers. If VA cannot reprimand poor performers, we cannot
reasonably expect VA to deliver timely, quality care to the veterans
who need it. This will take significant changes to federal employee
protections and federal hiring practices, but the VFW believes that
this can be done equitably to provide reasonable protections for
employees, but decisive accountability for under performers.
The VFW is also concerned that for far too long VA has focused on
its internal business models rather than the needs of its end-users,
the veterans. In other words, in accomplishing its mission, VA does
what is best for VA, instead of what is best for the customer. The VFW
believes that this culture must change.
To the VFW, the culture of secrecy and low morale among VA
employees are symptoms of a VA culture that does not focus on the well-
being of patients. The VFW has heard concerns from veterans that
resources are stretched too thin, but employees are afraid to speak up.
In this environment, if doctors are forced to rush treatment, they will
naturally misdiagnose their patients or botch a critical procedure.
Doctors will also burn out and leave VA--especially when hospital
administrators downplay or neglect the legitimacy of their concerns.
To make this situation worse, inspectors have found clear examples
where whistleblowers who exposed inadequate care standards or
disingenuous business practices were quickly penalized for speaking up.
Instead of incentivizing proper care or patient safety, the business
mind-set of VA seemed to encourage employees to cut corners in order to
make the system work.
VA has to change this business mind-set. Administrators and
clinicians must recognize that their primary mission is serving
veterans--not VA. Congress must also ensure that VA employees at all
levels feel comfortable asking for help or voicing their concerns to
leadership when the situation demands it.
Finally, the VFW has repeatedly heard from veterans that VA Patient
Advocates are incapable of directly intervening on behalf of veterans
at many VA health care facilities. Some veterans even quipped that
Patient Advocates do not advocate for the patients; they advocate for
VA. The Patient Advocate is designed as the primary method of recourse
for a veteran to resolve health care issues locally. They are supposed
to be able to intervene directly with either hospital directors or care
providers. However, veterans have told the VFW that Patient Advocates
often lack the authority to perform their most basic functions. VA
Patient Advocates must be appropriately staffed with professionals
capable of intervening on behalf of veterans. They must also have the
institutional support of VA leadership to intervene in difficult
circumstances.
As you can see, the current problems in VA are multifaceted and
demand decisive reforms. Thankfully, not everything the VFW hears about
VA health care has been bad. Nearly 40 percent of the veterans who
contacted us to share their health care experiences praised the care
they received at VA. At the recent VFW National Convention, several
veterans sought out our national staff to share their stories on how VA
doctors had saved their lives. Others offered their perspective on how
much the VA health care system has improved over the last three
decades. We believe the system can work, but it cannot work unless
Congress takes action.
This week at the VFW National Convention, the membership of our
organization passed a stern resolution calling on Congress to quickly
pass the VA Access and Accountability Act that currently sits in
conference. Though this bill will not solve all of VA's current woes,
both the House and Senate have already agreed that these necessary
reforms will help veterans receive the care that they need. Congress
absolutely cannot go into the August recess without passing this bill.
When the current VA scandal broke, every legislator agreed that this
was a national imperative. However, in recent weeks, some legislators
have backed off, caring more about the cost of the legislation than the
veterans who are waiting for care. This week, the members of the VFW
said this is unacceptable. If Congress fails to pass this legislation
before the recess, our members will hold their representatives
accountable during the August recess.
We have an opportunity here. We have an opportunity to show our
veterans and the men and women still serving in harm's way that our
nation will live up to its promise to care for those who defend our way
of life. We have to get this right. We have to restore trust and
confidence in the VA system, and the VFW will do whatever it takes to
make that happen.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony and I am prepared to take
any questions you or the committee members may have.

Information Required by Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, VFW has
not received any federal grants in Fiscal Year 2013, nor has it
received any federal grants in the two previous Fiscal Years.

Prepared Statement of Carl Blake

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, and members of the
Committee, Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) would like to thank you
for the opportunity to testify today on the current state of health
care provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the changes
that have been made by the VA in the wake of serious access problems
that have been reported in recent months, and additional changes that
we believe are warranted moving forward. PVA members--veterans with
spinal cord injury or dysfunction (SCI/D)--have the unique perspective
of dealing with a system of care within the VA that is wholly dedicated
to their health care needs. No group of veterans understands the full
scope of care provided by the VA better than our members. PVA members
are the highest percentage of users among the veteran population. They
are also the most vulnerable when access to health care and other
challenges impact quality of care.
Yet, as the VA has made significant changes to address the
nationwide access problems facing the system, and as Congress continues
to debate legislation to address these problems, the specialized health
care needs of our members, and other veterans with catastrophic
disabilities--loss of limbs, blindness, polytrauma and traumatic brain
injury, etc.--have been all but ignored. The simple truth is the VA is
the best health care provider for veterans.

VA Accelerated Access to Care Initiative

As you are aware, immediately following the media reports about the
serious access problems at the Phoenix VA Medical Center (and other
facilities around the country), the VA instituted the Accelerated
Access to Care Initiative. Through this program, VA will reach out to
all veterans it has identified who have waited longer than currently
established access standards to provide them the first available
appointment within the VA health care system or immediately seek care
in the community. This program essentially reflects an expansion of
fee-basis care authority. PVA has long argued that VA does not do a
good job of managing its fee-basis authority or ensuring that the care
provided is properly coordinated with VA
providers. Hospital directors and Veterans Integrated Service Network
(VISN) directors were incentivized to use fee-basis care as little as
possible as a part of their performance evaluations. As a result,
veterans were often denied access to fee-basis care even when it was
appropriate, leaving veterans waiting longer than necessary for care or
traveling great distances to receive care.
We believe that the steps being taken to expand access to care
through this initiative are appropriate. However, we believe that VA
should focus on many of the concepts outlined by its Patient-Centered
Coordinated Care (PCCC) program as it expands contract care options.
The PCCC program places the responsibility for management and
coordination on the VA, but it also places specific requirements on its
contract partners regarding veterans' medical records and follow-up
prior to guaranteeing payment.
As the VA has rolled out this initiative, many of us in the
veterans service organization (VSO) community have heard that many of
the solicitations to veterans to provide service through this program
continue to be haphazard and not well managed. We are certain that this
is not the intent of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), but the
only way to ensure success is to overcome these types of concerns. We
would encourage the Committee to conduct serious oversight of the
Accelerated Access to Care Initiative to ensure that high quality
health care is provided in a timely manner and that it is managed in a
well-coordinated and reasonable manner.

Providing Veterans a Choice for Health Care

As a result of the serious scrutiny that the VA Health Care System
has been under in recent months, Congress is moving on a bipartisan
basis to expand contract care activities within the VA to address the
problems that have been identified. We continue to reiterate the fact
that the VA's specialized services--spinal cord injury care, amputee
care, blinded care, polytrauma care, etc.--are incomparable resources
that cannot be duplicated in the private sector. Moreover, establishing
a scenario whereby veterans can choose to leave the VA Health Care
System places the entire system at risk. Former VA Secretary Anthony
Principi recently wrote in the Wall Street Journal why the concept of a
veterans' card (as provided for in the ``Veterans Choice Act'') is not
a viable long-term solution to the problems facing the VA Health Care
System:
``Vouchers (similar to cards) are not necessary to ensure high-
quality health care .1A.1A. While this may have value in areas with
long waiting lists, it raises serious questions. The VA system is
valuable because it is able to provide specialized health care for the
unique medical issues that veterans face, such as prosthetic care,
spinal-cord injury and mental-health care. If there is too great a
clamor for vouchers to be used in outside hospitals and clinics, the VA
system will fail for lack of patients and funds, and the nation would
lose a unique health-care asset.''
These services do not operate in a vacuum. The viability of the VA
Health Care System depends upon a fully integrated system where all of
the services support each other. Sending veterans into the private
health care marketplace serves only to undermine this principle.
However, as Congress and the Administration move forward with broader
contract care, it is important that VA remain responsible for
coordinating and managing that care.
To be clear, PVA finds it wholly unacceptable that tens of
thousands of veterans have waited for far too long to be seen for an
appointment, and in many cases were never seen. We fully understand the
intent of H.R. 4810, the ``Veterans Access to Care Act,'' and similar
legislation that is being considered by the conference with the Senate
Committee on Veterans' Affairs. However, we have raised many questions
as it relates to these bills in the past that we believe continue to be
unanswered:

How will continuity of care, seamless medical record
exchange, and accountability be ensured when non-contracted,
non-VA providers are added to a veteran's circle of care?

What actions will Congress take when doctors choose
not to accept veterans as patients because they choose not to
accept the Medicare rate (a common and growing problem in the
medical provider community)?

How will Congress respond when reimbursements to
private providers are not provided in a timely manner?

What actions will Congress take when it becomes
apparent that the private sector cannot provide timely access
to high-quality care as well?

What actions will Congress take when it becomes
evident that the care being provided in the private sector is
substandard to the VA?

Will Congress provide the additional funds that will
be absolutely necessary to support such a program when it
becomes apparent that the cost of care provided in the private
sector is significantly more expensive than care currently
provided in the VA system?

Unfortunately, for those clamoring for it, contract health care is
not the answer to this problem. Studies have shown that contract health
care providers cannot provide the same quality of care as the VA at any
less cost, despite claims by some that it can. Similarly, contract care
simply is not a viable option for veterans with the most complex and
specialized health care needs. A veteran with a cervical spine injury
whose autonomic dysreflexia was mistakenly treated as a stroke is not
better served at a local outpatient clinic or the local doctor's office
closer to his or her home. Sending those individuals outside of the VA
actually places their health at significant risk while abrogating VA of
the responsibility to ensure timely delivery of high quality health
care for our nation's veterans. This is not to suggest that leveraging
coordinated, purchased care is not part of the solution to access
problems in the VA. However, granting easier access to the private
sector should not come at the expense of the existing health care
system and the men and women who rely almost solely on the VA for their
health care.
Specialized services, such as spinal cord injury care, are part of
the core mission and responsibility of the VA. These services were
initially developed to care for the complex and unique health care
needs of the most severely disabled veterans. The provision of
specialized services is vital to maintaining a viable VA Health Care
System. The fragmentation of these services would lead to the
degradation of the larger VA health care mission. With growing pressure
to allow veterans to seek care outside of the VA, the VA faces the real
possibility that the critical mass of patients needed to keep all
services viable could significantly decline. All of the primary care
support services are critical to the broader specialized care programs
provided to veterans. If primary care services decline, specialized
care is then also diminished.

Understanding VA Capacity: Utilization vs. Demand

PVA has a unique perspective on the issue of capacity. In order to
better track these issues and ensure they are addressed by the VA, PVA
developed a memorandum of understanding with the VA more than 30 years
ago that authorizes site visit teams managed by our Medical Services
Department to conduct annual site visits of all VA SCI/D centers (hubs)
as well as medical centers (spokes) that support the hubs. We are able
to clearly identify where inadequate capacity exists in the SCI/D
system. This opportunity has allowed us to work with the Veterans
Health Administration (VHA) over the years to identify concerns,
particularly with regard to staffing, and offer recommendations to
address these concerns. What's more important, PVA is the only VSO that
employs a staff of licensed physicians, registered nurses, and
architects to conduct these visits and report on the conditions.
Unfortunately, this concept is not easily transferable to the larger VA
Health Care System.
The fact is that the most common complaint from veterans who are
seeking care, or who have already received care in the VA, is that
access to care is not timely. PVA believes that VA's access issues
result from the broad array of staff shortages within the VHA, which
brings into question the VA's capability to provide care to veterans
when it is needed--VA's capacity. Evaluating the capacity of the VA to
care for veterans will require comprehensive analysis of veterans'
health care demand and utilization measured against staffing, funding,
and VHA infrastructure.
We believe that VHA capacity is currently based on skewed
utilization versus true demand for services as ultimately revealed by
systemic hidden waiting lists. For instance, a shortage of nurses
within the SCI/D system of care has resulted in VA facilities
restricting admissions to SCI/D centers (an issue that we believe
mirrors the larger access issues that are being reported around the
country). Reports of bed consolidations or closures have been received
and attributed to nursing shortages. When veterans are denied admission
to SCI/D centers and beds are consolidated, leadership is not able to
capture or report accurate data for the average daily census--demand.
The average daily census is not only important to ensure adequate
staffing to meet the medical needs of veterans; it is also a vital
component to ensure that SCI/D centers receive adequate funding. Since
SCI/D centers are funded based on utilization, refusing care to
veterans does not accurately depict the growing needs of SCI/D veterans
and stymies VA's ability to address the needs of new incoming and
returning veterans. Lack of transparency made it impossible to prove to
the (disingenuously) skeptical senior VHA leadership that veterans were
languishing on waiting lists despite growing empirical evidence to the
contrary (as evidenced by PVA's site visits), field staff engagement
with facility and VISN directors, frequent meetings between PVA
national leadership and the Under Secretary of Health, and the co-
authors of The Independent Budget.
Meanwhile, the VA has manipulated scheduling practices and uses
inadequate staffing ratios to misrepresent the demand for VA health
care services. Staffing models are flawed by an underestimation of SCI/
D patient acuities and loose interpretations of SCI/D bed/staffing
policy. This has had a downstream impact on adequacy of funding for new
major and minor construction, which has been lacking over the past
decade. Limited care alternatives for groups requiring specialized
services, particularly veterans with SCI/D, amputations, blindness, and
polytrauma/TBI, become even more limited as demand increases thus
stretching existing VA capacity at the seams and impacting access and
quality of care in many cases.
This is simply unacceptable. The statistics reflect the fact that
many veterans who might be seeking care in the VA are unable to attain
that care. We believe that these staffing shortages exist not only in
the SCI/D system of care, but across the entire VHA. Therefore, we
recommend that an evaluation of VA's capacity include a comprehensive
analysis of VHA staffing needs to include the recently identified
veterans who were denied care, or are on wait lists for primary care.
We also recommend the VA conduct outreach in its specialized systems of
care to identify eligible veterans in need of care and ensure that they
have access to the VA.
Evaluating VA's capacity to provide care will require the VA's
commitment to transparency and the implementation of policies,
procedures, and systems that will allow for the collection of data that
accurately reflect the demand for VA health care in primary care and
specialty care, and specialized services. We appreciate the fact that
Acting Secretary Gibson outlined a plan to expand clinical staff across
the VHA last week. However, it is important that the mistakes of the
past are not repeated if Congress chooses to provide additional funding
to address the concerns outlined by the VA. It is imperative that the
VA commit to hiring actual providers who are delivering services.
Otherwise, capacity will continue to be insufficient to meet actual
demand.
Last, as a result of P.L. 104-262, the ``Veterans Health Care
Eligibility Reform Act of 1996,'' the VA developed policy that required
the baseline of capacity for the spinal cord injury/disorder system of
care to be measured by the number of staffed beds and the number of
full-time equivalent employees assigned to provide care (the basis for
PVA's site visits today). This law also required the VA to provide
Congress with an annual capacity report to ensure that the VA is
operating at the mandated levels of capacity for health care delivery
for all specialized services. Unfortunately, the requirement for the
capacity report expired in 2008.
PVA has made reinstatement of this annual capacity report as a
legislative priority for 2014. We would like to thank Rep. Jeff Denham
for introducing H.R. 4198, the ``Appropriate Care for Disabled Veterans
Act.'' This legislation would reinstate this critically important
capacity reporting requirement. The report affords the House and Senate
Committees on Veterans' Affairs, and the veteran stakeholders, the
ability to analyze the accessibility of VA specialized care for
veterans in such areas as SCI/D, mental health, women's health, and
polytrauma. We urge the Committee to consider this legislation as soon
as possible. Additionally, while this legislation focuses on VA
specialized services, such a reporting requirement for all of VHA every
few years would allow VA and Congress to have a more accurate
reflection of what is needed to maintain VA's Health Care System.

Structure of the Veterans Health Administration

The overall structure of the VHA has obscured accountability. By
design (and perhaps intent), the current structure places too much
unchecked power in the hands of the 21 loosely aligned VISN directors
with little evidence of operational control and accountability at the
VA Central Office level. The original vision for the VISN structure was
an efficient management system with limited staffing that would allow
the top leadership of the VHA to delegate responsibility for delivering
services. Unfortunately, the VISN system has evolved into a costly
model that has too many administrators and too much bureaucracy with
not enough nurses, clinicians, and therapists to deliver actual
services.
Legislation has been considered in recent years that would reduce
the number of VISNs significantly. We believe that the concepts of
those bills have serious merit. In fact, we believe the time has come
for the VHA to streamline itself and realign to a sharper focused group
of networks with greater control retained at the VA Central Office
level. Meanwhile, we maintain the position that Congress should not
dictate specifically how many VISNs should be established to operate
the VA Health Care System. Congress is not the appropriate entity to
determine the optimal organizational structure of the VA Health Care
System. That decision should be left to health care administrators at
the top of the VA who have experience with these matters. However, that
does not mean that significant pressure should not be brought to bear
on VA management to make changes to the VISN structure, including
reducing their numbers.
Paralyzed Veterans also has serious concerns with the
organizational realignment of the Chief Consultants of the specialized
services at the VA Central Office. Under previous leadership, the VHA
separated the Under Secretary of Health and VA Secretary by management
filters added within the hierarchy. In other words, the Chief
Consultant for SCI/D previously reported directly to the Under
Secretary of Health, but now he or she reports to the Chief of Patient
Services who reports to the Deputy Chief Under Secretary who then
reports to the Under Secretary for Health. This reporting structure
distances senior leaders from subject-matter advisers and filters
concerns, essentially making the chief consultant of SCI/D an adviser
to an adviser to an adviser who has direct access to the Under
Secretary. It has rendered consultants, who report under Policy (10P),
ineffective as they have no practical impact on the Operations (10N)
side of VHA.
This chasm between the operations and policy components of VHA
creates variability and inconsistent interpretation of VHA policies,
particularly in the SCI/D system of care. This has made it difficult to
monitor compliance with directives on critical concerns, such as timely
SCI/D patient transfer to hubs and administration of fee-basis care. It
also muddles top-down, bottom-up communication and discourages lateral
communication.
Last, the current organizational structure has allowed for
plausible deniability when serious systemic problems are identified.
Senior VHA leadership was shielded from accountability in the wake of
Legionella-related deaths in Pittsburgh, and colonoscopy-related deaths
in Columbia and Augusta. As it is, while the VA touts itself as ``One
VA,'' it really is 21 VAs (the VISNs) that function autonomously. It is
time for this to change.

Ongoing Problems With Prosthetics Procurement

The VA Prosthetic and Sensory Aids Service (PSAS) has created a
prosthetics and surgical products contracting center within the VA
Office of Acquisition and Logistics that is responsible for ordering
prosthetic devices that cost $3,000 or more. Additionally, the
``warrant transition'' process added layers of bureaucracy by inserting
a corps of administrators and acquisitions staff member into the
clinical process supposedly driven by patient needs. Similarly, VHA
downgraded the Chief Consultant for Prosthetics to a National Director
and reversed course on a procurement process that was flawed by its
former underpinning to the Federal Acquisition Regulations.
The ``warrant transition'' process placed Title 38 U.S.C. Sec. 8123
authority for purchases above the micro purchase threshold of $3,000
(customized wheelchairs, limbs, surgical implants, etc.) in the hands
of contracting specialists instead of on-site purchasing agents, thus
creating physical and temporal distance between veterans with special
needs and those who authorize purchases to meet those needs. Senior VA
and VHA leaders who have oversight of acquisitions and procurement have
made marginal progress in attempting to refine this process that is
merely adequate for many instead of the best possible process available
for all.
Unfortunately, these changes have resulted in delayed delivery of
prosthetic devices, the diminution of quality service delivery for
disabled veterans, and prolonged hospital stays for veterans waiting
for the prosthetic equipment that they need to safely move forward in
the rehabilitation process. The implementation of the new warrant
transition process has not unfolded as planned, and an increasing
number of veterans are suffering the consequences, languishing in
hospitals as in-patients, or at home without their much needed
prosthetic equipment. The VA is not communicating effectively with
veterans and stakeholders in the veterans community to learn of the
various ways that this change is impacting veterans and the delivery of
their care. PVA believes that VA's ``warrant transition'' process
deserves more attention than it is currently receiving, and we
recommend increased Congressional oversight to bring attention to the
negative outcomes that have resulted from this change and to identify
ways to address the issues.
Although the ``warrant transition'' involves a small percentage of
the total workload for the VHA, this change includes critical
prosthetic devices such as artificial limbs, wheeled mobility chairs,
and surgical implants. Delays in these procurements prove costly to
both the government, in terms of unnecessarily extended hospital stays
while awaiting equipment, and veterans, in terms of lost independence
and quality of life.

VHA Rulemaking Without Stakeholder Input

PVA has serious concerns that the VHA continues to develop new
regulations with little to no input from external stakeholders. Some
VHA workgroups are
reportedly allowing one or two veterans to participate but limited
information is offered on the details. Prosthetics directives are
currently being drafted and posted with virtually no notification
despite PVA's insistence that the rules that impact catastrophically
disabled veterans include our expertly derived and experience-based
input as they are being developed (most recently, the HISA VHA 1173
directive), not as an afterthought when collegiality must necessarily
give way to more adversarial means of engagement.

Focus on Underserved Veterans With MS and ALS

The need for multiple sclerosis (MS) and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS) systems of care are well documented. Unfortunately,
this critical need has largely ignored by senior VHA leadership. The MS
system of care directive was published but not fully implemented,
particularly with regard to staffing and funding, across all of the
VHA. It is inconsistently administered leaving some veterans with
substandard care while others enjoy the full realm of rehabilitative
therapies.
Meanwhile, the ALS directive was just approved after sitting on a
senior VA official's desk for the past five years. It was approved
without any substantive changes over that period of time. The fact that
the VHA cannot get this done in a timely manner suggests a complete
disregard for one of the most vulnerable populations of veterans. It is
simply unacceptable that the VHA's lack of action on this issue leaves
veterans with ALS with an inconsistent system.

Accredited Representative Status for VSOs

PVA believes that serious steps should be taken to strengthen
accredited representative status of Congressionally chartered veterans
service organizations in the VHA. While the Veterans Benefits
Administration (VBA) acknowledges the role of accredited
representatives pursuant to applications for VA benefits on behalf of
claimants, the accredited representative power of attorney is
misunderstood by senior leaders in the VHA. In cases where a veteran
desires to pursue a health benefit or appeal a clinical decision, some
VHA leaders will arbitrarily limit statutorily authorized access to
health information by invoking Privacy Act and HIPAA shields that have
no application, particularly when the veteran has explicitly authorized
access to records for the purpose of pursuing benefits. This creates a
system where duly appointed veterans advocates are hindered in their
ability to timely address health care issues and obtain benefits on
behalf of clients. It also stifles a process that would otherwise
reveal systemic problems. Denying access to accredited representatives
denies veteran patients an important advocate who can assist with
obtaining health care services and benefits.

VA Health Care

Ultimately, PVA believes that the quality of VA health care is
excellent, when it is accessible. In fact, as mentioned previously, VA
patient satisfaction surveys reflect that more than 85 percent of
veterans receiving care directly from the VA rate that care as
excellent (a number that surpasses satisfaction in the private sector).
The fact is that the most common complaint from veterans who are
seeking care or who have already received care in the VA is timely
access. PVA cannot deny that there are serious access problems around
the country. The broad array of staff shortages that we previously
mentioned in our statement naturally lead to the access problems that
VA is facing across the nation. Many of the problems that the media
continues to report are really access problems, not quality of care
problems. While there are many detractors of the VA who would like to
convince veterans and the public at large that the VA is providing poor
quality care, that is simply not true. In fact, the complaints of
veterans about access often ring true about health care delivery in
private hospitals and clinics as well. It is no secret that wait times
for appointments for specialty care in the private sector tend to be
extremely long.
We believe many of the access problems facing the VA Health Care
System are the responsibility of Congress and the Administration
together. The Administration (and previous Administrations) has
requested wholly insufficient resources to meet the ever-growing demand
for health care services, while at the same time attempting to fragment
the VHA health system framework. Meanwhile, it has committed to
operation improvements and management efficiencies that are not
adequate enough to fill the gaps in funding. Similarly, Congress has
been equally responsible for this problem as it continues to provide
insufficient funding through the appropriations process to meet the
needs of veterans seeking care.
For many years, the co-authors of The Independent Budget--AMVETS,
Disabled American Veterans, Paralyzed Veterans of America, and Veterans
of Foreign Wars--have advocated for sufficient funding for the VA
Health Care System, and the larger VA. In recent years, our
recommendations have been largely ignored by Congress. Our
recommendations reflect a thorough analysis of health care utilization
in the VA and full and sufficient budget recommendations to address
current and future utilization. Moreover, our recommendations are not
clouded by the politics of fiscal policy. Despite the recommendations
of The Independent Budget for FY 2015 (released in February of this
year), the House approved earlier this year an appropriations bill for
the VA that we believe is nearly $2.0 billion short for VA health care
in FY 2015 and approximately $500 million short for FY 2016.
While we understand that significant pressure continues to be
placed on federal agencies to hold down spending and Congress has moved
more toward fiscal restraint in recent years, the health care of
veterans outweighs those priorities. If Congress refuses to acknowledge
that it has not provided sufficient resources for the VA, and that many
of these access problems that are being reported around the country are
a result of those decisions, then we will. Until Congress and the
Administration make a serious commitment to providing sufficient
resources so that adequate staffing and capacity can be established in
the VA Health Care System, access will continue to be a problem.
Additionally, inadequate funding for VA infrastructure has weakened
the capacity of the VA to provide care to veterans. This year the
Administration requested $561 million for Major Construction. This
included funding for only four primary projects and secondary
construction costs--despite a backlog of construction projects that
requires a minimum of $23 billion over the next 10 years in order to
maintain adequate and serviceable infrastructure.
If the Administration refuses to properly address this construction
funding problem, then we ask Congress to fill this void. There is no
doubt that the new funding (approximately $6.0 billion) requested by
Secretary Gibson last week is critically needed. The Independent Budget
has repeatedly expressed concerns with the woefully inadequate funding
requests submitted by the Administration (and previous Administrations)
and the amounts provided by Congress. Ultimately, if VA is not provided
sufficient resources to address the critical infrastructure needs
throughout the system, it will have no choice but to seek care options
in other settings, particularly the private sector. Maintaining the
capacity of the VA as a comprehensive health care provider and
increasing the number of veterans seeking care within the private
community is fiscally impossible. Therefore, funding VA's
infrastructure needs is critical to its ability to provide safe,
quality health care.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, we appreciate your
commitment to ensuring that veterans receive the best health care
available. We also appreciate the fact that this Committee has
functioned in a generally bipartisan manner over the years.
Unfortunately, even veterans issues are now held hostage to political
gridlock and partisan wrangling. It is time for this to stop! Political
interests do not come before the needs of the men and women who have
served and sacrificed for this country. We call on this Committee,
Congress as a whole, and the Administration to redouble your efforts to
ensure that veterans get the absolute best health care provided when
they need it, not when it is convenient. PVA's members and all veterans
will not stand for anything less.
This concludes my statement. I would be happy to answer any
questions that you may have.

Information Required by Rule XI 2(g)(4) of the House of
Representatives
Pursuant to Rule XI 2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives,
the following information is provided regarding federal grants
and contracts.
Fiscal Year 2013
National Council on Disability--Contract for Services--$35,000.
Fiscal Year 2012
No federal grants or contracts received.
Fiscal Year 2011

Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, administered by the Legal
Services Corporation--National Veterans Legal Services Program--
$262,787.
William Carl Blake, Acting Associate Executive Director for
Government Relations, Paralyzed Veterans of America, 801 18th Street
NW., Washington, D.C. 20006, (202) 416-7708.
Carl Blake is the Acting Associate Executive Director for
Government Relations for Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) at its
National Office in Washington, D.C. He is responsible for the planning,
coordination, and implementation of PVA's National Legislative and
Advocacy Program agendas with the United States Congress and federal
departments and agencies. He develops and executes PVA's Washington
agenda in areas of budget, appropriations, health care, and veterans
benefits issues, as well as disability civil rights. He also represents
PVA to federal agencies including the Department of Defense, Department
of Labor, Small Business Administration, the Department of
Transportation, Department of Justice, and the Office of Personnel
Management. He coordinates all activities with PVA's Association of
Chapter Government Relations Directors as well with PVA's Executive
Committee, Board of Directors, and senior leadership.
Carl was raised in Woodford, Virginia. He attended the United
States Military Academy at West Point, New York. He received a Bachelor
of Science degree from the Military Academy in May 1998.
Upon graduation from the Military Academy, he was commissioned as a
Second Lieutenant in the Infantry in the United States Army. He was
assigned to the 2nd Battalion, 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment (1st
Brigade) of the 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
He graduated from Infantry Officer Basic Course, U.S. Army Ranger
School, U.S. Army Airborne School, and Air Assault School. His awards
include the Army Commendation Medal, Expert Infantryman's Badge, and
German Parachutist Badge. Carl retired from the military in October
2000 due to injuries suffered during a parachute training exercise.
Carl is a member of the Virginia Mid-Atlantic chapter of the
Paralyzed Veterans of America.
Carl lives in Fredericksburg, Virginia, with his wife, Venus; son,

Jonathan; and daughter, Brooke.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

[all]
