- CREATING EFFICIENCY THROUGH COMPARISON: AN EVALUATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CREATING EFFICIENCY THROUGH COMPARISON:

AN EVALUATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR BEST

PRACTICES AND THE VA HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-81

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

89-380 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              DINA TITUS, Nevada
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
DAVID JOLLY, Florida
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Nancy Dolan, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Wednesday, July 16, 2014

Creating Efficiency Through Comparison: An Evaluation of Private
Sector Best Practices and the VA Health Care System............     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Jeff Miller, Chairman.......................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    45

Hon. Michael Michaud, Ranking Minority Member....................     2
Prepared Statement...........................................    45
Corrine Brown
Prepared Statement...........................................    46

WITNESSES

Richard J. Umbdenstock FACHE, President and Chief Executive
Officer, American Hospital Association.........................     4
Prepared Statement...........................................    47
Monte D. Brown M.D., Vice President for Administration and
Secretary, Duke University Health System Associate Dean of
Veterans Affairs, Duke University School of Medicine...........     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    51
Daniel F. Evans Jr., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Indiana University Health......................................     7
Prepared Statement...........................................    66
Rulon Stacey PhD., FACHE, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Fairview Health Services.......................................     9
Prepared Statement...........................................    70
Quinton D. Studer, Founder, Studer Group, Inc....................    11
Prepared Statement...........................................    73

FOR THE RECORD

The Boston Globe Article.........................................    73

CREATING EFFICIENCY THROUGH COMPARISON: AN EVALUATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR

BEST PRACTICES AND THE VA HEALTH CARE SYSTEM

Wednesday, July 16, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Walorski, Michaud,
Takano, Brownley, Ruiz, Negrete McLeod, Kuster, O'Rourke, Walz

OPENING STATEMENT OF JEFF MILLER, CHAIRMAN

The Chairman. Good morning, everybody.
The Committee will come to order.
Welcome to today's full committee hearing entitled,
``Oversight, Creating Efficiency Through Comparison: An
Evaluation of Private Sector Best Practices and the VA Health
Care System.''
Over the last eight weeks, the Committee has held ten full-
committee hearings encompassing just over 35 hours of
testimony. You know, at these hearings, we have heard from VA
leaders and a diverse collection of expert witnesses about the
many and varied access accountability, integrity, and data-
reliability failures that are plaguing the Department of
Veterans' Affairs health care and benefits system.
In their testimony this morning, the American Hospital
Association states that, ``Successful organizations have
cultures that set clear, measurable, and actionable goals and
make sure that they are communicated to and understood by all
employees, embrace transparency, and engage their clinicians as
partners, not as employees.'' By this measure, which I believe
is a fair one, the VA health care organization as we know it
today cannot be considered a successful organization. VA has
failed to set and embrace clear measurable and actionable
access and accountability goals, as evidenced by a recent
Administration report which stated that VA's 14-day scheduling
standard was, and I quote, ``Arbitrary, ill-defined, and
misunderstood,'' unquote. VA's culture tends to minimize
problems or refuse to acknowledge problems altogether.
VA has failed to embrace transparency, as evidenced by the
115 outstanding deliverable requests dating back more than two
years that this Committee continues to wait for. VA has failed
to engage their clinician workforce as partners, as evidenced
by the numerous whistleblowers who have come forward to share
their stories of retribution and reprisal and many more who
continue to call our office, yet, understandably, are reluctant
to come forward publicly.
Our veterans deserve a VA that works for them, not one that
refuses to work at all. Improvement and innovation are
necessary, but neither can thrive in a bureaucratic vacuum. And
with any vacuum, nature fills it with whatever is available,
and in this case it is questionable care, falsified performance
and abuse of employees.
During this morning's hearing, we are going to discuss how
the Department, and by extension, how our nation's veterans can
move forward from this summer of scandal and create the VA
Health Care System our veterans deserve by leveraging the best
practices used by non-VA providers and private sector health
care organizations.
On our witness panel today we have two Malcolm Baldrige
National Quality Award winners, a former VA physician, two
high-performing VA academic affiliates, and a national advocacy
organization representing more than 5,000 hospitals, health
care networks, and care providers. Though VA or though VA's
organization and patient population may have certain
demographic qualities, there are valuable lessons to be learned
from health care standard bearers and leaders that, if heeded,
could vastly and rapidly improve the care that our veterans
receive.
As I stated, during the hearing at the very beginning of
this intense Committee oversight process, the Department got to
where it is today due to a perfect storm; a perfect storm
believing its own rhetoric and trusting its status quo as a
sacred cow that was immune from criticism and internal revolt.
VA cannot continue business as usual. The status quo is
unacceptable. It is time for a change, change that embraces
both new ideas and proven practices.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Jeff Miller appears in
the Appendix]

And with that, I would yield to the ranking member for his
opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL MICHAUD, RANKING MINORITY
MEMBER

Mr. Michaud. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and good
morning.
I appreciate that we are continuing to gather valuable
information about what works and what doesn't work in the
Department of Veterans Affairs Health Care System. This
information is guiding our efforts to reform the Department and
ensure that our veterans receive quality, safe, timely health
care where and when they need it. I am looking forward to the
testimony that we are going to hear this morning from our
panelists on best practices in the private sector. I believe
that we should always strive to do better, and I think that we
can learn and get some good ideas in areas where private sector
health care providers have had great successes in either
tackling or outright avoiding many of the problems that we are
confronting today in the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
One area where I think we need to hear more from the
private sector is related to scheduling and patient medical
records. Clearly, the scheduling practices and technology
within the department are not working. The system can be
manipulated. There is no standardization and patients are not
getting seen in a timely fashion and I would be interested in
hearing about some of the scheduling models of various private
sector organizations-uses. Getting patients seen right away
before their medical conditions are allowed to worsen
absolutely must be one of our first priorities.
Also, the Department has clearly struggled to anticipate
and plan accordingly for a surge of veterans seeking to access
the health care system as we continue winding down the wars. I
would like to hear how other health facilities have developed
strategic plans and are tailored to the current and anticipated
needs of their specific population. I believe that in order for
us to maintain progress on things like the wait list, the
backlog, the VA needs to do a better job of looking a few years
down the line, figuring out what regional and local veterans
population needs will be and plan accordingly.
We should also keep in mind the VA provides a number of
specialty services for our veterans that just can't be found in
the private sector. Despite the many problems throughout the VA
system, it remains a system best suited to meet our veterans'
health care needs across the entire episode of care.
As we all know, our veterans generally have greater health
care concerns and are older than the general population. The VA
has developed a bench of medical professionals who are trained
to treat the specific--to service specific needs of veterans
better than most. That includes issues like prosthetics, spinal
cord injury, and inpatient mental illness services. Also, a
higher number of medical professionals in our country, more
than 60 percent, trained at the VA medical facilities. I want
to be clear: I am not looking at talking about privatizing VA
care, I am talking strengthening the health care system that is
uniquely suited to serve the needs of our veterans with best
practices that are working in the private sector.
And I would like to thank the panelists once again who are
here this morning. I look forward to hearing your testimony
today. I think we can learn a lot from the private sector and
look forward to the question and answer.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.

[The prepared statement of Hon. Michael Michaud appears in
the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much to the ranking member and
to the panel. Members will be coming in and out all morning.
There are other hearings and markups that are taking place on
the Hill this morning, so expect a little movement from up here
at the dias and we apologize for that.
Members joining us today on our first panel is Mr. Richard
Umbdenstock, the President and Chief Executive Officer of the
American Hospital Association; Dr. Monte Brown, the Vice
President and Secretary of Duke University Health System and
the Associate Dean of Veterans Affairs for the Duke University
School of Medicine; Mr. Daniel Evans, Jr., the President and
Chief Executive Officer of Indiana University Health; Dr. Rulon
Stacey, Executive Officer of Fairview Health Services; and Mr.
Quint Studer, the founder of the Studer Group, which I should
let you know is based in Pensacola, Florida, where thousands
live like millions wish they could.
So it is great to have all of you here today and Mr.
Umbdenstock, you have five minutes for your opening statement.
Thank you, sir.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD J. UMBDENSTOCK

Mr. Umbdenstock. Thank you, Chairman Miller, and Ranking
Member Michaud and Members of the Committee. I am Richard
Umbdenstock, the President and CEO of the American Hospital
Association and I appreciate the opportunity to speak on behalf
of our 5,000 member hospitals, health systems and other health
care organizations. For decades, the VA has been there for our
veterans in times of need and it does extraordinary work under
very challenging circumstances for a growing and complex
patient population. The nation's private sector hospitals have
a longstanding history of collaboration with the VA and stand
ready to assist them and our veterans as they seek solutions to
today's challenges.
Health care delivery is most effective when it is tailored
to the unique needs of patients and the community; it is not a
one-size-fits-all enterprise. All hospitals are committed to
providing the right care at the right time and the right
setting. Many hospitals are borrowing process improvement
programs like the Baldrige criteria for performance excellence,
the Lean process and Six Sigma for manufacturing, all to
optimize the patient experience, lower costs and improve
overall quality.
Each hospital is unique, so leadership must select the
method that it believes will work best for its organization;
however, quality improvement efforts generally involve five
steps: Identify target areas for improvement; then determine
what processes can be modified to improve outcomes; then
develop and execute effective strategies for improving quality;
track the performance and outcomes, and disseminate the results
to spur broader quality improvement. Successful health care
providers have cultures that set clear, measurable and
actionable goals, communicate them clearly and make sure that
they are understood by the employees, as the chairman noted in
his opening comments. They measure the results and share them
widely. They embrace clinicians as partners. They use
standardized nomenclature and processes and they undertake
multiple incremental changes revising and adjusting as they go.
Nationally, hospitals are harnessing the power of
collaboration to dramatically improve the quality and safety of
patient care. The AHA's Health Research and Educational Trust
administers the largest hospital engagement Network under the
HHS Partnership for Patients. In the first two years of that
program, participating hospitals in that Hospital Engagement
Network reduced early elective deliveries by 57 percent,
pressure ulcers by 26 percent, central line associated
bloodstream infections by NICUs by 23 percent, ventilator-
associated pneumonia NICUs by 13 percent and across all units
by 34 percent, and hospital readmissions within 30 days for
heart failure by 13 percent. HHS estimates that the HEN program
as a whole has prevented nearly 15,000 deaths, avoided nearly
560,000 patient injuries and saved almost $4 billion dollars.
These lessons in collaboration are valuable models for
development and dissemination of operational best practices.
Other witnesses can speak more directly about what has worked
in their organizations, but I can share a few principles around
scheduling. For primary care, the Institute for Health Care
Improvement recommends an opening scheduling system in which
physicians begin the day with more than half of their slots
available. Same-day appointments are made regardless of the
type of care needed. Open-access scheduling may be ideal in the
private care setting, but it is not always feasible.
In specialized care, for example, capacity is more limited
and testing and consultations may be needed before appointments
can be scheduled. To be successful, open-access scheduling
requires understanding and measuring patient flow so capacity
problems can be identified quickly and resolved at the
appropriate point. On-going monitoring of continuous
improvements necessary, and staffing is also critical.
AHA applauds Congress in its speedy action in passing
legislation to allow veterans to more easily secure care from
civilian providers. As you resolve the differences between the
House and Senate bills, we urge you to adopt several specific
principles to ease veterans access. First, retain and
strengthen language that would enable hospitals to continue to
contract directly with their local VA facilities, rather than
going through a manage-care director--contractor, excuse me.
Second, to facilitate veterans access we must avoid barriers,
such as pre-clearance permission to utilize civilian providers,
so that veterans who meet the criteria can be seen by a
physician or a hospital of their choice close to home. Third,
Congress must provide adequate reimbursement rates for non-VA
providers, and we support the House payment language. And
finally, the AHA urges conferees [sic] to insert language to
establish and implement a system of prompt payment for claims
from non-VA providers, similar to the Medicare Program.
In conclusion, the VA does extraordinary work under very
difficult circumstances. I am confident the system's current
operational challenges can be overcome and that in the interim,
private sector hospitals can help. Thank you very much.

[The prepared statement of Richard Umbdenstock appears in
the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Brown.

STATEMENT OF MONTE D. BROWN

Dr. Brown. Good morning. Thank you for allowing me to speak
today for something that I have been passionate about for 30
years: the care of our veterans. I am currently the Vice
President Secretary of the Duke University Health Care System
and Associate Dean for the VA Affairs for the Duke University
School of Medicine, so I am intimately involved in the issues
that the VA faces today.
My past involvement of the VA includes medical training,
six years as an employee at the Palo Alto VA where I served in
many different roles, including the associate chief of staff of
inventory care and the assistant chief of the medical service.
My administrative career was a very unusual one in that it
began as a battlefield promotion during the earthquake of 1989
where I was suddenly thrust into the role of evacuating the
Palo Alto VA four months after medical training. My greatest
professional accomplishment also includes the VA, as it was the
creation of the Menlo Park Willow Clinic. This is the only
clinic that I know of today where a county health system, the
VA and two private hospitals came together for the benefit of
all the parties, mainly the patients. They said it couldn't be
done, but it lasted 20 years.
I am proud of the overall improvement of the quality of
care of the VA system over the years and I am proud to say that
my brother and stepfather continue to receive care in the VA
system. My mother insisted today that I tell you how
appreciative she is of the care that they are receiving or I
wouldn't be allowed home.
The Chairman. Let the record reflect that you delivered
that message.
Dr. Brown. So my goal here today is to improve the system,
rather than be critical. We should not forget that the VA is
doing many things well, and in some cases, doing it better than
the private sector.
The VA has tremendous VA research awards, the VA mail
pharmacist system, the teleradiology program, the medication
monitoring by nonphysicians and the use of non-face-to-face
encounters by the VAs are great examples.
What the VA lacks that the private sector benefits from is
flexibility. The VA has so prescribed the programs and
centralized the big three of IT, H.R., and local contracting
that the local entities can no longer maximize the use of their
resources and make rapid adjustments to meet the needs of their
patients. There is no one-size-fits-all approach, just look at
the population density of our veterans by county. What works in
Boston won't work in rural North Carolina where you may not
even find good Internet access.
From the perspective of those who live it every day, the
problems are only getting worse. First, contracting: The
regionalization of contracting continues to be the single-most
frequent complaint I hear both internally and externally. With
the exception of the purchase of bulk supply, centralization of
contracting by the VA has only created a large layer of
inefficiency and unnecessary rules.
I want to highlight one example that is pertinent to the
current issues of the patient access that you are undertaking
today: the leasing of space. Current local management can only
approve a lease up to $300,000, even if the medical center can
only provide one room per provider, which is very inefficient
and has a growing population. It would take them years to lease
space under the current rules.
One quick way to improve access would be to more broadly
define the use of sharing agreements with the academic
affiliate to include use of academic excess. If it were allowed
today, Duke could offer the VA over 40 examine rooms with an
existing building within weeks to months, not years; a
collaborative effort.
Second is information systems. Weil the VA has an excellent
centralized clinical information system, the VA and the private
sector trends differ in two ways. First, the private sector
trend is toward purchasing EMRs, rather than continuing to
invest in what has now become a commodity, rather than a
differentiator. We all need to have electronic record.
Second, the VA has divorced IS from the clinical operations
by segregating it into a separate reporting structure. Simple
things like having computers and scanners or updating outdated
telephone switches to improve customer service are no longer
within the purview of the local director. The VA should return
deployment decisions back to the local entities. I can't
imagine telling a CEO of a private hospital they can't purchase
a new PC.
Third is the H.R., the private sector mantra is that we
need all clinicians working at the top of their license. One
example where this may not be happening is the Patient Aligned
Care Team model where the VA RN-to-provider staff ratio is
three to four times that in the private sector. The VA needs to
maximize the use of RNPs, physician assistants and physicians
by providing the appropriate non-clinical support staff so the
clinicians can practice at the top of their license.
I believe that the VA needs a fundamental cultural change
in the hours of operation. I don't know of a private clinic
that closes at 4:30 p.m. Extending to 5:00 p.m. would add five
million visits without any capital investments by the
Government. The VA should also review and consolidate all
mandatory annual training for providers which reportedly takes
a full week per year, thus decreasing provider productivity.
The VA could also clarify that it is legal for the full and
part-time providers to perform services at non-VA facilities
while on their VA tour. This would allow the VA providers to
provide procedural access without increasing fixed facility
costs. I do want to mention, since it will impact the future
leadership of the VA that the current VA pay system limits the
VA's ability to attract and retain the best physician leaders,
as physicians actually can take a pay increase if they take on
important administrative responsibilities like the chief of
staff position.
In closing, we should remember the VA and the private
sector each have their own strengths and weaknesses. Only a
thoughtful, flexible, and accountable, patient and family-
centered approach will deliver the care our veterans deserve.
It is time to entertain bold ideas rather than protectionalism
and incrementalism. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Monte D. Brown appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you.
And, Mr. Evans, welcome. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL F. EVANS, JR.

Mr. Evans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and special thanks to
the Congresswoman from Indiana where we have numerous
facilities in her district and we appreciate being here today
on behalf of Hoosiers and especially Hoosiers in her district.
First of all, I adopt, by reference, everything that Dr.
Brown and Mr. Umbdenstock said as if I said it myself and that
will shorten my comments just a little bit. At the present
time, I am actually Chair of the Health and Quality Committee
of the Hospital Association in Indiana which deals with the HEN
and the Partnership for Patients Project and I can tell you
that private hospitals that fully incorporate the Partnership
for Patients idea will be those that are the most efficient and
provide the highest quality care.
IU Health is Indiana's largest and most comprehensive
academic health system and one of the busiest health systems in
the United States. We have a unique partnership with the IU
School of Medicine, the nation's second largest medical school,
and as such, have frequent interactions with the education
facilities of the VA.
Like the VA system, the IU Health system is both complex
and diverse. Our patients range from those with basic primary
care needs in rural and urban areas to those with the most
complex or severe ailments imaginable. It is not easy to change
any large and complex health organization, whether it is IU
Health or the VA, but I would like to respond specifically to
the comments that the ranking member made about scheduling and
get those into the record
To that end, IU Health has been part of a system wide
strategic plan effort, meaning assessment of what the core
customer, the patient, needs. We at an aggressive, but
achievable goal of 25 percent efficiency over the--efficiency
improvement over the next four to five years. What that means
is that without spending any additional money on bricks and
mortar, we will be able to treat more people. That is a private
sector idea, been around a long time and I will remark on it in
just a second.
So, therefore, we have established an office of
transformation to change the way that the work is done
throughout our organization. A key tool in implementing this
transformation is the Lean process, which Rich referred to a
moment ago. But where did we go to train our senior staff,
including me? We went to DOW--Eli Lilly and Subaru, all of whom
are located in Indiana and we had all of our senior leaders
mandatorily attend their Lean training. These are places that
have succeeded and failed in implementing Lean and we learned a
heck of a lot--I won't call any of them out, they all did a
fantastic job--but they were all impressed that we were trying
to transform ourselves to be more like them than the other way
around and warned us that this would be difficult, that this
journey is not easy because it requires a change in culture.
If I were to say one thing is the key attribute to that
change in culture, it would be focus on one thing. We only have
one customer in health care and it is the patient. That is it.
There are no other customers in health care. I will leave this
hearing in a few minutes and go to Arlington National Cemetery
where by complete coincidence, my father-in-law will be buried.
If he were alive, he would tell you that he knows the people
who have benefitted from VA care from his generation. He also
is aware of people from subsequent generations, of which there
are many more, who could benefit more from a different kind of
VA than he had when he was a young man.
With the assistance of outside consultants, which
specialize in Lean transformation, we have successfully
implemented Lean. We have done hundreds of rapid improvement
events, all of which have led to higher patient satisfaction
and reduction in things like 30-day readmission rates and the
things that Rich mentioned. But specifically with regard to
same-day appointments--I think I have a slide on that--it beats
the heck out of me why someone can't make an appointment the
same way I made my airplane ticket and boarding pass to get
here in the last 24 hours. I just don't understand it.
So we have been experimenting within IU Health and this is
the output. What you see is the self-service page for our
smallest hospital, by the way, in White County, Indiana,
Monticello, where the County Board of Economic Development came
to us and said to us, can you help us improve the health care
in White County, Indiana--too much off time. In other words,
privates or just ordinary people are just spending too much
time of off work to get to, obviously, to the doctor. This is a
part of a Lean process.
Now we have essentially a zero wait time. People make their
appointments at their convenience. Remember what I said about
Lean, it is about the patients not about us. So the thing that
Rich referred to about physicians and us are going to have
vacancies on our daily schedule, you can't make same-day
appointments if you overbook the plane, right? So that is the
cultural change. People have to accept that. So that won't work
unless you have things like EMR and things like that and so
forth
So our academic affiliates, that is the VA--we are very
proud of our affiliation, we are committed, as you are, to
ensure our nation's veterans receive the care they deserve. IU
Health stands ready to work with this Committee to succeeded in
achieving that goal. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, and please pass along
our condolences and thanks to the family you will be joining
out at Arlington today for your father-in-law's service.
Mr. Evans. Thank you. I can't tell my mother, but I can
tell my mother-in-law, so thanks.
The Chairman. Thank you.

Dr. Stacey, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF RULON STACEY

Dr. Stacey. Thank you. Good morning.
My name is Rulon Stacey. I am President and Chief Executive
Officer of Fairview Health Services, an integrated, academic
health system, based in Minneapolis, Minnesota, serving more
than 600,000 people each year. I am also honored to currently
serve as the Chair of Board overseers of the Malcolm Baldrige
National Quality Award, the world's leading performance
excellence criteria. The Baldrige Award was created by an act
of Congress 25 years ago to improve America's performance in
its competitive standing in the world.
Thank you Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud, Members
of the Committee, for this opportunity to speak with you today.
I, myself, am honored to be a veteran of the United States
Air Force. That background gives me an enhanced interest on the
topic under consideration today. I also bring my perspective
from nearly 30 years of health care administration experience.
I have worked in a variety of public health care systems in
rural, suburban and urban markets. Based on this diverse
background, I would suggest that while the issues faced by the
VA today are significant, they present you with problems
similar in nature to the issues each of our systems are facing,
specifically how do we increase access and quality in light of
the limited resources.
Like my health system and others in the country, Congress
is wrestling with how to deliver the care our veterans deserve
without breaking the bank. As the American Hospital Association
has suggested, health care needs are unique and health care
needs to be tailored to the individual; however, the processes
by which we can improve clinical outcomes are not unique. The
challenge, I would suggest is to find proven improvement
methodologies that cross care settings that can benefit any
health care organization, including the VA.
To this end, we are fortunate in the United States to have
the world's finest process to address these issues. The Malcolm
Baldrige Performance Excellence Program located at the National
Institute of Standards and Technology in the Department of
Commerce is a public/private partnership that defines, promotes
and recognizes performance excellence in United States
organizations. Some organizations choose to pursue the actual
Baldrige Award which carries the presidential seal and award
recipients then share their best practices with others. Best of
all, the program is up and running and available to help the VA
right now at no additional cost.
The program initially revolutionized manufacturing in the
United States and is now having the same effect on health care.
In 38 hospitals that were Baldrige Award finalists, the overall
risk adjusted mortality rate was 7 and a half percent lower;
the patient's safety index, more than 8 percent better; and
risk-adjusted complication index, 1.3 percent better than in
3,000 peer hospitals. Using a simple extrapolation, a
comparable improvement in mortality in U.S. hospitals would
save more than 54,000 lives and nearly $2 billion dollars
annually.
As a recipient of the Baldrige Award at a prior
organization, I experienced firsthand the power of the Baldrige
Performance Excellence Program. Using the program as an
improvement roadmap, we improved patient satisfaction for ten
consecutive years. Our risk adjusted mortality rate improved to
arrange among the top 10 percent nationally. Additionally, by
improving staff motivation and empowering the staff to be
innovative, we were able to decrease employee turnover from 25
percent to less than 5 percent and we achieved national
rankings in the top 10 person for physician loyalty. While
driving these improvements, we also created efficiencies,
freeing up resources and other abilities to invest in our
clinical care.
This process works and it is instantly available. It works
because engages physicians and nurses and staff in identifying
improvement opportunities and then engages them in duplicating
best practices, so each and every patient we serve receives the
best care possible.
On a national level, our health care providers have much to
learn from one another. In fact, the VA, in the past has led
the industry in identifying sharing best practice research. The
precursor to the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program,
the nation's leading surgical best practice tool, came from VA
research and best practice hearing. I know that the American
Hospital Associations and organizations like mine throughout
the country stand ready to help revitalize this process and
lend any assistance we can to search for leading-edge ideas on
how to improve quality while reducing costs.
Those services at Fairview, where we serve annually, 5.8
million patient encounters and 1.5 million clinic visits, allow
us to be able to interact with you, interact with the American
Hospital Association, identify best practices, and share them
across the country as we mutually find the alternative that
will best meet our needs. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Rulon Stacey appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Studer, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF QUINTON D. STUDER

Mr. Studer. Well, thank you.

My name is Quint Studer. I am the founder of the Studer
Group. I am hearing impaired. I am completely deaf on my right
side. I hear just a little bit on my left side. So if I miss
anything, I apologize. Many people ask me questions about
hearing impaired and normally it is how do you get to be
hearing impaired? It is not a bad option sometimes.
One of the things I have looked at--and I am not going to
repeat these distinguished gentlemen, they said great, great
comments, but I would be real careful not to fall into
terminally uniqueness and where I see most health care falls
into trouble is when they come up and think they are so unique
that there can't be a standardized approach to performance
improvement.
Autonomy does not create high performance. Standardization
and frequency creates high performance, and normally when I
look at--we do a lot of research at Studer Group. I started out
at--I don't have a master's degree in health care
administration or an MBA--I started out at a 35-bed hospital
and then I went to a larger inner-city hospital in Chicago,
where we were hospital of the year; then I went to a large
hospital in Florida, where we were hospital of the year; and
then we formed the Studer Group. We work with over 900 health
care systems in the United States. We also work in Saudi
Arabia, Canada, and we work in Australia, so we allegation
understand the capitated payment system and how that works,
because I think there is not more money, but there can be more
efficiency and more effectiveness and that is where we come
from.
We go into a health care system and if the first thing we
tell them is you need to spend more, we probably won't work
with have many. We have to talk to them about how do you better
utilize your resources? The mission statement at the Studer
Group is to make health care better, for patients to receive
care, employees to work, and physician to practice medicine.
So while we all have different approaches, if I went to the
doctor and Rulon went to the doctor--and we are fortunate
enough to work with Rulon and Danny over the years--certainly I
would have some differences, but there would be a lot of
standardized processes that would happen also. We find the
difficulty is not that people can't identify best practices; it
is people can't implement best practices.
Thomas Edison says that, you know, a vision without
execution is hallucination. That is usually what we get. Ralph
Waldo Emerson says that people like to be settled, but it is
only by unsettling them is there any real hope. And I thank you
because you are unsettling some things right now, but you are
unsettling things because you want things to be better, and
with that, there is hope. There is hope that people have better
access, better care, and so on.
A couple points as I wrap up in these last two minutes is
the employee, and that is who I want to talk about in the next
minute. Research basically shows that if you leave out the most
important person in the VA system, you won't reach the patient,
and that is the employee. I happen to believe that most
employees who get up every day with great purpose. My grandson
is in a burn center right now from an accident this summer at
the University of Wisconsin Hospital System. I happen to
believe that every day when those nurses, doctors, occupational
therapists, physical therapists go into his room, they want
nothing but the better care for Cooper Kennedy. I believe the
VA is same way. I think you have a number of probably wonderful
employees, and what we find is that if you don't get the
employee with you by capturing their heart and mind, you will
never be able to execute, no matter what process and
improvement you work.
I don't know if the VA does an employee engagement
diagnostic, but that is where I would start. I would start
finding out what do your employees feel. They will fell you
exactly who your better leaders are; who could use some skill
development; what works; what doesn't work. Because employee
engagement connects to mortality. No longer is it just about
employee satisfaction; it is about employee engagement.
The University of Alabama Birmingham study on employee
engagement shows that if you want to improve patient safety and
process improvement, you have to have high employee engagement
or else you are wasting your money; you are wasting your
resources because you have to capture the hearts and minds of
your employees.
We have done a number of studies--and I will wrap up with
our studies--we have done more studies on this than anybody
else in the industry. Our studies show high-performing
organizations have some commonalities. Sure, they have
uniqueness, whether they are in Minnesota, Indiana or North
Carolina, but they have a lot the same. Number one, they are
led by relentless leaders and that means they are relentless to
achieve measurable outcomes, as Richard said.
Number two, they have a good evaluation system. There is no
subjectivity; it is an objective evaluation system. Sort of
like in Pensacola when a pilot lands on a ship, they have
objective measurement on how well he does; it is not
subjective.
The third thing is they invest in middle-management
training. Nobody feels more pressure than that middle manager
and most of our middle managers are promoted from within with
little skill development.
Number four, they connect with the employees. They make
sure that the employee understands what is happening.
And lastly, they connect to the why. People don't need
purpose leads and there is no better purpose than I can think
of right now than to make sure that our veterans get the very
best in health care, so by connecting that to the why, people
comply, but if we don't connect back to the why, people don't
comply. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony. We
will do a single round of questions and then Members, if you
have additional questions, I am sure that the panel would be
willing to take them.
Concurrent with your testimony this morning, the Acting
Secretary Sloan Gibson is over in the Senate testifying before
the Senate VA Committee. I got a copy of the news release that
they have sent out on the secretary's testimony and basically
it boils down to the Department needing an additional $17.8
billion dollars in additional resources for the remainder of
2014 through 2017, and so what VA is saying is we need more
money and we need more space. I'd like to ask if you would give
us a brief synopsis of if you think that that will solve the
problem.
Mr. Umbdenstock.
Mr. Umbdenstock. Well, we certainly understand that the VA
didn't find itself in this situation overnight and it is going
to take some work to get it where it needs to be. We certainly
ready to survey our members--I have offered this to the acting
secretary in person--to do whatever we can with our reach. We
communicate daily with the 5,000 private sector hospitals and
health systems to find out what capacity they might have to Dr.
Brown's comment about being able to provide it much more
quickly, than on a capital investment basis, so we stand ready
to do that, if that would be of help.
The Chairman. Dr. Brown.
Dr. Brown. Not having seen a breakdown of that, I can't
tell you----
The Chairman. I haven't seen it either.
Dr. Brown [continuing]. The likelihood, but I think that,
you know, one of the things, as I pointed out, there are things
that they can do to increase, quote ``space capacity without
building new space.'' But, in fact, I think the VA should
predominately be looking at leasing space.
If you look at the VA's data from 2012, only 10 percent of
VA space is leased. I would venture to guess that that is 30--
that ours is 40 percent or more is leased space. You can then
flex based on your patient needs of when and where you need it,
so if a lot of that money is in actual outpatient facilities, I
would probability, if it were in the private sector, being
looking to lease that space. But space alone won't do it. You
need the providers to go along with it.
The Chairman. Mr. Evans.
Mr. Evans. To paraphrase Quint, this is an area where you
can't do it alone. Right out my window at 10th and Senate in
downtown Indianapolis, I can see four hospitals. I can see the
VA, Riley Children's Hospital, University Hospital, Methodist
Hospital--five--and Eskenazi, the public hospital, five
hospitals. None of those hospitals is full every day, none, and
I don't know how many hundreds of thousand of square feet we
have in outpatient facilities that we have in the same area.
But there has got to be a way in an era of scarce resources to
flex in a way that takes advantage of all the resources that
are available.
To Dr. Brown's point, we have the same thing available. So
one of the advantages to Lean for us is by becoming more
efficient and cutting out waste and focusing only on the
customer, we don't need as much bricks and mortar as we thought
we did. So we are building new buildings now that are actually
smaller on a square foot basis per patient encounter than they
were before, because we are simply using the space more
efficiently.
So, again, like Dr. Brown, I haven't read what the acting
secretary had to say, but my guess is that if they leased more
space or if they collaborated with a local providers--one last
story and I will be quiet.
My last conversation--I was in southern West Virginia,
which is not rural North Carolina, but it is pretty close to
it--I happened to run into a physical therapist. I said to him,
``Tomorrow at this time, I will be before a certain Committee
of Congress, what would you like me to tell them?''
He said, ``Tell them my patients have to drive 120 miles
roundtrip from Greenbrier County, West Virginia, to Beckley,
West Virginia, to get physical therapy.''
Think about that. How many physical therapists are there in
Lewisburg, White Sulfur Springs, that are just as competent as
those in Beckley? I don't know, but that was his point, so now
I have discharged that duty to him.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Stacey.
Dr. Stacey. You know, I, too, don't know the specifics of
the request. I know if I went to my board with a huge request,
my board would require that I show to them that I had a process
in place across the system where we shared data. We were able
to prove to them showing data that we were using the best
practice, that that best practice was being driven throughout
the organization and that we had evidence-based criteria that
would show that we had the best opportunities for our patients
and our staff and then they would consider spending more money
if we were using it the best.
The Chairman. Quint.
Mr. Studer. Yeah, we do something the same thing. I don't
live in that world. You know, we work in a world where people
know they are not going to get more resources; they are
probably going to get less. If people think they are going to
get more resources, they actually don't look at improving
efficiency and effectiveness because they think somebody is
just going to give them more resources.
So, first of all, people have to know they might not get
them, so how do you make what you have work the best? I look at
things like how much hospital-acquired pneumonia do you have;
how many falls do you have; how many infections do you have?
These are all things that can be eliminated and reduced by
implementing standardized practices and that is really where
you get your efficiency and effectiveness.
I would also look at things like employee turnover, because
employee turnover at VA Voluntary Hospital Association has
shown that your turnover has a huge impact on your, again,
efficiency and effectiveness, so that is where I would go
first. I would go to look at your current measurement, what can
be taken out, and so on.
I agree with Dan. There is a lot of flexibility of even
using different types of people. A friend of mine, Steve, had
severe headaches and he called the Mayo Clinic in
Jacksonville--he lives in Pensacola--they recommended he go
there and he called up and they said we can get you in
tomorrow. And he was shocked that they could get him in
tomorrow, and they said, well, we are going to have a nurse
practitioner who specializes in headaches see you first, but
the doctor will be there.
So I think there are all sorts of standardized best
practices that you could implement prior to just throwing money
and dollars at a problem.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
One of the things that we have heard in testimony and we
have been trying to gather from VA is how much does it cost for
a patient to see VA? They cannot define that for us, and we
have had experts on this committee. Dr. Wenstrup has tried to
get that answer. Dr. Benishek has too. VA cannot tell us. The
panel of patients that a VA doc sees is 1200. The average
patient load at VA per a day is about eight and in the private
sector, it is our understanding that it is considerably more
than that.
So I think the efficiencies that VA needs to be looking at
and needs to be surveying is part of the solution as well. If
more money is needed, we understand that, but as has already
been outlined, I think, by the panel, VA has got to show how
they are going to use that money. What they have done so far is
to continually ask for more, get large increases every year and
there has been no desire on their part to deliver health care
in a timelier fashion, more efficiently, and better for the
veteran.
Mr. Takano, you are recognized.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, several--I know we haven't heard from physician
groups, but what many physician groups have told me is that
there is a looming shortage of physicians in our country
across, whether it is private sector or Government health care,
and I want to know if you would concur with that, that we face
a serious shortage.
And I have talked to my local Kaiser person who has opened
up a clinic not too far from me and he says, you know, we are
especially in the empire of California, Southern California,
facing a shortage of behavioral health people, and I know that
that has been a real struggle not VA, as far as delivering
mental health services. I know that they have been trying to
drive efficiencies through telehealth, so I want you to know
that Dina Titus, myself and Mr. O'Rourke have offered a bill
which would fund 2,000 more medical residencies at VA
hospitals.
I want to know if you think that would make a difference,
not only for the VA, but for the total supply of doctors,
including the four-year members, starting with Mr. Umbdenstock.
Mr. Umbdenstock. Umbdenstock, yes. Thank you.
Yes, the American Hospital Association is on record
supporting the increase in graduate medical education or
residency slots. They have been held constant for a long time.
And we do face a shortage, but it is not just a shortage;
it is a distribution of specialties as well. Clearly we need to
make a better case for medical students to choose primary care
residencies. We have a particular problem in the primary care
area, so we would certainly want to favor that and then we have
to think about how we can encourage people to practice in
underserved areas. And we know that people typically serve in
areas where they typically receive their training, so we want
to see those residencies strategically placed to encourage that
distribution.
You mentioned behavioral health. That is a huge problem
across the entire health care system. It has largely been
underfunded and I would say ignored in recent years and to the
VA's credit, but others as well, I think in the last five years
or so, everybody has figured out that you have to integrate
behavioral health and primary care into one practice and see
that patient who has multiple conditions at the same time. So
that is one approach that is being used.
And finally, it is not all about physicians. We can do, I
think, a lot more with the skills of nurse practitioners and
physician assistants and others in a team-based approach,
saving that physician's expertise for that true clinical--
clinically ambiguous issue where that skill and expertise is
needed and utilize others a lot more effectively.
Mr. Takano. I appreciate it.
If we can go down the line quickly.
Dr. Brown. I am going to echo some of the things that it is
not a physician shortage; it is a provider shortage, and the VA
needs to utilize that workforce. As of last week, there were
776 job postings for physicians in the VA and there were 78 PA
and RNPs. The VA pays well for the nurse practitioners and the
physicians, but the PAs, they are not able to attract because
the salaries are really too low.
So this is really a workforce issue, and I would actually
say that in order to get the workforce up and going faster--I
am going to get myself in trouble--the better dollar for
investment is actually in the nurse practitioners and PAs and
more training there first because the time for training is
shorter.
Mr. Takano. So you disagree with what the AMA and others
are saying that we are not facing a shortage in this country?
Dr. Brown. No. We have shortages, and especially, like they
said, by specialty, but if you are going to put dollars and try
to get a faster impact to the provider shortage to the VA--
remember a PA, the training varies, but from two years to four
years. A nurse practitioner start from nursing is five years
and a doctor is eight years.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you.
Go ahead, sir.
Mr. Evans. We have got hospitals all over the state of
Indiana, so we have residency programs all over. We do need to
expand residency funding. It has been frozen, I think, since
the Balance Budget Act of 1996--is that right--so it is a whole
generation.
In the meantime, the population has aged incredibly, so the
specialties that are needed have changed, not to mention the
primary care needs.
Mr. Takano. Excuse me. Is the Government--I mean I heard
that 90 percent of the residencies are funded by the Federal
Government or actually almost a hundred percent, right? Ninety
percent by Medicare?
Mr. Evans. We all have caps and we have to fund over the
cap, so I don't know about----
Mr. Takano. I see.
Dr. Brown. So below the cap is funded by the Government and
then the provider itself does any other positions above that
cap.
Mr. Evans. And I believe that we are funded only for the
pure salary and we have to come up with----
Mr. Takano. There is supplemental that you have to----
Mr. Evans. Yeah, there is more.
Dr. Brown. There is IME and GME, so at Duke we have 900
residents and fellows; 400 are funded by the Government; the
rest are funded by the Department, so the University; and a
hundred are funded by the VA. That is kind of the breakdown.
Mr. Evans. So what that means is that the clinical
operations have to subsidize the expanded residencies and in
this day and age where we are being reduced in reimbursement,
that is more challenging to do.
But one idea for you--I tried this during the Affordable
Care Act. It didn't get very far, so maybe we will get further.
Now, one of the problems is debt and where do they do their
residencies and for what. So if you have got two or three
hundred thousand dollars in debt, you are not going to do a
residency in a specialty that is not going to help you deal
with that reality. The lines don't cross now on income and debt
until you are middle aged.
So what would you do if you had to make--so I tried to do
this with Senator Snowe and Senator Bye and it didn't get
anyplace, but you have to give tax credits to get people to go
to places they don't want to go. You do it for all other
industries, don't you? We don't--we, society, does it for all
sorts of other industries, but why we don't do it to get
primary care docs in underserved areas, I don't really
understand, but we don't do it in an aggressive way.
Now, number two--I need a number two--run residency
programs where you want people to stay. There is a high
correlation between where one does one's residency and where
they end up practicing medicine. So we have a very successful
residency program in Muncie, Indiana. Not the site of a big
University. Not the site of a major community hospital,
although we have a hospital there, it is not a big academic
hospital, and it is highly successful. It keeps about half the
residents that it trains in Indiana--pretty good ratio--and we
need those residents--or we need those permanent docs in places
like Muncie. Thank you.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I----
The Chairman. No, continue.
Mr. Takano. Okay, thank you.
Go ahead.
Dr. Stacey. I would--the answer to your question is yes,
that there is a--we are in the midst of a significant decrease
in the number of physicians available in the United States and
it is an issue that we are going to have to address.
My personal argument would be that as we address the
shortage of physicians, there is a huge downstream; the cost of
that. As the supply decreases, helping us with the graduate
medical education funding today will help defer that down the
line. But we have a--the model that Quint talked about earlier,
I think is significant. We have a clinic in Eden Prairie that
adopted a team-based approach where we try to use everybody at
their highest license. We know that there is no panacea out
there. We want to make sure that the nurse practitioners are
functioning to the highest level that the nurse practitioners
can; the physicians to the highest level that the physicians
can, and so on, work in a team-based approach and address those
needs.
And for us, it is reduced wait times. It has enhanced the
delivery to patients and I think it is a model from which I
think the VA could benefit.
Mr. Studer. Thank you.
Did you mention Kaiser?
Mr. Takano. I just mentioned as someone in my community had
just opened--we have a shortage generally, but Kaiser----
Mr. Studer. In the health care system?
Mr. Takano. Yes.
Mr. Studer. We are fortunate enough to have been working
with Kaiser for many, many years. In fact, the research that I
will give you is from Kaiser.
I have a new book that I am working on. The working title
is for doctors. It is called, ``Who moved by future?'' Instead
of who moved my cheese, because that is exactly what is
happening to physicians. They are now in an environment that
they weren't trained for and it is very, very difficult.
Sixty-five percent of physicians look back and say I'm not
sure that I want to do this anywhere, so I think step one is
let's make sure that we retain the physicians we have because
if we don't--years ago, 20 years ago, it is the same thing you
heard on nursing, you know, people couldn't find nurses, and
then we made it a better place for nurses to work and that is
not an issue right now, nursing, as it is with physicians.
In our work with Kaiser--Kaiser has found out that if they
visit a physician every month with some basic questions: Do you
have what you need to provide excellent care to your patients?
It is either a yes, what are we doing right? Or it is a no,
what can we do better?
When they visit a physician and have that conversation once
a month, the physician satisfaction is pat over the 80th
percentile. If they do it every quarter, it drops down around
70. If they do it every six months, it is around 55. If they do
it once a year, it is really around 50.
So the question is: What systems and places can we put with
the current doctors in the VA system and so on to make sure
that they are feeling good about what they are doing and so on;
however, I go back to why fix an old problem with old
solutions?
And I go back to what Rulon just said here. I have skin
cancer. It was recently removed by a nurse practitioner. I
thought the care was great. I think there are some wonderful
nurse practitioners and physician assistants.
We were brought over to China to look at their health care
system, telemedicine. So I think there is a lot of better
solutions than just saying how do we get more docs. I think
that is part of it, but I think we can be much more flexible in
looking at the talent we have in the system to handle that
situation. But I, again, don't know how you measure physician
satisfaction in the VA system. How can you come up with a
treatment plan if we have never diagnosed the problem?
So we measure physician engagement currently in the VA
system because I think they will give us some pretty good
insights on what we can do to make it better. Thank you.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
The Chairman. Dr. Benishek, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, Mr. Studer, you bring up a really good point. You
know, I am a doctor. I am a general surgeon and I worked at the
VA for 20 years.
Mr. Studer. Can I come up to you to hear? Can I come your
way?
Mr. Benishek. Yeah, yeah, sure.
Mr. Studer. I don't hear well.
Mr. Benishek. Well, the point that you brought up about
physician engagement is a serious one because in talking to
physicians and myself being a VA physician, they feel they have
no input whatsoever and that the processes that they are
dealing with come from above and they don't have any input.
Do you have any suggestions? And for the rest of the panel
as well, how do we get more efficiency out of the physicians
there? What are the processes that you all use, other than like
what Mr. Studer has stated to make sure that physicians' input
is taken into account by management?
Mr. Studer, could you please start?
Mr. Studer. I will now pass along, because I know that they
worked hard on this. Health care systems that are led by
physicians normally outperform those that don't.
Mr. Benishek. Right.
Mr. Studer. And the reason is because people all want to
know where is the physician on this, because the physician,
even if they are not even in an official leadership position,
are seen as a leader in every health care system, and if they
see that the physician is doing certain behavior, everybody
follows it. When we research physicians, they basically want
input because they don't want to be hostage in a situation that
they are working in and that is how they can feel at times.
So I think, one, where are you at now? How do we make this
a better environment for you to work in? Physicians aren't
asking for more money; it is normally more efficiency, more
effectiveness, a better work environment; you know, that is
what they are looking for, and then the input. You know, nobody
knows the health care system better than a doctor, so doctors,
basically, when you ask them what satisfies them, it is give me
an opportunity to provide excellent care for my patients and
then give me input into the decision-making around here and,
again, if you are not asking them--you know, one of the
things--you know, employee engagement--physician engagement
starts out, you can almost improve it just by asking them, and,
again, I don't know how the VA is currently measuring employee
engagement.
Do they have a system in place?
Mr. Benishek. Well, it is not very pretty. The physicians
that we have talked to at the VA are very unhappy.
Dr. Brown, do you have an opinion there?
Dr. Brown. Yeah, I think the VA does do physician
engagement. The question is: What action is taken on them? They
do student engagement, actually, and they have very good
process and because there is external review by the residency
programs to then act on it, those things actually get acted on
in realtime, otherwise we lose our accreditation.
At Duke, we actually do employee engagement, not just
physician engagement, and my salary is tied to that.
Mr. Benishek. Right.
Anyone else has an opinion there?
Mr. Evans. We do the same thing and my salary is tied to
it, as well. That causes the focus of the mind, and I agree
with what has been said here. Physicians have to do this, not
corporate CEOs. Our job is to create the atmosphere in which
that can occur, and then as Quint said, assiduously,
relentlessly, measure it, and then you know.
And if you only meet with physicians every six or 12
months, right, Quint, it can never improve.
Mr. Studer. Right.
Mr. Evans. And if you meet with them frequently but never
do anything they suggest, it will actually go down. I think
this is a problem for the learned professions in general as we
kind of lose control of our daily lives that we rebel by saying
that we don't have any control and then it actually becomes a
case.
Mr. Benishek. Dr. Brown, let me ask you this: As I
understand from your written statement that you had consulted
with a visit about ten years ago on how to apply private sector
analytics to the VA system. Can you expect that they take up
any of your suggestions or tell me more about what that was.
Dr. Brown. Yes, I called myself the reluctant consultant,
that I actually like to, I would rather spend money and teach
employees rather than having consultants who then walk away. So
I agreed to consult to actually Indiana, Michigan, Detroit, Ann
Arbor, about using dialysis as a model of how the VA could then
use business analytics to decide should they insource it?
Outsource it? Especially since the VA pays for travel.
So the good news is Indiana was already the model and was
as good as the private sector. The good news is we taught then
the VA employees at the VISN how to do these analytics. And by
the time I actually issued the report the other two VAs had
actually adopted what Indiana had done.
Mr. Benishek. So we had a good experience. I am just about
out of time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Brownley, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank the
panelists for being here. I think we can all agree that the
culture in the VA has to change. And you have all testified
towards what a culture should look like. It should be patient
centered; it should be a culture of continuous improvement;
transparency; data driven decision making; teamwork, where the
team is honored for improvements and individuals within the
team are honored for improvements. So my question, I think it
is an important question but it is a broader question. What
should this committee in its oversight responsibilities do to,
what should we be looking for? And I think primarily in the
short term, I am looking at. I know we have a longer term issue
here. But what should we be looking for as an oversight
committee in the short term to determine that there is real
change taking place within the VA? And I ask the panel, anybody
could----
Dr. Stacey. Well I would suggest that, we talked earlier
about a strategic plan. And the reason for a strategic plan is
you identify where you want to go and then set objectives to
get there. If I were on this committee I would want to know
what are the measurable objectives that are going to be
implemented immediately, and what is the report out? Employee
satisfaction is one of those. How are we going to measure the
engagement of our employees? My board wants that data every
year. And I have to give it to them, and my salary too is tied
to that. Physician satisfaction. What are our strategic
objectives, and then what is the report out to Congress on the
measurable objectives? And set the goals, set those targets
with the specific targets related to those outcomes and then
expect feedback. And we do it, they will be able to do it. I am
sure it is just a process that will make you and the American
people feel more comfortable with where we are going.
Ms. Brownley. But I feel like, I do know if the rest of the
members here feel like, that in large part the VA has done a
lot of the things that you are suggesting that they do. But the
outcomes that we are looking for are not necessarily there. And
so, you know, what is it that we need to be looking for that is
going to be those sort of real levers within the VA that
indicates to us that real change is taking place?
Mr. Evans. I asked the CEO of our Monticello Hospital that
question this morning. I said if I were to say one thing about
your same day appointments and your improvement in service,
what was the standardization that you used? And she said NCQA
Level 2 Primary Medical Home Certification, period. Those are
measurement tools that tell you whether or not you have got
there to do the job. So there are plenty of those measurement
tools out there.
I know very little about the overarching statute. I tried
to read it the other day. I am a lawyer, an attorney, but I had
not read the U.S. Code in some years, I think since I took the
bar exam. It seemed really complicated. So these, this kid in
West Virginia, who is a P.T., when he says to me, they have got
to drive 120 miles away, the way I read the rules was that was
almost mandatory. Meaning you had to go through a process to
access care. So if you had these standards you might find,
either doing a Baldrige process or a Lean process or both,
where the waste was. Because waste is defined as something of
no value to the patient. That is red. It is on your flowchart,
your value stream. And I daresay that if you put a chart up in
this room and ask the Acting Secretary to pick a hypothetical
patient from point A to point Z who had skin cancer, what would
the value stream show? How much of it is red? How much of it is
green? Green is very simple. Green is, only has value to the
patient. Paperwork has no value to the patient. So you see we
were stunned, I cannot speak for my colleagues but I bet they
were too. Stunned at how much red was in our value streams and
posed by us, not by the government. Please go to Point A to
fill out the paperwork, and then go to Point M to turn in the
paperwork. And you put that in a value stream.
Where it was most dramatic was the nurses in our pediatric
hospital NICUs. Who suddenly realized that their value stream
imperfections caused the baby to get home to its parents. And
they were very emotional about that. So back to Quint's
comments about the purpose of the work, the purpose of the work
is to get the baby back home to the parents, not to fill out a
bunch of paperwork.
So there are specific metrics. I would, if you want to
improve wait times for primary care physicians, and you want to
improve the health of veterans, you had better have a primary
care home. If you do not have it, it is not going to work.
Ms. Brownley. My time is up.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Brownley. Dr. Huelskamp, if
you would hold for just one second? We have another question
from Mr. Lamborn. He just wants to follow up very quickly on a
question that was asked just a few minutes. Mr. Lamborn?
Mr. Lamborn. And then thank you both. Dr. Brown, if you
could just finish what Dr. Benishek had been asking you and
then you ran out of time? But you said you did a study on the
VA versus the private sector, and incentives and results and
outcomes? What was, what could VA be doing to better match, at
least in productivity terms, the private sector?
Dr. Brown. So my specific aiming goal of that engagement
was to actually teach the VA how to do their own work, because
I did not want to be a long term consultant. I like staying at
home. But I knew the VA and I knew the private sector. So I
actually gave them what I thought were the tools so they could
actually make their own decisions. And I think that is what we
need to help the VA do, is have more people who understand what
the private sector is within the VA and then doing the
analysis.
So there, you know, to me they basically adopted the
policies of how they could run their own internal practices of
dialysis. And this is not difficult where, how you use the
number, what type of employees, RN versus techs. So they had a
best practice within the VA in their own VISN, but they had not
shared that learning across the VISN. And that just by
sunlighting it they then saw what the best practice was. What
they did not do then is to say, to take some risks politically
about how they then could utilize the external world and saying
is it better to outsource this dialysis if that person is
driving 200 miles or 100 miles? Because we pay, the VA pays for
travel for these patients, and for the customer convenience,
and the pay. So they did not adopt at that time. VA has now
changed some of its practices, ten years later, about doing
their own dialysis, owning their own dialysis. But I do not
think they actually analyzed it from a is it better to keep it
from within or outsource it as well as we could.
Mr. Lamborn. And then finally you have mentioned, and two
others have mentioned, that your salary is tied to certain,
like employee engagement, or other factors. In other words, you
are not just paid a salary and that is it? You are paid and
then you have to produce something on top of that, right?
Dr. Brown. Top management all the way down to management at
Duke has a system of metrics that was tied to the overall
system. We have our own unit metrics, and we have personalized
metrics both short and long----
Mr. Lamborn. Is that something the VA could learn from as
well?
Dr. Brown. Yes----
Mr. Lamborn. Adding incentives to salaries?
Dr. Brown. I think the VA should do that. But I would
actually argue that currently the VA has metriced themselves to
death. They have metric fatigue. There are 500 metrics and
measures and so you cannot pay attention to the biggest ones.
So the issue is that if you are looking for change, look at
your leadership. Without leaders you will not get the change.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you very much. Thank you,
Representative Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Dr. Huelskamp, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would expect a
few more acre feet to come down the Arkansas River by being
nice to my colleague from the west. But I appreciate the
testimony. And one common theme I have heard from a number of
you is putting the needs and the desires of the patient first.
And coming from a very rural area, that patient is usually
lost. I just had a case of a gentleman that would like a
shingles vaccination like he had received last year that was
available at the local CBOC. They said rules have changed, you
now have to drive five hours one way to get a shingles
vaccination. But there is a hospital 31 miles down the road
that would take care of that, but the VA cannot quite figure
out how to work in that system.
So Mr. Umbdenstock, and your name is almost as difficult as
mine to pronounce----
Mr. Umbdenstock. You nailed it.
Dr. Huelskamp [continuing]. Maybe that is why you have not
gotten as many questions. But can you describe how we can work
together better with our local hospitals? I have about 70
community hospitals. And it is a royal pain for them to
actually work with our veterans and give them a chance to come
in there because of the paperwork and the nightmare that comes
from the VA system. So if you could expound on that I would
appreciate you doing that.
Mr. Umbdenstock. Thank you. And thank you for correctly
pronouncing my name. It was nicely done. The reality is that
there are a lot of community hospitals today who have very good
working relationships with local VA hospitals. And it seems to
be that it has been able to be worked out at the local level.
And so we want to see that continue and actually expand. So
there are a couple of things to think about.
One is, you know, do they have the capacity and ability?
And most of my members, as I mentioned to the chairman on the
way into the room, are saying how can we help? So I am taking
that as a real positive, not just of intent but they feel they
have the capacity. Number two, make it easy for them to
contract. There are plenty of them that have direct contracts.
We can figure out what makes that work. There are some of them
now going through third party contractors. We find that it can
work but we find that burdensome and not the preferred way. And
if they cannot make decisions locally on, as was mentioned
earlier, areas of priority to them that they can fix today
through that kind of cooperation then the whole system is not
going to work. So I say let us put fewer barriers in place, not
more barriers, and figure out what those best relationships
show by way of how they are set up, how they function, and how
they are accountable. And what is it that we have to
demonstrate as a provider contractor back to the VA?
Dr. Huelskamp. A couple of things on that. Then are you
seeing different results and ability to work with the VA
depending on what VISN they are in? Are you hearing any of that
difference?
Mr. Umbdenstock. Definitely as we have talked to our
members, and we have been holding calls over the past month,
six weeks, to get more information on this, if you have seen
one, you have seen one, for sure.
Dr. Huelskamp. Yes.
Mr. Umbdenstock. And they do seem to operate very
differently. You know, our systems operate differently across
our membership, too. But not when they are under one
organizational control system.
Dr. Huelskamp. You know, in my particular congressional
district there are four different VISNs and all of them are a
long ways away, at the main facility. And they are not close.
And the VA's response is, well, we will pay for travel. By the
way they changed that, we will pay for travel in the shortest
distance possible, which might be down the dirt road rather
than the interstate which raises a little concern. But trying
to figure out how they can work better, because your members,
my community hospitals, they want to participate in the system
and they are not allowed to participate. It is incredible
paperwork.
One of the possible avenues was the Project ARCH program,
which looks like the VA is going to cancel. Do you have any
thoughts on that? Some places it seems it might have worked.
But it seems an enormous load of paperwork compared to other
systems that our hospitals participate in.
Mr. Umbdenstock. Yes, one of our colleagues who actually
serves on the AHA board at the moment from Caribou, Maine
testified about two weeks ago on their experience with the ARCH
program and are extremely favorable and would like to see it
continue. So that type of really local knitting together can
really be useful.
Dr. Huelskamp. Yes, and one thing that we cannot forget
that it is the family, as well. You say, oh yes, the VA will
pay under certain circumstances to drive, but you have got to
have a driver. You have got to have family that has got to take
a, as many of our veterans that are returning now are younger
and younger they have got to take a day or two off of work
literally from my district to drive to Wichita, Kansas. A young
man, young in terms of about 50 years old, he was told that he
had to drive three round trips in ten days for a service that
he could have gotten in his local hospital but the VA would not
approve it. And so he had to take off basically three full days
of work. And we can figure that out. We should be able to by
giving veterans a choice in keeping their needs in mind first
of all. So with that I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Huelskamp.
Mr. Studer. Congressman Miller.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Studer. Can I make a comment?
The Chairman. Yes, you may.
Mr. Studer. Thank you. And I will go, metrics, I think you
brought up, ma'am, what are the key metrics. We work, this is
what we do, you know, we have got Cleveland Clinic down to
seven. And I think what happens is we get to the point here we
metric ourselves, we paralyze ourselves with so many metrics.
So while we need all those metrics, what are the key element
metrics? You know, things I would look at I think Rulon brought
up, which are patient experience, your employee engagement,
what is your physician engagement. Then if you are looking at
access it is what percentage of patients can get in to a doctor
within so many time, how many left without being treated? I
mean, when you have people that actually show up and then
leave. So I think you pick five to seven good metrics you can
agree on and that becomes what you say your dashboard.
Your comment, I think also there is probably some VA
hospitals that work very, very well with the private hospitals.
The Heath brothers in their research on change, when change is
hard, there is a book out called Switch that does pretty well
right now. And they basically say you can study where it does
not work but you will not learn much. You can go in and study
that has got a free lunch that drops out and you might not
learn much. But study that child with a free lunch that does
well. So I think there is also again, I do not want to measure
this thing to death, but I bet you there are some real bright
spots and the Heath brothers say----
Dr. Brown. I will offer that, to come to Duke and the
Durham VA. We have a great relationship. The fee basis system
works. We get authorized. I can tell you who the fee basis
authorizing person is. We get the authorization number, we put
it into our system, the patient then, communication. What the
VA does not do well is then pay. I actually think this system
of direct contact is better than the PC3 system so the ARCH
system. Remember, you do not need a contract for the fee basis
or now called the non-VA care system. But I would actually hope
that the VA looks differently that it is not just hospitals.
Remember outpatient care. It is CVS, it is Walgreens, it is all
these. They can do it cheaper, so why are we not thinking big
picture, big change, not little change?
Mr. Studer. And that is what I would mention. You find your
bright spots. You study them. In my book Straight A Leadership
I have a whole chapter on moving best practices. And what is
called is find your bright spots then figure out how to scale
them and move them.
My last question I would ask the committee to think about
in this conversation is we did a workshop for health care
boards. And one of the board members, and we work with a lot of
rural hospitals, one of the board members said what if your
goal is to stay independent? Because there is a lot of mergers.
And the, James Orlikoff and Renee Kaufmann who were on the
panel, not me, said well is that your goal? Or is your goal to
provide the best care for the patient? So the real goal is not
how do you create a better VA. That is part of it. But that is
a symptom. The real question is how do you provide the best
care for veterans? And then they should go to the facility or
the location that provides that best care. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. And I am trying to get some real
time data as we are going through and listening to the
Secretary's testimony. And Quint, I want, you do not need to
react, but I just want you to think about this and maybe we
will talk about it a little bit later. And Dr. Brown, this kind
of keys off on what you just said a second ago. But the
Secretary made this comment. ``The greatest risk to VA health
care is to spend money on providing dollars for purchased care
without addressing the longstanding issues of lack of dollars
for VA.'' So both of you can think about that just a little
bit.
Ms. Kuster, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much. I appreciate you all being
here today and I wanted to address my comments to the
discussion of collaboration and moving things along. I was
impressed to find an article in the Boston Globe, and I do not
know if you any of you have seen it, but it is about data
driven scheduling predicts patient no-shows. One of the most
incredible issues that we have heard about is the 50 percent
no-shows. And it does not help that the VA is working off a
1985 scheduling program, apparently. And there is more than a
few questions around here, I am a new member, but hundreds of
millions of dollars have been appropriated. But I was intrigued
by this article and I will give it to the chair for the record.
They actually analyzed the patients that are least likely to
show up and compare them to the patients that are most likely
to show up. And use that information in the scheduling process.
And so that rather than just treating all patients similarly. I
guess I just want to ask generally, are there these types of
innovations that are going on? And are there, you know, can the
VA learn from that and do a better job? Because it seems to me
the greatest waste right now is physicians in their offices,
practitioners, and I appreciate the comments on nurse
practitioners and PAs, in their offices ready to see patients.
But because of this scheduling fiasco they are not showing.
Mr. Evans. If you applied Lean, and said what is the
problem? What is the question? The question would be we have a
40 to 50 percent no-show rate in a particular kind of clinic.
Dermatology, which is famous for no-show rates by the way. Then
you would say what is the desired state? Well, what is it? No
no-shows. And then you go through the why, you would measure
it, you would have a rapid improvement event to see if it
worked, you would measure the outcomes. If it did not work you
would not try that again. You would try something else. But
that would be a Lean process. That would be a specific tool.
The Baldrige award goes to people that do things like that
well. So I think what we have done in this country is we have
trained millions of people to not show up. Because when they do
show up, they wait. It is the only industry that still has
waiting rooms, ours. So the example that I showed you of
Monticello, Indiana, we have replicated that in LaFayette,
Indiana, which is a much bigger community. And the waiting
rooms in LaFayette have nobody in them. They are empty because
they are not waiting. So now they show up, right? So that was
part of a rapid improvement event that came out of a Lean
process that we did this value stream to determine what was
waste. And we discovered that regular things that we did were
wasteful to the core customer, the patient. So what remedy did
the patient have? They do not show up. Or worse yet, I think
Quint referred to it, they show up and then they walk out. They
leave without receiving care, like in ERs. But the tool that we
used anyway was Lean to achieve that. And back to what Rich
said, we had to convince docs that empty time on their schedule
so that you could deal with the ebb and flow of real live
people. And the younger veterans that someone referred to have
jobs. So they are more likely to not be able to show up. So do
we want to punish them? So that is the whole purpose of that
Lean process and a measurable outcome would be----
Ms. Kuster. Reducing no-shows?
Mr. Evans [continuing]. Yes, no-shows.
Ms. Kuster. And Dr. Brown.
Dr. Brown. So I am not sure what, I am not familiar with
the article. But I am not sure if you are also referring to the
previous testimony a week or two ago about 50 percent no-show
in the psychiatry service. I think that is not common in the
other practices of the VA. And I would argue that it is not a
scheduling problem then. If they have behavioral health issues
it may be that they need a home visit, not actually a patient
visit, them coming to us, because there are other things going
on. So it is not, I think what the article may be referring to
is actually how we are looking at overbooking. Should you
overbook by five or ten percent? That is not really the issue.
My experience in looking at the why people no-show, the number
one is that we did not actually communicate to them an
appointment that they actually could keep. The second is the
length of time between you give the appointment, I mean you
give them the appointment and when it is actually scheduled
for. So if you are scheduling nine months out, I cannot tell
you in nine months if I can come or that I will remember. So I
think that----
Ms. Kuster. And particularly if there is not a reminder.
That was part of the issue.
Dr. Brown. Right. The VA does have that. But again, that is
50 percent I think was specific to a psychiatry practice, not
the usual VA practice.
Ms. Kuster. All right. My time is up. Thank you.
Mr. Studer. What we have found when we go into an
organization one of the things of course we have to demonstrate
is how we are going to prove our worth. And one of the things
we always look at is the no-show rate and it is usually much
higher than they think. Then you have to say was it a no-show
rate because the patient does not show up, or is it a no-show
rate because the doctor does not show up? Or the doctor cancels
their practice? So you have to again do this diagnose before
you treat.
However, we do find that there is some simple things you
can do that will reduce no-show rate and we guarantee it by 70
percent no matter what it is. And that truly is you have to
remind the patient. A human being reminding them is better than
a machine. And explain to them where their appointment is, how
to get there, where to park, how long it is going to take, and
then tell them why it is a medical necessity. So we teach
something called Aid It. Part of it is explanation. Because
when a patient has something explained to them, why it is
important, what to do, we find no show rates can drop by 70
percent. And we start off by having people make those phone
calls when the patient is not showing up, and then pretty soon
financially it makes sense if you need to to have somebody do
it because your productivity improves so much.
Ms. Kuster. Okay. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Walorski, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today. And I would like to extend a special welcome to
Mr. Dan Evans from IU and a fellow Hoosier. And I just wanted
to say that I am grateful for the services that IU Health
provides in my district in Goshen, La Porte, Starke County, and
we are grateful for your service there.
Mr. Evans, can you speak to this issue of leadership in a
multibillion dollar facility as large as the VA is? And I
guess, you know, what we have heard continually on this
committee in all these hearings is this constant proclamation
that says it is leadership, it takes leadership. You guys have
all talked about it today. But given that Indiana has done such
a phenomenal job, IU has as well, and I am proud of the IU
system in Indiana and the standard that you have set. But can
you just speak to, as we look at, even some of the things the
chairman just read about, you know, we have an Acting
Secretary, we have a soon-to-be Secretary could be vetted,
could be the next person selected. Can you just speak to what
does that, what is the issue with leadership in a facility this
large?
Mr. Evans. That is a big question.
Mrs. Walorski. I know.
Mr. Evans. That is a really big question. And any of the
gentlemen here could answer it just as well if not better than
I.
First of all, I work in the building where I was born. The
people that I see everyday are my friends and neighbors,
literally. So it is difficult for me to relate to someone who
is a journeyman manager and may be managing a facility where he
could be gone in a while. So the first thing I think is
demonstrable passion about the work. And you do not have to be
a resident CEO, you can be a journeyman administrator to do
that. So here was my measure when I first became CEO of IU
Health, and I learned a little bit of this from Quint and his
colleagues, is if I went to a meeting and the word patient was
not mentioned in the first five or ten minutes, I just figured
I was at the wrong meeting. So who is the keeper of the flame
in a big institution? It is the CEO, the Superintendent, the
General Director, the Chair of the Committee, the President of
the United States, the Secretary. That is the person.
So you have got to engage people in the core work. And if
the boss is not engaged in the core work, then it is never
going to happen. You will always have lousy employee
engagement. The docs will never believe what you have to say.
And I want to manage up Quint a little bit. Quint and his
organization have done an excellent job of teaching people how
to be better leaders but I do not think, Quint, you have made
any leaders that did not already have the passion in them. So I
think it is that you have to walk the talk. And it is as simple
as that.
And then what happens in our place anyway is people talk
about it. I am always amazed, I am sure my colleagues feel the
same way, amazed how the smallest action by the CEO is
magnified throughout the system, negatively or positively. It
is hard to magnify focus on the patient negatively, the purpose
of the work negatively. So the comments about the people
driving 120 miles round trip; the comment about the VA saying,
oh, do not worry, we pay for your time; that is just horse
stuff, you know? Time is important, even to people who have got
plenty of it. So if you are focused on the patient you are not
going to require somebody to do something like that.
Mrs. Walorski. And just a real quick question on the Lean
program, and I am fascinated by the Lean program as well. And I
know that you mentioned Eli Lilly and Subaru as being companies
that were involved in that. When you first looked into that
concept of Lean, from the time that you started checking out to
what you consider an institution that has been greatly affected
now by Lean, which is the IU Health System, how much time
elapsed in there? What kind of a timeline was that?
Mr. Evans. It is a minimum of three years for us to get to
an operational stage. First of all, like many of the facilities
here we are gigantic.
Mrs. Walorski. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Evans. And to get something, at the VA it would be just
huge. But it is a common tool. And the first, and we start at
the top, not the bottom.
Mrs. Walorski. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Evans. So it was me and my direct reports who went to
Subaru, Dow AgroSciences, and Lilly, and sat down with, in
fact, we sat down with people who had failed as well as people
who had succeeded.
Mrs. Walorski. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Evans. And so it took a year just for us. Secondly, a
footnote to that, it means that I had to become Lean trained
myself. By the way, I think I was an ER orderly. That was the
job that I pretended I was in order to get my own
certification. But that took a while.
And then the second key is put your best people in charge
and do not make it a project. So spending more money, it could
be that, I do not know if you need to spend more money because
like Dr. Stacey said, no one is sitting around here offering
ways to give health systems more money.
Mrs. Walorski. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Evans. I do not know why you would give anybody in the
health industry more money because we have already eaten
everything that we have been given. We need to use what we have
already got more efficiently. But we did employ funds to the
Lean effort and made it permanent.
Mrs. Walorski. I appreciate it. And I, again, am grateful
for the work that you do in our district as well. So thank you
very much for your presence today. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Walz, you are recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Walz. Well, thank you, Chairman. Thank all of you for
bringing your expertise here and choosing to put that expertise
towards helping our veterans. And Dr. Evans was getting at
improving the entire health care system. I think we love the
false choices. They make neater sound bytes. And so it is
public versus private, and then that is the argument. It is
much more complex. And the good news is there is much more
solutions in that. So I want to applaud each of you for just
clear testimony.
Dr. Brown, just within a few seconds of, just very clear,
how you focused on it, and talk about clinicians practicing at
the top of their license. We have had some hearings where I
have asked the folks who are sitting here when is the last time
you saw a patient? And they cannot tell me. And they are
obviously talented doctors, now they are in administration
positions. And then the longer hours, just that small thing.
VA does a lot of things well. Building brick and mortar
hospitals is not one of them. And they want to engineer the
dang thing. Heck, they want to carry the bricks to do it. And
that is wrong. So I appreciate that.
And I also want to bring, I represent Southern Minnesota
and I drive by Dr. Stacey's hospital every Monday, and I have
the Mayo Clinic in my office. I want to bring all of you when
they talk scope of practice, so I will sit down with the nurse
anesthetist and anesthesiologist, you can work out that whole
feud for me on scope of practice. But you are hitting on an
important point. And do not get me wrong, I somewhat
facetiously say that. But it is a tough issue. But it is one we
are all going to have to address, both in the private sector
and the public sector.
I am going to come back on this, this issue of leadership.
And I am going to go to you, Dr. Stacey, on this Baldrige
issue. It is ironic. Yesterday we lost James MacGregor Burns,
and transactional versus transformational leaders, and some of
the things that we have grown up on. The Secretary sat right
where you were, Mr. Evans, and said she is going to achieve ISO
9001 certification. Now the thing is I thought about this in
full disclosure, and my doctoral work education deals with
Baldrige so I am more facility with Baldrige in working on
that. ISO 9001, you can help me Dr. Stacey, focuses on defects
more than it focuses on results and strategy. And it seems to
me, I have seen this happen in organizations, the process of
achieving 9001 can become an end rather than a means to patient
care. And if there was ever an organization in a world that
lends itself to getting sucked into the process over the
outcome, it would be that. If you had, Dr. Stacey, using the
rest of the time, should they be doing 9001? I do not want you
to go towards Baldrige----
Dr. Stacey. Why do I feel set up?
Mr. Walz. No, but I want you, I want them to pick the right
thing for the right reasons and get the outcome that we need,
not just to come back and here display a 9001 certificate and
we get the same results. So help me understand.
Dr. Stacey. So I will offer my opinion on the topic. I
think the most important thing is process. Process that
identifies the problems, evaluates the opportunities to
improve, and measures that improvement. And then shows the
people who are responsible the objective improvements proving
by data how we improve and where we are going. We as taxpayers
should be able to see that and understand that, and I agree
with that.
We did an evaluation in my organization years ago and
looked at the different alternatives for process improvement.
We looked at ISO 9000. It was 9000 then, it is 9001 now. We
looked at Baldrige. We looked at a number of different
alternatives. Like you I personally believe that the
performance excellence criteria as outlined in the Malcolm
Baldrige National Quality Award, because it identifies the
opportunities for improvement and then uses Lean or Six Sigma,
the specific alternatives to help address the problems that it
finds is the best. But I will say I know ISO 9001 well enough
to know that it is better than nothing. It is, see that
pejorative and I did not mean it to. It is, it is a process.
And it is a system for improvement. And if they are pursuing
that it is a different alternative than I came up with, but it
is an alternative I personally think, especially since Congress
approved Baldrige there is reason to look at Baldrige.
Mr. Walz. I wished I would have asked why they came up with
that decision. Because it wonders to me if it almost, you know,
and I, again, I am the VA's staunchest supporter but their
harshest critic. I do not know why they came up with it.
Mr. Umbdenstock. I cannot speak to that either, and I
cannot give you numbers. But I can tell you that in
conversation with my members of 5,000 hospitals in this country
many of them select Baldrige, many of them select ISO 9000. And
I think to underscore the central point that Rulon was making,
that the issue is get on to a framework that brings the process
out clearly and can align everybody in support of that
process----
Mr. Walz. I agree. I did not want to discourage them from
it because it seemed like a positive step.
Mr. Umbdenstock [continuing]. Rather than one brand or the
other.
Dr. Stacey. It is a positive step.
Mr. Studer. Yes, if I could comment on that? Because as a
company we deal with people that use all of them. And what John
Cotter will tell you from Harvard, there is a 70 percent
failure rate, and the Heath brothers will tell you there is an
80 percent failure rate in change. So when we look at them,
here is what we see, the ones that work and the ones that do
not work. You have to have the right process but if you do not
tie it in to how you are going to manage the objective or the
amount of accountability, it does not matter. So if I am a
leader and you are telling me I need to use a better selection
process you still should hold me accountable then for turnover,
not did I put the process in place. So one that is measuring
the outcome.
Number two, making sure that the leaders have the skill to
implement the process. And that does not mean I know the
process. That means I can connect my employees to why this will
make things better. And once somebody connects into why, once
you capture the heart, in fact the Heath brothers will tell you
people change because either their mind tells them to change or
their heart tells them to change, and about 75 percent of the
time it is their heart that tells them to change. So I think
process improvement will not work as a stand alone. I think it
just has to be part of an operational structure.
Mr. Walz. Good advice. I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Wenstrup, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and gentlemen, it is
a pleasure to have you here today. You know, as we look back on
some of the other testimony that we have had where we were
initially relying on those within the VA for solutions I found
it very interesting because the head, basically, had never been
in private practice, never been in a private hospital setting,
never had to be in the black. So the set of solutions to keep
the doors open was completely different for them, and I think
we have an opportunity to make some changes here.
When I started in practice I had two employees and I wrote
the checks and paid all the bills and bought the insurance, and
later joined a larger orthopaedic group with 20-some doctors,
operations chairman. And so when we looked at how to improve we
looked at how do we serve more patients in a timely fashion
with greater quality. And I can tell you probably the last
thing that we really looked at was how do we spend more money
and how do we utilize more space. It was finding better
solutions than that. Unless we were looking at physician
extenders, or another medical assistant, someone that can
improve the timeliness of your clinic to allow you to be more
productive and proficient. That is really what we were after.
And we would look at things like are doctors too bogged down
with administrative duties. And I am in the military as well,
and DoD has that same set of problems.
But you know that being said, we talked a little bit before
about the cost per patient. And the VA just measures RVUs, and
that is how they measure their productivity, which certainly is
subject to change. But they do not look at the cost per RVU.
And so when I hear that we are saying, well, we need to spend
more money. How do you know what you are really spending money
on if you send a patient out, I am talking about? Because you
do not know what you are spending per RVU. Medicare does, they
know what they are spending per RVU. And so that is totally
lost in the whole system right now. And I know a young veteran
who now lives in Hawaii, and he volunteers at the VA there. And
he said that they fly patients from Samoa to Hawaii just for
their annual physical and put them up for a few days. Now what
does that cost per RVU? And would you ever take a look at that
and say that this makes sense? Obviously not. And I would like
your opinion on what would be the problem of having somebody be
considered a VA doctor that is not in the walls of the VA? In
other words, I might be a provider for United health care, Blue
Cross Blue Shield. I could be a provider for the VA. And I
could actually be on Samoa seeing these patients. Can I get
your opinion on that concept? Any of you?
Dr. Brown. Do you want me? Actually that was actually what
I recommended, and to not say anything there actually it is
happening today, but the providers, the medical directors out
there and the different units are not sure if they should be
encouraging this or not. I say, absolutely. So there are places
today where VA people on VA time that are being paid under VA,
you know, rates are actually practicing in private sector. When
the capacity of the VA gets too high and they cannot do their
surgeries or endoscopy, they go use the local facilities. So
why are we not encouraging it? That is best practice. Let us do
more of it. So I absolutely think it can be done. But the rules
are unclear. So people in the VA are a little bit hesitant to
then go and do it big time.
Dr. Wenstrup. But do you not think it is more difficult if
you really do not know what you are spending per RVU to begin
with?
Dr. Brown. Oh, absolutely. And the VA is in an unusual
situation. They say they know what their costs are. But the
reality is just like in my family one day they use their
Medicare benefits, the next day they may use another benefit
that is from their previous employer. So they do not know the
true cost of care. So I do not actually think the VA currently
can be looking at using panel size. That actually, you know, I
could have a thousand people on my panel but they only show up
once a year, versus somebody else who shows up every week. So I
am not sure that is the right way to measure it. I actually
would recommend that the VA, rather than doing their own fee
basis payment, use the Medicare intermediaries to pay it. Then
we could collect all the data, everything they are fee basing
out, and what they are getting in their Medicare data, and then
merge that with the VA data, and we would know the true cost of
taking care of these patients.
Dr. Wenstrup. If I can get your opinion on one other thing?
I think back to when I started in practice, and I had about 20
new patients a month. And I went to my two employees and I said
I will bonus you a dollar for every patient over 20 we see each
month. And suddenly they are saying, hey, so and so just
called, can you stay a little longer and see one more? And a
year later I am writing fifty dollar checks, which was a big
deal to them. You know, going from 20 to 70. What kind of
incentives can we put within the VA system to promote that type
of productivity?
Dr. Brown. Currently within the rules I do not know that
they have that flexibility to do it. Especially, there are more
flexibility in the physician Title 38 positions but not then,
you still need the OR tech to stay, the, you know, anesthesia
people, you need everybody to stay if you want to do that extra
surgery. So there are private sectors who do that. To say,
okay, if you take on the extra case then you do this. Right now
it is just overtime. And there is not the incentive. You know,
everything in the VA, as I pointed out, you know, kind of slows
down or shuts down around 4:30. That would not happen in most
other private sectors. And----
Mr. Evans. So if you could flip it, if the VA measured the
productivity rather than the expense, you would have the heart
before the mind. Right now it is just an expense. That is why
we all sort of hesitated when you asked that question. There is
no way to incent----
Dr. Brown. Right now.
Mr. Evans. They are just, yes, they are just spending more.
Dr. Brown. Without changing the culture.
Mr. Evans. If we add another surgery it is just going to
cost us more.
Dr. Wenstrup. And the bottom line comes down to making the
patient an asset rather than a liability.
Mr. Evans. Core customer.
Mr. Studer. With that, research shows that only one in five
physicians feel they get adequate feedback on their own
performance. One of the things we look at is a provider
feedback system because the RVUs is just one slice. So an
organization has to say what is important. If access is
important that should be part of the feedback for the payment
system. If clinical quality is important. These are the types
of things where I think, and you know you need that balance
feedback system. Because I believe physicians want to do a good
job. I think they want to do the best job. But we really do not
have, maybe we think there are not many very good feedback
systems. That is why we pushed something called a provider
feedback system which allows the physician to have input into
how am I going to get the feedback, when am I going to get the
feedback. And we even weight it. So we tell them weight for the
doctor what you feel is the most important. If RVUs is, then
put that. But if it is not, maybe it is something else. So I
think putting in better feedback systems is only fair for the
physician. And we capture the physician because now they have
input and they have skin in the game.
Dr. Wenstrup. Excellent input. I appreciate it. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Dr. Ruiz, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This is one
helluva of a panel. We have the all-star team here and I really
appreciate the comments, and I appreciate your minds. And I
appreciate you caring for our veterans and all of the work that
you have done to improve health care. One of the things that is
very striking here for me is to really look at a system. And I
remember working with my father at a packing house in Thermal
or Coachella, and every system has a product, and every system
has the outcome. And the product of a health care system is the
health and wellness of our veterans. It is producing healthy,
productive veterans. And we measure our health care system
through effectiveness, how well are we doing that, and
efficiency, how much resources are we expending per unit volume
of the product. And so clearly we need to make sure that we go
back to our basics and really focus on the outcome of the VA
health care system, which are our veterans. And I repeat it
over and over and over again, that we need to change the
culture from an institutional based culture where we value and
put our focus on either administrators, on physicians, on
providers, and switch and transform that into a veteran
centered health care system. So and we all talk about that and
it seems like we are all in agreement with that.
So my question is drawing upon your expertise is what are
three practical, pragmatic, problem solving things that we can
do, that the VA can do, to change that culture into a veteran
centered, high quality culture within the VA health care
system?
Dr. Stacey. I would argue that it centers on your
measurement tools to begin with. And if you, if we are focused
on veterans then what is the outcome we want? We want to meet
the needs of veterans. How do we measure that? How do we know
if those veterans' needs are being met? Do we do customer
satisfaction engagement? How are the employees--that is one
thing is we could measure that. The second thing is with that
data we engage the employees in meeting those criteria. It is
all a part of a system where we know what we want to achieve,
that is meeting the needs of the veterans. And then we engage
the employees in meeting that goal. We measure how well the
employees are engaged in meeting that role. And then how they
participate with the physicians, how the physicians and the
employees are meaningfully engaged. I think there is a wide
range of opportunities for us to first engage the employees,
who then engage the physicians, who collectively provide the
best care ever.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you. So I understand a physician centered
survey questionnaire that has teeth to it. Something that like
in the physician practice, the Press Ganey where your salary
could be determined based on your patient satisfaction on your
bedside manner. And I think that would be a very, something to
look into.
Mr. Studer.
Mr. Studer. Yes, I think what you have to do in every
organization is flip the organizational chart upside down. And
once the veterans are the key point, then you measure how they
feel. Then I go to what Rulon said, I believe then you, the
most important person is the person who touches the veteran.
And that person has to be your most engaged. What we do in
organizations is pretty much hold the managers accountable for
the employee engagement piece. And it is amazing what happens
when the manager finds out, and the questions are not
ridiculous, they are do you know what is expected of you? Do
you get feedback on how well you are doing? Do you have the
tools and equipment you need to do the job? It is basic
performance questions that every manager and every leader
should want their employees to field. So if I measured just two
things it would be that patient experience and that employee
engagement, particularly the front line employee.
Mr. Ruiz. Wonderful. One of the things I did when I went
back home in an underserved area where I grew up was to conduct
some community centered forums to get qualitative data that we
can then put some numbers and metrics based on what they said
that their experiences are with a lack of health care. And one
of the things that they said is we do not have enough
physicians. So we looked at the full-time equivalent physician
per population ratio. We found in my area we have one to 9,000
and the recommended number is one to 2,000 in the United
States. So would looking at a physician per veteran ratio per
VISN or per health VA system, would that give us good measures
as to the need for more providers in that area? Mr.
Umbdenstock?
Mr. Umbdenstock. You know, I would like to try to stream
together a comments that have been made throughout the morning
and put this on a business basis. If this was a company that
any of us owned of any size, and it was not performing the way
it needed to, and the operators of that company were coming
back to the owner looking for more resources, we would sit down
and craft a strategic plan that said what are the critical few
things we have to address and straighten out? How do we measure
those things? How do we then communicate those things to
everybody in the organization, and how do we hold people at
each level accountable for that? Incent them, as was raised
over here by the gentleman. Incent them, but only incent them
on those critical few measures. And start to get some progress
around those measures.
At the same time you are asking your customer, in this case
the veteran, do these measures, do these make sense to you as
the customer? I am not sure that physicians per thousand is
going to make sense to them so much as how that translates into
their access to the system. So you will start to put things
into patient friendly terms and you refine that over time.
But at the moment if this business is kind of stuck in the
water where it is, what it needs now is some direction, some
priorities, and some momentum, and then build from there.
One side comment, and Dr. Brown mentioned this earlier, but
we had a meeting previously scheduled before the whole
scheduling issue came up around the VA. It got cancelled due to
a snowstorm this winter. We met subsequently right as this was
breaking. We were with senior leaders of the various VISNs and
quality directors. And I was stunned when they shared that they
had some 600 or 800 measures that they track and produce within
the system. That is not the critical few. I mean, that is
somebody someplace saying, you know, I would really like to
know more about this. Well that is terrific for that person.
But that is not an organizational priority. So you really have
to boil it down. Get it down to the basics. Get everybody
aligned and directed. A Baldrige framework can help do that so
that everybody in the organization knows how they contribute to
those critical few. And get some progress, get some momentum.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you very much. You know, this is a breath
of fresh air to be solutions based rather than hammering on the
same problems that we know exist. And I appreciate you being
here.
I just in closing, I want to give you my condolences, sir,
Mr. Evans, you, and your mother-in-law, and your family. And
Mr. Studer, your grandson Cooper Kennedy, from working in a
burn center before, I will be praying for him. And you know,
make sure that they have enough procedural sedation and
analgesia during his wound care, especially for pediatrics.
Mr. Studer. Thank you.
Mr. Ruiz. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you, doctor. Mr. Coffman, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When we, first of all
I want to thank you all for your time in coming here and
helping us find solutions to fix the Veterans Health
Administration. But when we talk about metrics I think one of
the big concerns I have is I would think that you all could
tell me or know how much it costs to do a given procedure in
your hospital, I mean at least within a range. And I do not
think we have any idea within the VA system how much it costs
in any given facility and how much it comparatively costs. I
know I see outcomes data in terms of, oh, infectious diseases,
and morbidity, and things like that, mortality. But I do not
see the data in terms of cost and some kind of valuation. And
so I wonder if you all could address that issue?
Mr. Umbdenstock. Certainly. I have to be totally honest
with you, we are only starting to get better at that in health
care.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Mr. Umbdenstock. We have performed, we have been paid on
and performed to more of what I call a wholesale form of
business enterprise, not a retail. And so cost per unit and
true cost accounting systems definitely exist in health care
but I would not say they are widespread. I would say they are
now starting to grow. So it is not just in this particular
sector, it is something that we are grappling with across
health care. See if my colleagues agree with me on that.
Dr. Brown. I would say the three institutions I have worked
at in the private sector, you know, Stanford partners and Duke,
we all have that data and we analyze it all the way down to the
variation by provider, what is the cost per provider for
providing the same case, to then see where they could learn
from each other. So I think the data is there available. You
know, we at Duke also have a hundred performance, even just for
Duke itself, have a hundred performance services people who are
operations improvement. So they go in there at the CEO's
direction and say what is the performance standard or labor
standard for a phlebotomist? What is the performance standard
for a respiratory therapist? I mean, you cannot use our same
standard because your operation systems, your space, everything
is different. You need it to be specific to your area and how
things work. But having a performance services group is a very
important part of health care now.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Evans.
Mr. Evans. I echo both the comments. Ten or 12 years ago we
did not much know what our costs were. We knew what our charges
were.
Mr. Coffman. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Evans. We were excellent at charges, superb. But we
were not so good at costs. Part of it I think is our 501(c)(3)
nature, or the accounting principles, while we use gap
accounting that is just a tool to measure what we tell is in
there. So we have, to improve our productivity, which I
mentioned in my testimony, we had to figure out what our costs
were. And that was a journey as well. It was not as easy as I
thought it would be. Part of that is the artificiality of how
we allocate expenses among our various units. Because health
care, we have got thousands of business units. Maybe tens of
thousand, I am not really sure. And then acute care hospitals
and critical access hospitals, tertiary and quaternary
hospitals, so how do you allocate that? So we had, but it was
not until we had a grip on what our costs were that we really
could do this improvement process.
Mr. Coffman. Dr. Stacey.
Dr. Stacey. At the risk of sending accolades to any of my
competitors, I was meeting with the CEO of Health Partners
Health System in Minneapolis and that is a fully integrated
system that has both insurance, it is like Kaiser as was
brought up earlier. And I believe that that is where we are
going as an industry. I believe that that level of interaction
is what our future is. And their ability to calculate the cost
per patient, per encounter is crucial. And it is something that
we are learning. I do not think as an industry we are as far
along as we need to be. I think it is something that we can all
work together because that, sure as shooting, is where we are
going to go. And if we cannot manage that the rest is just
window dressing.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Studer.
Mr. Studer. Well I think what you are finding is with the
fact that there is, at least in the private sector, limited
access to revenue now. You have to look at being, how do you
measure, and I think measuring cost is where everybody is at.
And I think the public, whether not for profit or for profit
health care systems, are facing some of the same challenges the
VA has. This is something that I do not think anyone has
declared victory in.
Mr. Coffman. Because it is interesting, and I have not seen
the report that apparently the President's nominee to be
Secretary of Veterans Affairs has determined, has mentioned, is
testifying before the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee today,
and putting forward a request for more resources. I do not know
what the break down for those resources, what the break down
is. But I think the mere fact that we do not know what the
costs are----
Mr. Studer. Right.
Mr. Coffman [continuing]. For doing given procedures makes
it really difficult to say, I mean, can we wring out more
efficiencies in the system in fact? If they are way, way out of
line with their counterparts in the private sector in both for
profit and not for profit, inpatient facilities as an example,
I mean, we have no idea. And yet we are asked to put more
resources into the system. And I think that is problematic.
Mr. Studer. Right. It is like driving a car without a
dashboard.
Mr. Coffman. Yes. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. O'Rourke, you are recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The chairman last
week convened an excellent panel comprised of, we had Sergeant
Renschler, who had returned from War with Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder, Traumatic Brain Injury. He was joined by the parents
of three young returning servicemembers who had similar
conditions, all of whom took their lives. And the parents
showed great courage in sharing their stories of having to deal
with the VA, what the experiences were like for their children,
and even for them after their children had taken their lives.
Trying to get medical records, trying to see somebody, trying
to frankly be treated with the dignity and respect that their
sons had earned. But beyond focusing our attention on the true
and total cost of War, and the deficiencies within the VHA,
they came to the table with some recommendations and some
potential solutions. And the parents of Daniel Somers, Dr. and
Jean Somers, proposed that perhaps the VHA should become a
center of excellence for War-related injuries, both mental and
physical. And kind of following some of Dr. Wenstrup's
questions about could we expand capacity by having doctors
serve veterans in the community; and Dr. Brown, some of your
comments about the rules are not clear about how we do this;
could we more clearly and cleanly define what the VA does or
can do very well, and limit the VHA to doing that? And then
make it very clear that these other procedures and conditions
and issues will be treated in the community? I would love to
get, Dr. Brown, your thoughts, and then anyone else on the
panel who would like to share their thoughts on this?
Dr. Brown. I think obviously you bring up a big long term
question, is what is the future of the VA? I remember when I
started my career back in the eighties everybody said, well,
are we going to be here existing, you know, ten or 20 years
from now. And everybody kind of worried about it. So I do not
know. One of my rules is whatever you predict, you will be
wrong. You know, we look at a five-year planning horizon. Where
will we be in five years? You can see the declining population.
The private sector, in my opinions, does not do a great job
with the injuries that are being sustained in our current
conflicts. They are very specialized in certain areas. You
know, you can name the top five institutions. So I think the VA
has to continue to invest in the research and the prevention of
these issues. There is a lot of actually research where people
are trying to predict who might get Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder and should not then go into the battlefield. I mean,
that is really where the key, where the VA can play a current
role now. I think there could be better collaboration of
private and public, even in these centers of excellence that
you are talking about. They do not have to be islands. That is
not a core competency of Duke, but there are other private
sector places that actually they could be doing this jointly
together probably and learning from each other. Because I think
there are great learning lessons. Think about what we are
seeing in the football injuries.
Mr. O'Rourke. Right.
Dr. Brown. You know, are there correlations to this?
Mr. O'Rourke. And I wonder if anyone else would like to
comment on whether the VA should confine itself to treating,
doing the necessary research on, and maybe preventing these
conditions that are essentially War-related, and leave other
medical attention and care to the private sector? Mr. Evans?
Mr. Evans. Bulls-eye. What I meant to say was when I look
out my window I see all this capacity. I see five hospitals,
all of which have empty beds, empty outpatient centers at that
moment. And I wonder why the VA does the things that they do,
if there is capacity across the street, and if they could stop
doing it. So that is another Lean principle. You just stop
doing something. It is not achieving the goal.
So what you just referred to, the witnesses last week, that
is we would call VOC, voice of the customer. And that is the
loudest voice in the room. So when we hear the voice of the
customer, we consider those our orders. So if you have got a
customer saying become an expert at TBI, wow. Wow. That, my
office also overlooks the NCAA. There is a partnership there
someplace. We keep Duke as a great brain injury center. We keep
getting grants from various places to study brain injury. It
has become the thing with neuroimaging in particular. So why
cannot the VA be the place to go for TBI?
Mr. O'Rourke. Mr. Umbdenstock, do you have a comment?
Mr. Umbdenstock. The flip side of that is that whatever you
might decide as the VA to stop doing, the private sector needs
some lead time to understand what they are going to be picking
up and what the unique needs of these particular patients and
individuals are. Because so few people ever have just one
condition when they present anymore. And certainly if they have
a highly complex condition it is not going to be the same as
our, there is no average patient, but a typical patient coming
in from a community based setting. So we need time to
understand what it is we will be picking up in that as much as
possible.
Dr. Brown. I will give you one data point that I know of
just from my specific thing. The fee basis people that tell me
that they are calling all the patients, veterans, over a
certain time period, 70 percent of those people are deciding to
stay within the VA and 30 percent are deciding to fee basis,
and that is where I have been working with them. So there are
customers, the voice of the customer, who prefer the VA. We do
not know yet the total cost of care. But my gut tells me the VA
could do a good job. It may not be in every place around the
country. So I think it is going to end up being a hybrid. I do
not think it is going to be an all or nothing phenomenon. And I
think that the data should make the decision.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Mr. Studer. I think what you are bringing up is excellent.
I think you have to be good at those things where you are going
to have the most demand. And I think the question continues to
ask, I ask you, is your goal to have a strong VA, or is your
goal to provide the best care for veterans? And if the number
one goal is to provide the best care for veterans then the
location where they can get the best care is where they should
be. It should not depend on what the title is. And for most
people I talk to access is vital right now. So of course that
would probably provide better access.
Dr. Stacey. And if I might just add one thing. A year and a
half ago my nephew came back from Afghanistan. He was a Marine
in Afghanistan. And when he went to Afghanistan we all feared
the worst. And he came home with PTSD. And we realized that the
worst was not what we thought it could be, that this was the
worst. And it is an ongoing, I appreciate hearing you say what
can we do? What unique nature do we have that we can take care
of to take care of people like my nephew? I just hope we
remember those things. The national surgical quality program is
in place today because the VA had the best access to surgery
and training and they shared that with everybody. There are
things like that that we can take advantage of.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you. Thank you all for your answers.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Dr. Roe, you are recognized for
five minutes.
Dr. Roe. I thank the chairman, and I certainly thank the
panel for being here. And you have made a lot of great
comments. The lenses I will always view the VA through is in
the examining room, patient to doctor. That is how I will view
it. And I look at the private for profit, not for profit
hospitals, versus the VA system, and Mr. Evans and those of us
that have lived in the private world all these years, you know,
you start your fiscal year, you do not know what your revenue
will be. You think you know what it will be based on previous
years, but you really do not know what it will be at the start
of the year. Just the opposite for the VA, they know exactly
what their revenue is going to be, exactly how much money they
have budgeted because we provide that for them. They come up
here, present a budget, we approve it, pass it, and write the
checks. So there is a different motivation. And I look at what
Dr. Wenstrup and Dr. Ruiz both were mentioning, there is a
difference when you are an employed physicians at a VA, a
certain expectation, versus an employer, which is what I was,
working for myself. I had a totally different motivation to get
up and go to work everyday. And it did not stop at 4:30, and it
did not start at 8:00. It started at 6:00 or 6:30 in the
morning, and it finished when I got finished, whenever the time
was that day. And if I did not finish that day I might finish
the next afternoon, 36 hours later. That was a different
motivation and model than you see at the VA right now. And I
think with all this testimony I have heard, I have been here
five and a half years, and you see this as a symptom. And I do
not know whether you can change the VA or not. I do not know
whether it can be done or not.
I certainly agree with Dr. Wenstrup. I was a, have VA
hospital a mile from where I live at home. I saw, because they
did not have a gynecologist, an OB/GYN doctor most of the time,
I saw a lot of VA, I served as a VA doctor in the private
sector. It worked fine. And I think many things, I am a
veteran, I could easily go to the VA, or I could go to the
private sector. I choose to go to the private sector because I
can afford to and there are other needy veterans who cannot so
I do not want to get in the way of someone who would need that.
So they limit the number of people they see based on a lot of
reasons. Scheduling, number of patients that can be seen,
number of doctors, providers they have, and so on. A lot of
different reasons. And Mr. Evans and Dr. Stacey know in the
private sector we have to serve everybody. You keep your
emergency room, you cannot say, well, we are overbooked. You
have to take whoever comes in the door. And that is a
completely different philosophy, I think, than you see at the
VA.
I have heard a lot of good ideas here today. Whether we can
actually incorporate them, and one bad idea I have heard is let
us just, and I have not heard it yet, but it is let us just
throw some more money at it. Money is finite. And we ought to
look at the resources we have, and can we better use them
within the VA? I think we can. I think good, smart people can
do that. And I know you all provide the 30,000-foot level. The
level I work at, as I say, is in the patient's room or the
operating room. And you have to have systems here that allow me
at my level to do my job the most efficiently I can. And right
now I do not think that occurs at the VA. I have worked in a
VA. I trained at one, most physicians have. And it is a
different model than the private sector. So that may in and of
itself stop it. And I want to hear your views on that, from any
of you on the panel that would like to comment.
Dr. Brown. I will say I am actually in the weeds on all
those things, too. I actually designed the space, the exam
room. But the most troubling thing I heard out of there is you
do not know if it can, believe that it actually could be done
no matter what. So if that is the case, do we not have to prove
that it actually will work and do a pilot somewhere that
something different that is, if you look for innovation in
industries it usually does not come from the big monolithic,
you know, organization. It is the skunk works, the, you know, a
new start up or something. So should we take a center and
totally turn it upside down, change every policy and procedure,
and let it be managed under a different set of paradigm, and
then prove that it could be done, and then take that through
the rest of the VA? Rather than trying to change the entire VA
at once?
Dr. Roe. I think that makes a lot of sense. I think one of
the things that will help the VA get better is competition. I
think having veterans who can opt out, as you said 30 percent,
I think, of veterans do. Many veterans like to be served at the
VA, and they should have that choice. I agree with that
completely. And many veterans get great care at the VA. I want
to make that, and it is not all bad. And I mean, the Veterans
Hospital provides a lot of great care for veterans and they do
some things better than anybody else I think in the world, as
Mr. O'Rourke mentioned.
So I think they need to do what they do well. I think
things like taking care of high blood pressure, Type II
diabetes, things that we do everyday that is just ho-hum in the
private sector can be taken care of well outside and relieve
these long waiting lines, and so forth. So yes, I like your
idea of taking a VA center and say, hey, let us try these new
things. I totally agree with that. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much to the panelists. We are
very grateful for you coming today. Just a couple real quick
short, short questions. VA has told us that one of the biggest
barriers that they have and that is time consuming, is the
credentialing and privileging process for their physicians. And
my question is, to those of you that are, I suspect Mr. Evans,
Dr. Brown, in particular, Dr. Stacey, do you agree with that?
What is the average time it takes to credential somebody, and
get them hired?
Dr. Brown. In the VA it is not just the credentialing, it
is then the security stuff and the fingerprinting, and all the
rest. But it is, you know, four to five months.
I think there are two different processes that members need
to understand. There is the credentialing, where I actually
call back to your medical school, I check your----
The Chairman. No, I have that.
Dr. Brown. Right.
The Chairman. I am sorry. I am talking, because this is
what VA will tell us. They will say the biggest problem,
basically is looking to see their medical licenses, and they
will talk about the different states they have to go through,
and all this. And that should be quick.
Dr. Brown. Yes. And I would actually say that we could
actually do a better job of sharing that information. So within
health systems we only have now one office that checks the
credentials for all of our hospitals. Each of the hospitals
have to have a separate privileging board that gives
privileges. But credentialing is centralized.
The Chairman. How long does that process take?
Dr. Brown. I could not say off the top of my head.
Dr. Stacey. The process can take a month or more to get all
the data----
The Chairman. Yes, but VA, and that is what I am saying. I
am fine with that. VA says it takes them eight months. All
right?
Dr. Brown. And they duplicate what we do. Because most of
the VA docs are actually also our docs. Could we actually share
this and do this together?
Dr. Stacey. But we have that data. Yes----
Mr. Umbdenstock. There is a nonprofit organization here at
the national level that has a uniform practitioner database
where you keep all your credentials up to date yourself and
then you decide who they send it to. So it does not all have to
be done by individual organizations either. There are options.
The Chairman. Again, I think VA is doing it the way they
did it in 1944. And we have got to change the process. And so,
we have also heard from VA that when one veteran patient, in
particular it happens in Northwest Florida because people come
from the North down to the beaches for the summertime, and they
are considered a new patient when they come into the VA system
again, year after year after year. And so Mr. Evans, quickly to
you, if you go from one facility to the other within Indiana,
are they considered a new patient?
Mr. Evans. Our vision as a system is one standard of care,
everyplace, all the time. So that somebody in Goshen, Indiana,
which is on the Michigan border, or somebody in Paoli, Indiana,
which is down near Louisville, receives the same standard of
high quality care. At the root of that is data. So in practice
we are not 100 percent there. Our electronic medical records do
not talk to each other all the time. But that is our goal. And
in reality we are probably 75 percent there, meaning that that
website I showed you, I can go there, I should have done it, I
can get on it and put in my own name and it would tell you
every place I have received care within IU Health, and I could
make an appointment, and then I could coordinate with the
pharmacy, and the doc, and so forth. But the root of that is
the electronic medical record. And the industry is still on a
journey with that.
But as the other panelists have said, the VA has been a
leader in some of these areas.
Dr. Brown. That being one.
Mr. Evans. That being one. So why the heck it is not
completely integrated, I do not really understand.
Dr. Brown. Well within the VA it is not actually one single
unified record. You still have to request it through a web if
you are actually going from Wisconsin to Florida. If you are
within the VISN you get it. From a CMS, you know, system within
the private sector, if you are seen within the same tax id'd
organization within two years you are not a new patient. You
know. So it is the difference between is that a workload unit?
Because you do not have to redo everything within two years. So
I am not sure they would be considered a new patient within the
same VISN.
The Chairman. Well, and I was not talking about the same
VISN. I was talking about people coming from the North into a
totally new VISN.
Dr. Brown. Right.
The Chairman. It still does not make sense. It should be
one health care system for everybody that is out there. And
then real quickly, as we close, VA is surging, obviously from
the time that we brought this forward on our hearing in April
9th, they have said they have reached out to everybody that
they can think of in order to talk about the issues. And so my
question is, very simply, yes or no, and you have already said
that they have reached out to you. So Dr. Brown, have they
reached out to you?
Dr. Brown. No, but I am an Indian. I am not a bigwig. They
would not. I mean, I have reached out and talked to my own, I
talk to my local VA every week. But not any higher than that.
The Chairman. Mr. Evans.
Mr. Evans. Well the Superintendent of our VA, whatever his
title is, I talked to him this morning.
The Chairman. About.
Mr. Evans. About this hearing and about our collaboration.
Our COO----
The Chairman. But prior to that did----
Mr. Evans. Yes. Yes.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Evans. Well, one of the reasons is we provide most of
the specialty----
The Chairman. Yes. Dr. Stacey.
Mr. Evans [continuing]. Medical school.
Dr. Stacey. Yes.
The Chairman. Mr. Studer.
Mr. Studer. No.
The Chairman. Okay. Very good. Any other questions? I ask
that all members would have five legislative days with which to
revise and extend their remarks.
Again, we are grateful. We hope that we can invite you back
to talk with us. And this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:16 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
Prepared Statement of Jeff Miller, Chairman
Good morning. The Committee will come to order.
Welcome to today's Full Committee oversight hearing entitled,
``Creating Efficiency through Comparison: An Evaluation of Private
Sector Best Practices and the VA Health Care System.''
Over the last eight weeks, the Committee has held ten Full
Committee oversight hearings, encompassing just over thirty-five hours
of testimony.
At these hearings, we have heard from VA leaders and a diverse
collection of expert witnesses about the many and varied access,
accountability, integrity, and data reliability failures that are
plaguing the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) health care and
benefits systems.
In their testimony this morning, the American Hospital Association
states that:
``Successful organizations have cultures that: set clear,
measureable and actionable goals and ensure they are communicated to
and understood by all employees; embrace transparency . . . [and] . . .
engage their clinicians as partners, not employees . . . ''
By this measure--which I believe is a fair one--the VA health care
organization as we know it today cannot be considered a successful
organization.
VA has failed to set and embrace clear, measurable, and actionable
access and accountability goals as evidenced by a recent Administration
report which stated that VA's fourteen-day scheduling standard was `` .
. . arbitrary, ill-defined, and misunderstood . . . '' and VA's culture
`` . . . tends to minimize problems or refuse to acknowledge problems
altogether.''
VA has failed to embrace transparency as evidenced by the one-
hundred and fifteen outstanding deliverables requests dating back more
than two years that this Committee continues to wait for.
And, VA has failed to engage their clinician workforce as partners
as evidenced by the numerous whistleblowers who have come forward to
share their stories of retribution and reprisal and the many more who
continue to call our offices yet, understandably, are reluctant to come
forward publicly.
Our veterans deserve a VA that works for them; not one that refuses
to work at all.
Improvement and innovation are necessary but neither can thrive in
a bureaucratic vacuum.
And as with any vacuum, nature fills it with whatever is available
and, in this case, it is questionable care, falsified performance, and
abuse of employees.
During this morning's hearing, we will discuss how the Department--
and, by extension, our nation's veterans--can move forward from this
summer of scandal and create the VA health care system our veterans
deserve by leveraging the best practices used by non-VA providers and
private sector health care organizations.
On today's witness panel we have two Malcolm Baldridge National
Quality Award winners; a former VA physician; two high-performing VA
academic affiliates; and, a national advocacy organization representing
more than five-thousand hospitals, health care systems, networks, and
care providers.
Though VA's organization and patient population may have certain
demographic qualities, there are valuable lessons to be learned from
health care standard-bearers and leaders that, if heeded, could vastly
and rapidly improve the care our veterans receive.
As I (the Chairman) stated during a hearing at the very beginning
of this intense Committee oversight process, the Department got where
it is today due to a perfect storm of believing its own rhetoric and
trusting its status quo as a sacred cow immune from criticism and
internal revolt.
VA cannot continue business as usual.
The status quo is unacceptable.
It is time for change--change that embraces both new ideas and
proven practices.

Prepared Statement of Michael Michaud, Ranking Member
Good Morning, and thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this hearing
today.
I appreciate that we continue to gather invaluable information
about what works and what doesn't work in our VA health care system.
This information is guiding our efforts to reform the VA and ensure
our veterans receive quality, safe, timely health care--where and when
they need it.
I'm looking forward to the testimony we'll hear this morning from
our panelists on best practices in the private sector.
I believe that we should always strive to do better.
And I think we can learn and get some good ideas in areas where
private health care providers have had great success, and either
tackling, or outright avoiding, many of the problems we are confronting
today in the VA.
One area where I think we need to hear more from the private sector
is related to scheduling and patient medical records.
Clearly, the scheduling practices--and technology--within the VA
system are not working. The system can be manipulated, there is no
standardization, and patients aren't getting seen in a timely fashion.
I would be interested to hear about some of the scheduling models
various private sector organizations use. Getting patients seen right
away--before their medical conditions are allowed to worsen--absolutely
must be one of our first priorities.
Also, the VA has clearly struggled to anticipate and plan
accordingly for the surge of veterans seeking to access the health care
system as we continue winding down two wars. I would like to hear how
other health facilities have developed strategic plans that are
tailored to the current and anticipated needs of their specific
populations.
I believe that, in order for us to maintain progress on things like
the wait list backlog, and to ensure individual VA facilities have the
resources they need to treat their patients in an acceptable amount of
time, the VA needs to do a better job of looking a few years down the
line, figuring out what regional and local veteran population medical
needs will be, and planning accordingly.
We also should keep in mind, as we hear these best practices, the
VA is the health care system best-suited to meet the needs of our
veterans. It provides a number of specialty services for our veterans
that just can't be found in the private sector.
Despite the many problems throughout the VA system, it remains the
system best-suited to meet our veterans' health needs across their
entire episode of care.
As we all know, our veterans generally have greater health concerns
and are older than the general population.
The VA has developed a bench of medical professionals who are
trained to treat the service-specific needs of veterans better than
most. That includes issues like prosthetics, spinal cord injury
treatment and in-patient mental health services.
Also, a high number of medical professionals in our country--more
than 60 percent--train at VA medical facilities.
I want to be clear: we are not talking about privatizing VA care.
We are talking about strengthening a health care system that is
uniquely suited to serve the needs of our veterans with best practices
that are working in the private sector.
I'd like to thank the panelists who are joining us today, and I
look forward to hearing today's testimony.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

Prepared Statement of Hon. Corrine Brown
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member for calling this
hearing today.
The VA has been under the microscope for its practices over the
last few months. We all know how big the VA is and the many issues that
accompany treating veterans for their many and individual health issues
that come with serving in the military and deploying overseas.
The VA operates 1,700 sites of care, and conducts approximately 85
million appointments each year, which comes to 236,000 health care
appointments each day.
My regional VISN, the VA Sunshine health care network serves more
patients than most health care systems. With eight VA Medical Centers
in Florida, Georgia and Puerto Rico and over 55 clinics serving over
1.6 million veterans, veterans are getting the best in the world.
Over 2,312 physicians and 5,310 nurses are serving the 546,874
veterans who made nearly 8 million visits to the facilities in our
region. Of the total 25,133 VA employees, one-third are veterans.
In 2013, 37,221 women received health care services at VA hospitals
and clinics in Florida, South Georgia and the Caribbean--more than any
other VA health care network nationwide. This means that more than 75%
of women Veterans enrolled for VA health care in VISN 8 were seen by
providers in 2013.
I look forward to hearing the testimony of the witnesses today and
am interested in how they think they could adapt their policies to the
unique circumstances the VA deals with every day.

Prepared Statement of Richard J. Umbdenstock
On behalf of our nearly 5,000 member hospitals, health systems and
other health care organizations, and our 43,000 individual members, the
American Hospital Association (AHA) appreciates this opportunity to
testify on operational best practices from the private health care
sector and their applicability to the Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) health system.
The goal of every hospital in America, including VA hospitals, is
to ensure patients get the right care at the right time, in the right
setting. For decades, the VA has been there for our veterans in times
of need, and it does extraordinary work under very challenging
circumstances for a growing and complex patient population. VA patients
are generally older and sicker with more limited resources, in many
cases requiring greater care coordination. The VA also is the
definitive source of care for the treatment of conditions related to
the occupational health risks associated with military service; for
example traumatic brain injury, polytrauma, spinal injury and post-
traumatic stress disorder. In addition, the VA is a leading expert on
helping patients who require prostheses navigate life post-amputation.
The nation's hospitals have a long-standing history of collaboration
with the VA and stand ready to assist them, and our veterans, in any
way they can as they seek solutions to today's challenges.
As others on the panel will demonstrate, health care delivery is
most effective when it is tailored to the unique needs of patients and
the community. What works for one type of health care provider in one
setting or one location, may not work for another because health care
is not a one-size-fits-all enterprise.

Our testimony focuses on two areas:

Lessons learned from hospitals' continuous efforts to
improve operational efficiency and quality, including
demonstrated best practices from the private sector; and

The AHA's advice to the committee regarding a final
agreement on legislation to speed veterans' access to health
care through the private sector.

A Culture of Continuous Improvement

Hospitals are on a never-ending journey of quality improvement--
employing new technologies and techniques and research on what works,
as well as continuously training new workers to meet the needs of
patients and improve operations. While hospitals are at different
points on their quality path, all hospitals are committed to safety,
improving clinical quality outcomes and the patient experience.

Varying Approaches To Improvement

Hospitals employ various approaches and models to improve quality.
Many hospitals are using process improvement programs with roots in
manufacturing to optimize the patient experience, lower costs and
improve overall quality. Examples of these models include the Baldrige
Criteria for Performance Excellence, Lean, Six Sigma and the Plan-Do-
Study-Act (PDSA) approach. The Baldrige Criteria are an organizing
framework that facilitates organization-wide alignment around
improvement goals and supports the development and continuous
strengthening of a culture of improvement. The criteria focus on seven
critical aspects of managing and performing as an organization:
leadership; strategic planning; customer focus; measurement, analysis,
and knowledge management; workforce focus; operations focus; and
results. Health care is the dominant sector utilizing and being
recognized in the Baldrige process. Lean, based on the Toyota
Production System, is a process improvement methodology that aims to
increase efficiency and productivity while reducing costs and waste.
Six Sigma is another approach to improving quality that was developed
by engineers at Motorola for use in improving the quality of the
company's products and services. It uses statistics to identify defects
and a variety of techniques to try to identify the sources of those
defects and the potential changes that could be made to reduce or
eliminate them. The PDSA approach is a four-step cycle to carry out a
change, such as a process improvement or a modified work flow. Under
the model, providers develop a plan to test a change (Plan), execute
the test (Do), observe and learn from the results (Study), and
determine potential modifications (Act).
Because each hospital is unique, leadership must select the method
that it believes will work best for its organization. However, quality
improvement efforts generally involve five steps:

1. Identify target areas for improvement;
2. Determine what processes can be modified to improve
outcomes;
3. Develop and execute effective strategies to improve quality;
4. Track performance and outcomes; and
5. Disseminate results to spur broad quality improvement.

For improvement efforts to be sustained, the organization's culture
must be aligned. Successful organizations have cultures that: set
clear, measureable and actionable goals and ensure they are
communicated to and understood by all employees; embrace transparency--
results measured and shared widely; engage their clinicians as
partners, not employees; standardize language and processes across the
organization; and focus on multiple, incremental changes to ensure
processes and systems are rethought, revised and tweaked to continue
achieving a precise execution. Top-performing organizations also
recognize their successes, both as individuals and teams, and encourage
active and ongoing feedback. Any member of any team--from a clinician
to an environmental services worker--should be empowered to speak up
when they believe something could be improved.

Lessons From Hospitals' Patient Safety and Quality Efforts

While hospitals have typically looked to other industries for
operational performance improvement strategies, they also are
harnessing the power of collaboration to dramatically improve the
quality and safety of patient care. Hospitals are working together, as
well as with quality-focused organizations, states, payers and others,
to improve patient safety and reduce adverse events. By forging
effective strategies and sharing what they have learned, hospital
leaders have spurred notable improvements in care delivery and patient
outcomes at the national, state and regional levels. These efforts have
led to better quality and patient safety, as well as reduced health
care costs, but more work is yet to be done.
The AHA/Health Research & Educational Trust (HRET) administers one
of 26 Hospital Engagement Networks (HENs) under the Department of
Health and Human Services' (HHS) Partnership for Patients campaign. The
AHA/HRET HEN, the largest in the nation, is comprised of 31
participating states and U.S. territories and more than 1,500
hospitals. The AHA/HRET HEN has accelerated improvement nationally, and
patients are benefiting every day from the spread and implementation of
best practices. Among other quality and patient safety improvements, in
the first two years of the program, participating hospitals reduced:

Early elective deliveries (which can increase
complications) by 57 percent;

Pressure ulcers by 26 percent;

Central line-associated bloodstream infections in
intensive care units by 23 percent,

Ventilator-associated pneumonia in the intensive care
unit by 13 percent and across all units by 34 percent; and

Readmissions within 30 days for heart failure patients
by 13 percent.

HHS estimates that the HEN program has contributed to preventing
nearly 15,000 deaths, avoided 560,000 patient injuries, and saved
approximately $4 billion. The program has helped the hospital field
develop the infrastructure, expertise and organizational culture to
support further quality improvements for years to come. These lessons
in collaboration could also prove valuable for development and
dissemination of operational best practices.

Specific Operational Issues Confronting the VA

Internal audits and this committee's investigations have revealed
systemic problems in the VA's scheduling system and patients' ability
to access care in a timely manner. While the other witnesses at this
hearing can speak more directly to what has worked for their
organizations, I can share a few principles around scheduling and
backlog reduction, specifically.
Patient Scheduling. Health care providers utilize a variety of
options to ensure the efficient flow of patient care. In the primary
care or ambulatory hospital settings, one of the key components in
ensuring patients receive the care they need in a timely manner is
effective scheduling.
There are three access models for patient scheduling in the primary
care and ambulatory setting:

In the traditional model, the schedule is completely
booked in advance; same-day urgent care is either deflected or
scheduled on top of existing appointments.

In a carve-out model, appointment slots are either
booked in advance or held for same-day urgent care; same-day
non-urgent requests are deflected into the future.

In the advanced or ``open access'' model, there is
true same-day capacity: The majority of appointment slots are
open for patients who call that day for routine, urgent or
preventive visits.

Because health care is not a one-size-fits-all enterprise, each
organization determines which scheduling model offers the best fit for
its patients' needs. health care organizations should analyze the needs
of patients as a group, for example their condition, age and gender
breakdown.
For primary care, the Institute for health care Improvement
recommends an open scheduling system in which physicians begin the day
with more than half of their slots available. Same-day appointments are
made regardless of the type of care needed. New patients and physicals
are also seen on the same day. Schedulers use a standard slot size--15
minutes, for example--and simply combine slots to make time for longer
visits. Depending on scale, an organization can do a hybrid or carve-
out model of open scheduling. While open access scheduling may be the
ideal in the primary care setting, it is not appropriate for every care
setting, particularly specialized care where capacity is more limited
and testing and consultations may be needed before appointments can be
scheduled. Nor is it easily realized; according to a November 2013
Commonwealth Fund report, only 48 percent of U.S. adults surveyed
reported being able to secure a same-day or next-day appointment to see
a physician or nurse.
Understanding and measurement of patient flow through the system is
critical to successfully implementing open access scheduling.
Measurement enables capacity problems to be identified quickly and
resolved at the appropriate point in the system. As with any process,
ongoing monitoring and continuous improvement is necessary.
It also is critical to consider resource availability and alignment
when selecting a scheduling system. One systematic electronic health
record, such as the VA has, allows for consistent data collection. But
staffing is also critical. Many organizations find it helpful to create
``care teams'' with the appropriate mix of caregivers needed to meet
patient demand.
As with most systems, communication is key to ensuring any
scheduling system's continued success. Agreement among all staff is
required before proceeding with the new scheduling process, and ongoing
meetings and status check-ups should occur among staff on the new
scheduling process. Communication also should be structured to identify
gaps in the scheduling process and pinpoint areas for improvement.
Education for staff and patients is also key. Staff should be
provided with education on the open scheduling concept, and training
should be tailored to each position along the process. New patient
orientation should explain the open scheduling concept.
Backlog Reduction. Even a well-functioning system can sometimes
result in backlog when demand is high or staffing is not optimal. To
reduce and eliminate backlog, facilities must first measure it, then
create and use a reduction plan.
Often in primary care, the backlog consists of patients waiting for
physicals, new patient visits or follow-ups. In specialty care, the
backlog includes patients waiting for an initial consult with the
specialist, or awaiting a timely return visit.
The Institute for health care Improvement's Backlog Reduction
Worksheet provides a step-by-step process to calculate backlog by each
provider in a given practice.
The Importance of Staff. Another way to improve efficiency is to
ensure that staff turnover is kept at a minimum. The right mix of
health care professionals, as well as support staff, is needed to build
an efficient team and to maintain positive morale. An inappropriately
staffed team is an inefficient team. Overburdened staff are under not
only an enormous amount of physical strain, but emotional strain as
well. Health care is about people, and staff are emotionally invested
in their mission and their patients. Conversely, overstaffing can lead
to inefficiency and higher costs as well. The key is to maintain
optimal staffing levels with minimal turnover.

Ensuring Veterans' Access Through the Private Sector

America's hospitals stand ready to offer assistance to ensure our
veterans get the care that they need and deserve. As Congress continues
its work to resolve differences between H.R. 4810, the ``Veteran Access
to Care Act of 2014,'' and H.R. 3230, the ``Veterans' Access to Care
through Choice, Accountability, and Transparency Act of 2014,'' we have
urged the conferees to adopt specific language in the final agreement
to ensure veterans are able to more easily obtain care from civilian
providers.

Minimizing Burden for Veterans and Providers

First, the AHA urges Congress to retain and strengthen language in
both the House and Senate bills that would enable hospitals to maintain
the ability to contract directly with their local VA facilities rather
than requiring hospitals to go through a managed care contractor. Many
hospitals have ongoing and cooperative relationships with their local
VA facilities, which can be built upon to enable our veterans to
readily secure needed care. Allowing hospitals to contract directly
with the VA allows hospitals to meet the needs of their local veteran
community and provides the quickest route for veterans to be seen by a
primary care provider. While some hospitals participate in the Patient
Centered Coordinated Care (PC3) program, civilian hospitals should not
be forced into this model in order to provide care that veterans need.
We also encourage the committee to minimize any additional
administrative burden placed on hospitals opting to contract with the
VA by exempting hospitals for the limited duration of the final
legislation from any federal contractor or subcontractor obligations
imposed by the Department of Labor's Office of Federal Contract
Compliance Programs (OFCCP).
The obligations OFCCP imposes on federal contractors, which could
be applied to hospitals that contract with the VA, will only add to
hospitals' costs and frustration without enhancing protections against
discrimination. Hospitals already are subject to myriad anti-
discrimination laws and regulations, including anti-discrimination
regulations that are appropriately enforced by many federal, state and
local agencies. Subjecting hospitals to additional paperwork burdens
and the costs associated with OFCCP regulations would divert financial
resources from patient care, and may, as a result, inhibit hospitals'
ability to improve access and deliver high-quality, timely and
efficient care to veterans with significant unmet health care needs as
the legislation intends.
Additionally, to facilitate veterans' access to needed health care,
it is imperative that any barriers, such as ``pre-clearance''
permission to utilize civilian health care providers, be avoided so
that veterans who meet the criteria (more than 40 miles from the
nearest VA facility or unable to receive an appointment in the allotted
time span) can be seen by a physician or in a hospital of their choice
near their place of residence.
Your commitment to work with hospitals and other health care
providers to streamline burdensome regulations will benefit both
veterans and caregivers by enabling health care professionals to spend
more time with patients and less time on bureaucratic paperwork.

Providing Adequate and Prompt Reimbursement

The AHA further encourages conferees to provide adequate
reimbursement rates for non-VA providers. Under the Senate bill,
payment for care provided by a non-VA facility could not exceed
Medicare rates; the House bill would pay non-VA providers who are not
under an existing VA contract at a rate set by the VA, Tricare, or
Medicare, whichever is greatest. We support the House language and urge
conferees to include this language in its final conference agreement.
Finally, the AHA urges conferees to insert language to establish
and implement a system for prompt payment of claims from non-VA
providers, similar to the Medicare program. Currently, there is no
binding prompt pay language in either bill.

CONCLUSION

The Department of Veterans Affairs health system does extraordinary
work under very difficult circumstances for a growing and complex
patient population. While the system faces operational challenges, I am
confident these can be overcome through the sharing of best practices
and technology solutions with the private sector, along with additional
access to civilian caregivers.
The AHA applauds Congress for the speed with which it has moved to
allow veterans to more easily secure care from civilian providers. And
we urge Congress to move expeditiously to resolve differences between
the House and Senate bills. We look forward to working with our VA
colleagues, Congress and the Administration to ensure our veterans
receive the care they need when they need it.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9380.004

Prepared Statement of Rulon F. Stacey
I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today both on behalf
of Fairview Health Services, an integrated, academic health system
based in Minneapolis, Minnesota serving more than 600,000 people each
year, and the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, the world's
leading performance excellence criteria created by an act of Congress
25 years ago to improve America's performance and its competitive
standing in the world.
I myself am honored to be a veteran of the United States Air Force.
That background gives me an enhanced interest on the topic under
consideration today. I also bring my perspective from nearly 30 years
of health care administration experience. I've worked in a variety of
private health care systems in rural, suburban and urban markets. Based
on this diverse background, I would suggest that while the issues faced
by the VA today are significant, they present you with a problem
similar in nature to the issues each of our systems are facing.
Specifically, how do we increase access and quality in light of limited
resources? Like my health system and others in the country, Congress is
wrestling with how to deliver the care our veterans deserve without
breaking the bank.
As the American Hospital Association has suggested, health care
needs are unique and health care needs to be tailored to the
individual. However, the processes by which we can improve clinical
outcomes are not unique. The challenge, I would suggest, is to find
proven improvement methodologies that cross care settings that can
benefit any health organization, including the VA.

Malcolm Baldrige Performance Excellence Program

To this end, we are fortunate in the United States to have the
world's finest process to address these issues. The Malcolm Baldrige
Performance Excellence Program, located at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology in the Department of Commerce, is a public-
private partnership that defines, promotes and recognizes performance
excellence in U.S. organizations. Some organizations choose to pursue
the actual Baldrige Award, which carries the Presidential seal, and
award recipients then share their best practices with others. Best of
all, the program is up and running and available to help right now at
no additional cost to the VA.
The program initially revolutionized manufacturing in the United
States, and it is now having the same effect on health care. In 38
hospitals that were Baldrige award finalists, the overall risk-adjusted
mortality rate was 7.57 percent lower, the patient safety index was
8.17 percent better, and risk-adjusted complications index was 1.3
percent better than in 3,000 peer hospitals.
Using a simple extrapolation, a comparable improvement in mortality
for all U.S. hospitals would save more than 54,000 lives and 1.78
billion dollars in health care costs annually.
Results achieved by Baldrige Award recipients include the
following:

Health Care Outcomes And Patient Safety

24 percent reduction in risk-adjusted mortality rate
over 3 years (Advocate Good Samaritan Hospital, Indiana); 23
percent reduction in overall mortality rate over 2 years
(Heartland Health, Missouri); 25 percent reduction in overall
mortality rate over 5 years (Robert Wood Johnson University
Hospital Hamilton, New Jersey); and 20 percent reduction in
overall mortality rate over 2 years (Bronson Methodist
Hospital, Michigan)

33 percent reduction in harm events per 1,000 patients
over 3 years through a ``zero-defect, no-excuses'' approach to
health care outcomes (Henry Ford Health System, Michigan)

1 percent or better hospital-acquired infection rate
over 3 years (Schneck Medical Center, Indiana); zero central-
line-associated blood stream infections since 2010 and zero
catheter-associated urinary tract infections and adverse events
involving incompatible blood since 2008 (Sutter Davis Hospital,
California); No central line-associated blood stream infections
in the intensive care unit for two years (North Mississippi
Medical Center)

Patient Satisfaction

Top 10 percent nationally for patient satisfaction and
engagement as defined by the Hospital Consumer Assessment of
health care Provider and Systems (HCAHPS), as well as a four-
year record of meeting CMS benchmarks for overall hospital
ratings of and measures of customers' willingness to recommend
the hospital to others. (Sutter Davis Hospital)

725 percent improvement in medical-group patient
satisfaction with urgent care and 100 percent improvement in
overall medical-group patient satisfaction over 5 years (Sharp
health care, California)

Weighted patient satisfaction results at or above the
Press Ganey Associates 90th percentile since 2008 (North
Mississippi Health System)

Better-than-top-decile patient satisfaction ratings
for outpatient, emergency, ambulatory surgery, and convenient
care (Advocate Good Samaritan Hospital, Illinois)

Efficiency and Cost Reduction

Decrease in Emergency Department average door-to-
doctor time from 45 minutes in 2008 to 22 minutes in 2012, well
below the California benchmark of 58 minutes. (Sutter Davis
Hospital)

Best 25 percent in the state for adjusted cost per
discharge (Sutter Davis Hospital, California)

Decreases of 50 percent in costly emergency room and
urgent care visits, 65 percent in specialty care, 36 percent in
primary care visits, and 54 percent in hospital admissions due
to increased same-day access to care (South Central Foundation,
Alaska)

Despite its location in what has been called ``the
nation's epicenter of poverty,'' the only health care
organization in Mississippi or Alabama with a Standard & Poor's
(S&P) AA credit rating, which it has held for the past 18
years. (North Mississippi Health System)

Average charge $2,000 lower than that of its main
competitor and $7,000 lower than the average charge in the
metropolitan area, while achieving a profit per discharge
higher than the top 10 percent of U.S. hospitals (Poudre Valley
Health System, now University of Colorado Health)

Nearly 28 percent overall improvement in length of
stay over 3 years (Poudre Valley Health System); nearly 16
percent overall improvement in length of stay over 4 years
(AtlantiCare)

Workforce Engagement

Employee satisfaction and engagement scores that are
better than the top 10 percent in a national survey database.
(Sutter Davis Hospital)

Employee retention rate at or above 90 percent since
fiscal year 2009, exceeding the Bureau of Labor Statistics'
benchmark for health care organizations by 10 percent. (North
Mississippi Health System)

A culture that emphasizes ``people first'' among its
critical success factors. Based on a ``servant-leadership''
philosophy, managers model the organization's values and build
trust with employees, sustaining an empowered, accountable, and
high-performing workforce. (North Mississippi Health System)

Ranking in the national top 10 percent of similar
organizations for physician loyalty; names on of the ``Top 100
Best Places to Work'' (Poudre Valley Health System, now
University of Colorado Health)

Clinical Integration Program that rewards physicians
for achieving superior clinical, service, and efficiency
outcomes (Advocate Good Samaritan Hospital, Illinois)

Nearly 47 percent improvement in physician
satisfaction over 3 years (AtlantiCare, New Jersey); 20 percent
improvement over 2 years (Bronson Methodist Hospital); 99
percent overall physician satisfaction (North Mississippi
Medical Center)

Decreases in employee vacancy rates: 68 percent
decrease over 3 years (Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital
Hamilton); nearly 31 percent decrease over 2 years (North
Mississippi Medical Center); 34 percent decrease over 5 years
(Mercy Health System); 33 percent decrease over 4 years
(AtlantiCare, New Jersey)

As a recipient of the Baldrige Award at a previous organization, I
experienced first-hand the power of the Baldrige Performance Excellence
Program. Using the program as an improvement roadmap, we improved
patient satisfaction for ten straight years. Our risk adjusted
mortality rate improved to rank among the top 10 percent nationally.
Additionally, by improving staff motivation and empowering the staff to
be innovative we were able to decrease employee turnover from 25
percent to less than 5 percent, and we achieved national rankings in
the top 10 percent for physician loyalty. While driving these
improvements, we also created efficiencies, freeing up resources to
further reinvest in our clinical care and services.
This process works and is instantly available. It works because it
engages physicians, nurses and other staff in identifying improvement
opportunities and then engages them in duplicating best practices so
each and every patient we serve receives the best possible care. Best
practices can come from within our organization or from others in the
industry.
What Providers Can Learn from One Another: Examples from Fairview
Health Services
On the national level, health care providers have much to learn
from one another. In fact, the VA has, in the past, lead the industry
in identifying and sharing best practice research. The precursor to the
National Surgical Quality Improvement Program, the nation's leading
surgical best practice improvement program, came from VA research and
best practice sharing. I know that the American Hospital Association
and organizations like mine throughout the country stand ready to help
revitalize this process and lend any assistance we can as we search for
leading-edge ideas on how to improve quality and access while reducing
costs.
These processes have also helped us at Fairview Health Services,
where we annually have more than 5.8 million outpatient encounters, 1.5
million clinic visits, 72,000 inpatient admissions and 9,000 births.
And we continue to driving many quality improvements from which I
believe other organizations can learn. Some examples:

In just one of our Emergency Departments, the care
team cut the average time spent waiting between registration
and seeing the doctor by more than half--from 58 minutes to
less than 28 minutes.

In May 2010, we launched an ambitious effort to change
how we deliver primary care to improve quality outcomes and the
patient experience while reducing the total cost of care. By
more fully leveraging the multidisciplinary team and the date
now available to us through the electronic health record, we've
moved the dial on all three metrics. In fact, just this week 32
of our clinics were recognized statewide for clinical quality
results.

A Tel-Assurance program that has been in place less
than a year has already has helped cut in half the 30-day
hospital readmission rate for participating patients compared
to a baseline population--from 13 percent to 6.5 percent. The
program was initially launched for select patient populations,
and we're now spreading it to others.

To meet the needs of adult patients with complex,
chronic conditions who have physical, psychological or social
barriers that make leaving their home challenging, we recently
expanded our Complex Care Clinic to provide more home-base
care. We found that meeting with patients in their homes does
more than provide them access. It provides an opportunity to
more rapidly build relationships and trust and to identify
barriers to their health and well-being that may not be readily
evident in the clinic setting.

A multidisciplinary team at Fairview believed reducing
injuries to mothers and babies during delivery was a worthy
mission and set out in 2008 to reduce those injuries to zero--
and they are making great progress. For example, birth injuries
at our children's hospital were already rare, but this work
reduced them by another 70 percent. Our work to drive birth
injuries to zero is often cited as a national best practice.

To specifically better meet the needs of the seniors
we care for, we are bringing more health care directly into our
senior resident communities. Services include mobile X-rays and
fracture casting, in-house vision and hearing check-ups and
online medical record services accessible by residents and
their families. We're learning that one person's convenience is
another person's lifesaver.

I share these examples to emphasize that health care organizations
can achieve dramatic improvements when we identify improvement
opportunities--both small and large, take steps to address the
opportunities, measure the results and then spread what works. I also
share them to reinforce that health systems across the country are
driving improvements and that providers have a lot to share and learn
from another. That's what methodologies like the Baldrige Performance
Excellence Program teach us. We are fortunate to have such a resource
available to us, and I hope more health care organizations take
advantage of what it can do to improve care and reduce costs.
The United States Congress expects people like me to find ways to
deliver even higher quality care while further reducing costs. And, you
are right to do so. By using proven methodologies and sharing best
practices across the industry, our nation's health care system can
improve and better serve the people who count on us each day to care
for them and their loved ones.
Prepared Statement of Quinton Studer
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Michaud and Committee Members:
Thank you for the opportunity to address the Committee today on
best practices from the private sector.
Health care organizations, both large and small have found that
standardizing operations along with standardizing clinical care
practices lead to both efficiencies and improved outcomes.
Successful operators in the private sector know they must reduce
tolerance for variance, whether it is within a specific department,
across departments or across facilities within a division. Further,
once a best practice is identified (by measurable outcomes) the path
must be opened for it to be scaled across an organization.
These successful leadership teams also recognize that this begins
with workforce engagement as studies have shown that a more highly
engaged workforce creates both a safer work and a safer care
environment. Higher engagement traditionally leads to fewer workarounds
which drives safety and, in turn, clinical outcomes.
The path to standardization begins with a strong sense of
alignment. Successful organizations' leadership teams know that by
focusing on fewer vs. more goals allows for clear communication, clear
expectations for middle leaders and a clear path to execution on those
goals.
While establishing clear goals and metrics (with emphasis on
outcomes vs. process measures) is important, the best leadership teams
understand the importance of ``connecting to purpose'', and thus are
able to create buy-in and ownership of front-line leadership and front-
line associates. Connecting to purpose allows the front-line associates
(whether patient-facing or in support service areas) to keep the
patient at the center of their work.
We learn much of what we know about standardizing practices within
health care from our physician colleagues. Physician leaders will tell
you that the greater good of the organization and patient care should
always trump individual autonomy. Strong medical groups are quick to
address colleagues practicing outside a body of evidence. The VA would
be well served to follow this model and move quickly and strongly to
diagnose, create a treatment plan and standardize certain operational
and clinical practices across the enterprise.

Key Elements/Areas of Focus:

Action, Alignment, Accountability

Culture of High Performance

Current VA issues: Access, Pre communication, post
communication, etc.

Efficiencies = higher quality = expense reduction

For The Record
The Boston Globe Data-Driven Scheduling Predicts Patient No-Shows
By Michael B. Farrell
Globe Staff July 14, 2014
With all the advancements in health care, the medical profession
still cannot get its appointment book in order.
Doctors are constantly overbooked. Patients constantly
rescheduling. One day a waiting room is packed, the next it's empty.
So when Gabriel Belfort attended a health care hackathon at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2012, he challenged the
coders, engineers, and clinicians there to fix that nagging issue.
``There's a scheduling problem in medicine,'' said Belfort, who at
the time was a postdoctoral student studying brain science at MIT. ``If
you've had an appointment and you've showed up on time, you've probably
had to wait.''
That dilemma posed by Belfort generated a very MIT proposal: What
if you could use data science to determine which patients are likely to
show up and which ones will be no-shows and manage office appointments
around those tendencies?
``It was immediately clear to me that this is a problem that
computers could solve,'' Belfort said.
In short order, Belfort and an ad hoc team of nine people--students
and health care professionals--at the hackathon built a prototype to
prove out the concept. Then, so excited by the prospect that they could
solve one of health care's chronic pains, Belfort and three others who
were strangers before that weekend launched a startup, aptly named
Smart Scheduling Inc.
Here's the gist: Smart Scheduling mines patient scheduling
histories to determine who is more likely to cancel or miss an
appointment. It then sends alerts to the scheduling programs that
doctor offices use to book appointments.
If a patient is in a high-risk category, for instance, it prompts
office schedulers to call with a reminder. If the patient cannot be
reached, there is a good chance he will not show up at all. So, the
doctors could then book another patient for that time slot, keeping the
patient flow consistent throughout the day.
Within months of forming, Smart Scheduling attracted the interest
of Healthbox, an accelerator program that invests $50,000 in promising
startups and gives them free office space and mentoring. It also landed
a meeting with executives at Athena Health Inc., which eventually
resulted in Smart Scheduling's becoming the first startup in the
Watertown Health information company's new accelerator program. Athena
Health also made an undisclosed investment to help the company build
out its marketing and sales efforts.
So far, Smart Scheduling has attracted some $500,000 in early-stage
investment. And already it has two large health systems signed up as
customers: Martin's Point Health Care, which runs health centers in
Maine, and Steward Health Care System, one of the biggest hospital
groups in Massachusetts, where the software is being used by about 40
of its doctors offices.
Dr. Michael Callum, president of Steward Medical Group, said Smart
Scheduling helps take some of the ambiguity and guesswork out of making
appointments; by eliminating unexpected down time, Steward doctors
systemwide are able to see 100 more patients every week.
``When you leave it to the front-desk people in the office, they
are not all that good of predicting flow in terms of when patients will
show up,'' Callum said. ``It turns out that Smart Scheduling is much
better at predicting that.''
Here is what Smart Scheduling has learned about us as patients: If
we are single, or under 40, we are more likely to cancel an appointment
than an older or married patient. New patients miss more appointments
than regulars.
In general, expecting patients to show up for the 1 p.m. slot is a
bad idea. On the other hand, Wednesdays are great, as patients are not
likely to cancel on those days.
So far, Smart Scheduling has developed 722 variables that it uses
to make predictions, based on an analysis of millions of data points
about patients from Athena Health. And the more data Smart Scheduling
can crunch, the better it gets at predicting behavior.
The company says that, so far, its analysis has proven accurate 70
percent of the time when predicting cancellations.
``If everybody got a better schedule, we'd all be happier,'' said
Ateet Adhikari, director of the Healthbox accelerator program. ``The
patients benefit, the doctors benefit, and the insurer benefits. A more
efficient system trickles down.''
Smart Scheduling was among the first companies that Healthbox
invested in when it launched in Boston in 2012. Since then, it has
backed 19 health-related startups.
Smart Scheduling exemplifies a new type of health care startup;
instead of going after the big issues in health care--curing cancer,
for instance--they are targeting more modest changes to improve the
medical experience with technology.
``Companies like Smart Scheduling are dramatically improving health
care not by producing a new drug,'' said Bill Aulet, director of the
Martin Trust Center For MIT Entrepreneurship. ``It's by streamlining
the process and getting increased efficiencies.''
Belfort has since gone on to work at a local biotech company,
although he remains an adviser to Smart Scheduling. Out of the group
that came together to build the original product at the MIT hackathon
in 2012, only Chris Moses has stuck around full time, and is now the
company's chief executive.
Improving patient flow in the doctor's office is just the first
step, Moses said. ``The next step,'' he added, ``is to try to figure
out who are the sickest patients and who the ones are that need to be
seen first.''

[all]
