- DEFINING AND IMPROVING SUCCESS FOR STUDENT VETERANS

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEFINING AND IMPROVING SUCCESS FOR STUDENT VETERANS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MAY 8, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-67

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
88-978 PDF                         WASHINGTON : 2015
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Member
Chairman                         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              DINA TITUS, Nevada
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               RAUL RUIZ, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GLORIA NEGRETE McLEOD, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California                TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
DAVID JOLLY, Florida
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Nancy Dolan, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

BILL FLORES, Texas, Chairman

JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               MARK TAKANO, California, Ranaking
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado                   Member
PAUL COOK, California                JULIA BROWNLEY, California
BRAD WENSTRUP, Ohio                  DINA TITUS, Nevada
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Thursday, May 8, 2014

Defining and Improving Success for Student Veterans..............     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Bill Flores, Chairman............................................     1
Mark Takano, Ranking Member......................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Michael Dakduk, Vice President of Military and Veterans
Affairs, Association of Private Sector Colleges and
Universities (APSCU)...........................................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    28

Mr. William Hubbard, Vice President of External Affairs, Student
Veterans of America (SVA)......................................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    32

Mr. Ricardo D. Torres, President and CEO, The National Student
Clearinghouse..................................................     7
Prepared Statement...........................................    43

Letter of Testimonies From: The National Student Clearinghouse...    48
Mr. Thomas W. Ross, President, The University of North Carolina
System, On behalf of The American Council on Education (ACE)...     9
Prepared Statement...........................................    49

Dr. Melissa Vito, Senior Vice President for Student Affairs and
Enrollment Management and Vice Provost for Academic Initiatives
and Student Success, The University of Arizona.................    10
Prepared Statement...........................................    54

Mr. Curtis L. Coy, Deputy Under Secretary for Economic
Opportunity, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs...............    20
Prepared Statement...........................................    69

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD

Universal Technical Institute....................................    72

Reserve Officers Association.....................................    80

The American Legion..............................................    86

Northern Arizona University......................................    92

DEFINING AND IMPROVING SUCCESS FOR STUDENT VETERANS

----------

Thursday, May 8, 2014

U. S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Bill Flores
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Flores, Takano, Brownley, Titus,
and Kirkpatrick.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN BILL FLORES

Mr. Flores. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order.
This morning, we will be examining how to define and
improve success for student veterans. VA's education and
training programs have been credited with successfully
transitioning and readjusting returning servicemembers for
generations.
In fact, many historians believe that the passage of the GI
Bill following World War II kept this country out of a
recession that very well could have spiraled into another
depression.
It has been reported that post World War II GI benefits
educated 10 million returning veterans, among them 14 Nobel
Prize and 20 Pulitzer Prize winners, three presidents, a dozen
senators, and three Supreme Court justices.
It was through this lens that Congress authorized and
expanded several education and training programs throughout the
years, including the newest and by far the most generous
program to date, the Post-9/11 GI Bill.
VA estimates that during the next fiscal year, they expect
to pay out $15 billion in payments to students and schools for
education and training. While I firmly believe that our
veterans deserve every penny of these benefits, it has become
clear to me and to most in the veteran community that there
simply have not been enough metrics to track the return on
taxpayer investment through student success.
Given our Federal Government's fiscal challenges, we owe it
to hard-working American families to develop, track, monitor,
and report these metrics.
I was surprised to learn that up until a few years ago, we
did not even begin to start tracking graduation rates or many
other statistics that track student success. That is why I am
happy to see that there seems to be a growing partnership
between advocacy groups, students, schools, and VA to truly
understand the rates of success for our student veterans.
I look forward to hearing about the Million Records project
and how this data will positively mold the future for student
veterans, schools, and the VA's administration of GI Bill
benefits.
Why is this important? It is important because this data
will help inform Congress about student veteran behavior and
show schools and the VA what type of best practices and
policies will improve outcomes for student veterans.
I also want to comment on VA's implementation of the
Transparency Act from last Congress. I know that the VA created
the new comparison tool and complaint system on a shoestring
budget. And while there are many limitations to these tools, I
think that they have the potential to be a game changer and
will allow for better transparency for our student veterans.
I look forward to hearing more about these and other VA
programs, including the VetSuccess on Campus program during
today's hearing.
In the end, it is up to the student to make the right
choice and to use their hard-earned benefits wisely. It is our
job to ensure that they have the tools they need to be
successful and to make the right decisions to help both
themselves and their families.
With that, I recognize the ranking member, Mr. Takano, for
his opening remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
I want to start by congratulating Student Veterans of
America for their hard work on the Million Records project that
has yielded such interesting and useful information.
This hearing will give us an opportunity to delve deeper
into the findings from the recently released project done by
SVA in collaboration with the National Student Clearinghouse
and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
This key empirical study compares the academic outcomes of
student veterans to those of traditional students and
highlights the need for this information. The findings shed
light on the amount of time it takes student veterans to
complete higher education programs, the type of degrees they
typically attain, and common areas of study.
SVA will elaborate on the impact of the initiative and how
lawmakers can use these findings to improve educational
programs for veterans.
Today we will hear testimony about how different
organizations define the success of student veterans and what
measures are still necessary to help veterans achieve their
academic goals.
We will also hear commentary on the implementation of the
Improving Transparency of Education Opportunities for Veterans
Act, Public Law 112-249, which is designed to improve a
veteran's access to information on an institution of higher
education's accreditation and federal student aid programs.
Finally, I want to add that Chairman Flores and I have
introduced H.R. 4248, the Veterans Education Outcomes Act,
which would require the disaggregation and dissemination of
data on student veterans with respect to completion rates,
employment rates, and retention rates of recipients of GI Bill
funding.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for scheduling this hearing today,
and I yield back.
Mr. Flores. I thank the ranking member.
And I now invite our first panel to the table. Your
complete written statements will become part of the hearing
record and each of you will be recognized for five minutes for
your oral statement.
We have joining us today Mr. Michael Dakduk, vice president
of Military and Veterans Affairs, at the Association of Private
Sector Colleges and Universities; Mr. William Hubbard, vice
president of External Affairs, for Student Veterans of America.
Will, I understand that you proposed in the last few days
and that she said yes. And so congratulations on your upcoming
nuptials.
And next we have Mr. Ricardo Torres, president and CEO of
the National Student Clearinghouse; Mr. Thomas Ross, president
of North Carolina System, who is here on behalf of the American
Council on Education; and we have Dr. Melissa Vito, senior vice
president for Student Affairs and Enrollment Management and
vice provost for Academic Initiatives and Student Success at
the University of Arizona.
I do not know how you get all that on one card, but--so
thank you all for being here.
Let's begin with Mr. Dakduk. You are now recognized for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL DAKDUK

Mr. Dakduk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Takano,
and Members of the subcommittee, for inviting the Association
of Private Sector Colleges and Universities or APSCU to testify
here today.
I am representing APSCU, our member institutions, their
faculty, and the nearly four million students who attend
private sector institutions, including the 325,000 plus
military veterans that attend our member institutions.
We appreciate the opportunity to offer our views on the
successful educational outcomes for returning servicemembers
and veterans, the VetSuccess program, and the implementation of
Public Law 112-249.
To begin, please allow me to offer a short summary of my
background. I previously served in the marine corps where I
deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan. I used military tuition
assistance while in the service and studied on base and onboard
a navy ship preparing for my second combat deployment.
After the service, I used the Montgomery GI Bill and other
Title 4 funds like the Pell Grant. Once the Post-9/11 GI Bill
passed, I began using that benefit and I am still using that
benefit today to earn my master's degree.
In brief, I have a special appreciation for the programs
discussed in this committee and Congress as a whole when it
comes to supporting student servicemembers, veterans, and their
families.
I would like to begin by discussing outcome measures
specific to veterans. You will likely hear from the Student
Veterans of America representative, who will go into more
detail on the recent results from their Million Records
program, a comprehensive study of veterans on the Montgomery GI
Bill and the Post-9/11 GI Bill.
Given my previous tenure at Student Veterans of America as
their CEO and my specific efforts on this project, I would like
to offer a few thoughts I found relevant to this hearing.
The overall completion rate was approximately 52 percent,
well above the nontraditional peers. Existing research on post
World War II and Vietnam veterans indicate that the vast
majority of veterans complete their post secondary programs.
Post Vietnam era veterans have GPAs greater than or equal to
their peers.
Recent research in 2010 conducted by the Department of
Veterans Affairs showed that 63 percent of veterans self-
reported as completing their post secondary training. Over half
of the post-9/11 era respondents said they completed as well.
While the private nonprofits had the highest completion
rates, approximately 22 percent later completed at a public or
proprietary institution. The completion rate for the private
sector was approximately 45 percent. And private sector
institutions or the for profits had higher proportions of
veterans completing degrees faster.
Overall, the reports suggest that student veterans are
succeeding at levels comparable to, if not greater than, their
peers. This refutes previous notions that veterans drop out in
high numbers.
We understand that the process for collecting outcomes data
on student veterans is already underway at the federal level
given the recent charge by President Obama under Executive
Order 13607 or the Principles of Excellence, although Congress
should be keenly aware of the limitations in current federal
databases like the integrated post secondary education database
systems or IPEDS.
As of today, IPEDS does not disaggregate data based on
military or veteran enrollment. We have provided at APSCU
recommendations for tracking student outcomes in our proposal
for the reauthorization of the Higher Education Act.
Our proposal offers thoughts around five key areas,
retention and progression rates, completion and return on
investment, employment of graduates, earnings and/or salary
gains, and graduate satisfaction.
We believe the common college completion metrics as
proposed by the National Governors Association chair's
initiative provides a good foundation for advancing the
conversation around student outcomes and success metrics.
Conceptually this model could be applied to veterans using the
Post-9/11 GI Bill and other Title 38 funds.
At a minimum, though, we should appreciate the unique life
experiences of veterans and servicemembers. They differ
drastically from the 18-year-old, first-time, full-time college
student. Current and future attempts to track their academic
success should be done with an appreciation for their
exceptional life trajectories.
And I would like to say a few words on VetSuccess and
Public Law 112-249. With the VetSuccess on program or VSOC, the
program provides important access to services and supports to
veterans on campus. The VetSuccess on Campus is on 94 campuses,
but only one is located at a private sector institution.
With Public Law 112-249, our association was an early
supporter of H.R. 4057, which is now the Public Law, and we
remain supportive and look forward to working with the VA on
implementation.
I look forward to your questions and thoughts. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee.

[The prepared statement of Michael Dakduk appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you for your testimony and thank you for
your service and thank you for the numerous trips you have made
to help this committee do its job better.
Mr. Hubbard, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM HUBBARD

Mr. Hubbard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate your
kind words earlier.
Ranking Member Takano and Members of the subcommittee,
thank you for inviting Student Veterans of America to submit
our testimony today. As the premier advocate for student
veterans and higher education, it is our privilege to share our
on-the-ground perspective with you this morning.
As quintessential nontraditional students, student veterans
face a myriad of challenges that most of our peers in the
classroom do not. Fortunately, this generation of veterans has
proven that they are well equipped to succeed.
Take, for example, Abby Kinch. Abby served as a Chinese
linguist in the Air Force for more than two years before
leaving to have her first child. Today Abby attends classes
part time in pursuit of her Ph.D. at Florida State University
while caring for two children and having to work full time to
support her family, a shining example of what student veterans
can accomplish.
Since the release of our Million Records project, we have
the data now, for the first time ever, proving that veterans of
the post-9/11 generation are broadly succeeding in higher
education.
SVA defines student veteran success as: student veterans
making well-informed educational decisions, achieving personal
academic goals without incurring student loan debt, and
securing gainful employment that propels them forward in their
career aspirations.
With veterans graduating across the country, we believe
that the debt burden for some of them will ultimately be the
single largest inhibiting factor to long-term success. There is
a common misconception that veterans who go to school on the GI
Bill have a free ticket, but we know that that is simply not
true.
An earned benefit, the GI Bill is, not only not free, but
for some it does not cover the full cost of their education. As
the MRP results indicate, some student veterans take longer to
complete their degree due to being nontraditional students,
resulting in the need to take out additional loans. Others face
abusive or misleading practices across sectors of education
that can result in undue and unnecessary debt burdens.
We also remain concerned with some of the technical and
career colleges that claim to offer credentials and
certifications, whose exams students are not able to sit for at
the end of their course of study due to a lack of proper
accreditation. This results in the loss of valuable benefits
and years of study.
Beyond the typical understanding of student success and
higher education, it is important to recognize that due to the
nature of the Post-9/11 conflicts, traditional definitions of
time to completion may create a false narrative of student
veterans. Many of these veterans face multiple deployments that
interrupted their academic efforts or put their education on
hold to complete a tour of service.
When the timeframe is extended out by a few years, these
completion rates increase significantly. The story here is one
of persistence as student veterans continue to work towards
graduation, even if it takes longer than traditional students.
Using data from the last fiscal year, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics illustrated the importance of higher education. For
those who achieved an associate's degree, unemployment dropped
to 5.4 percent and for those with a bachelor's degree or
greater, that drops even further to four percent and below.
Being able to support student veterans so they pursue
fields that positively impact the economy is a top priority for
us.
In fiscal year 2014, the Department of Defense budget
request was approximately $526 billion. Unfortunately, the
billions of dollars invested is often lost when servicemembers
exit the service and reenter civilian fields unable to cover
the cost of a longer education track required for fields like
STEM that would capitalize on previous advanced training.
We believe there may be opportunities to encourage these
individuals to pursue those rigorous fields of study. Together
with programs like VA's VSOC and VITAL, the community around
each student veteran is critical to their success. The
community acts as a web of support to create an environment
where all veterans will succeed.
Schools are recognizing the unique role that this web plays
in the achievement of student veterans and some have created
veteran liaison networks. In these networks, schools like
American University have established various points of contact
in different offices to provide a holistic support system to
student veterans. These touch points exist from financial aid
offices to career offices and beyond.
Given the new data from our MRP, we see there is more work
to be done for generations of student veterans to come like
Abby. Our next phase will seek to build and expand upon the
findings of the initial research by beginning to explore what
institutional factors influence student veterans' persistence
and degree attainment.
In collaboration with our partners at the Department of
Veterans Affairs, the National Student Clearinghouse, and the
Institute of Veterans and Military Families, the end goal of
this research will be to inform institutions, policymakers, and
other stakeholders of what works.
We thank the chairman, the ranking member, and the
subcommittee Members for your time, attention, and devotion to
the cause of student veterans and higher education. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of William Hubbard appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Hubbard.
Mr. Torres, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICARDO D. TORRES

Mr. Torres. Good morning. The National Student
Clearinghouse is a nonprofit organization which for the past 21
years has been focused on reducing administrative burdens on
students and school administrators from Title 4 institutions
that enroll 96 percent of our Nation's post secondary students.
The clearinghouse was founded to cost effectively address
Title 4 student loan program compliance related inefficiencies.
Participating institutions continuously provide access to
enrollment and degree information on each of their students
allowing the clearinghouse to offer student level coverage
encompassing more than 144 million students and counting.
Most clearinghouse verification and research services are
provided to colleges and universities at no charge. Think of us
as a back office to the university registrar, financial aid
office, and institutional researcher.
The clearinghouse performs over one billion secure and
legally compliant transactions annually. The public/private
partnership of the clearinghouse can be a model of a way to
better serve our veterans while reducing the burdens on both
governments and educational institutions.
We have recently issued reports that broaden perspectives
and inform many of the pressing questions about student
educational pathways and outcomes for states, school districts,
institutions, and policymakers.
Through the Million Records project, we were able to help
inform the Nation about the return in our Federal Government's
investment of more than $34 billion for veterans' education
benefits. For the first time for this collaboration among the
VA, the SVA, and the clearinghouse comprehensive national
statistics on veterans' educational pathways and outcomes were
made available.
The data that we provided highlighted the nontraditional,
multi-institutional journey of veterans' educational pathways.
Given the influx of veterans expected into higher education
over the next few years, it is imperative that we have the
ability to successfully meet veteran program demands in a way
that responds to the varied needs of these nontraditional
students.
The first opportunity to further assist veterans is
facilitating entry to colleges and universities. Among the many
challenges returning veterans face upon their separation from
service, understanding and managing the complex information
about their education benefits and multiple aid programs
available to them stands out.
They encounter administrative complexities around
activities such as processing their certificate of eligibility,
residency verifications, Kicker processing, previous credential
accumulation, applicability of credentials to degrees,
remaining benefit on transfers, and branch of service requests
and inconsistencies.
These procedures individually all serve a purpose but could
be greatly simplified while achieving the desired result, a
timely, benefit-enabled enrollment of the veteran at the
institution of their choice.
Our solution here would be twofold. First, employ
electronic document ordering capability into the e-benefit
portal, enabling a veteran to securely and privately send their
benefit summary directly to their chosen institution's
veterans' administrator and, second, in collaboration with ACE,
the VA, and the DoD, allow the clearinghouse to be the
repository of active-duty and veteran competencies, academic
credits, and credential aggregation, enabling a one-stop data
home to help facilitate efficient access to higher education
and a job.
The next opportunity is supporting veterans' continuous
enrollment towards their desired educational goals. Re-
mobilizations and employment changes and family circumstances
mean that a student veteran may take longer to graduate, making
it harder for them to maintain momentum and focus on their
goals.
We need further research like the MRP but expand it to
determine which veteran support programs both qualitative and
financial are working best to serve the needs of veterans today
and which need to be improved or modified. Using the
collaborative model of the MRP, such a project can be performed
within one year.
Second, we need to transform the administrative support
process to help both the veteran and the school quickly turn
around critical information related to student progress tied to
tuition assistance requests and timely aid disbursements.
Current pain points include repetitive end of semester
completion status reports, interim add/drops, changing majors,
determining entitlement balances, uploading of course
catalogues, and constant reporting outside of normal cycles.
Leveraging our Title 4 experience, we can enable a
significant improvement in reporting these requirements,
thereby allowing school staff to spend more time serving
students and allowing the veteran to be less focused on
paperwork and more on class work and homework.
One available tool is our free open source application,
Meteor, which provides a platform to aggregate student aid and
debt both private and public. Meteor connected to the VA
benefits' database could provide the veteran with an integrated
view of all aid, debt, and benefits.
When it comes to improving veterans' success in pursuit of
their educational goals, eliminating the administrative burdens
that impede a timely benefit-enabled enrollment and data-
informed support program and service provisioning that sync
with chosen educational pathways would be a great start.
Thank you for this great invitation to comment, and I look
forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ricardo D. Torres appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Torres.
Mr. Ross, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS W. ROSS

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today to
talk about defining and improving academic success for student
veterans.
I am Tom Ross. I am president of the University of North
Carolina System. We enroll more than 220,000 students on 16
university campuses and employ roughly 50,000 faculty and staff
across the state. Approximately 8,000 of our current students
use VA educational benefits to pay for some or all of their
post secondary education.
I know that this subcommittee and Chairman Miller have a
special interest in public institutions of higher education
extending in-state tuition rates to certain veterans who may
not qualify under current state law.
I want to be clear that the UNC System supports and has
always supported extending in-state tuition to certain veterans
and their families. We appreciate the leadership shown by
Chairman Miller and this subcommittee on this issue.
While North Carolina is not currently among those states
that offer this benefit, please know that we are aggressively
with state legislators going to change this situation and we
are optimistic that that will happen in our short session this
year.
As the state's public university, we are working hard to
enroll, educate, and graduate as many academically prepared
servicemembers, veterans, and dependents as possible. Our
motivation is simple. The success of student veterans and their
families attending UNC institutions is vital to the success of
the university and our state's future.
Since the Post-9/11 Bill became law in 2008, a series of
new and sometimes confusing requirements and initiatives in
support of student veterans have been introduced by the
Congress, the President, the Department of Defense, and the
Department of Veterans Affairs.
UNC agrees with the spirit and intent behind each
requirement or program. We hope, however, that federal agencies
will continue to work together to greater coordinate the
effort. We also ask to be included on the front end in any new
federal initiatives as we believe we are well positioned to
offer perspective and constructive feedback.
Because adequately serving student veterans requires
leadership from the top, I have been working with our 16
university chancellors to implement the recommendations of UNC
SERVES, a comprehensive report that offers specific action
steps for improving UNC SERVES veterans and their families.
Our campuses have established military affairs committees
and our system periodically convenes the UNC Military Affairs
Council, a coordinating body, with representatives from every
campus.
The UNC Board of Governors is equally engaged. In June of
2013, the board approved a military student success policy that
will provide a comprehensive network of services for military
affiliated students.
Under the policy, for example, any individual who has
completed at least two years of cumulative active-duty service
in the United States Armed Forces will be considered a transfer
student in the admission's process.
Last August, the board also established a special committee
on military affairs with a particular focus on fostering
success for university student veterans.
Further, UNC has implemented a uniform data collection
procedure to ensure that we identify and track the academic
progress of servicemembers, veterans, spouses, and other
dependent family members.
Individual UNC campuses have a long history of working with
military affiliated students and North Carolina's military
installations and several have academic advisors located on
post.
A number of campuses offer specialized programs of interest
to veterans and active-duty military servicemembers with
courses that are structured to accommodate student veterans'
special needs.
One of our top priorities is centralizing information
sharing and we used technology to create a virtual one-stop
shop where veterans can find reliable and consistent
information to answer their most common questions.
We believe that this one-stop shop approach works well for
the university, for student veterans, and for the military, but
the primary reason we have taken this approach is because we
care deeply about the men and women in uniform as well as our
veterans. We are committed to supporting student veterans
because of North Carolina's longstanding pride in and support
of the military.
The University of North Carolina can and should be a
natural place of transition. They have earned the educational
benefit and that benefit can be their ticket to a brighter
future. It is our duty to make it happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This concludes my testimony, and I
look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Thomas W. Ross appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you for your testimony.
Dr. Vito, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. MELISSA VITO

Dr. Vito. Thank you.
Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano, Representative
Kirkpatrick, and Members of the committee, I thank you for the
opportunity to represent President Ann Weaver Hart today with
testimony about what we are doing at the University of Arizona.
Thank you.
I want to focus today on three primary areas, what the
University of Arizona is doing to engage and support our
student veterans and how this has evolved, how we measure
success for our student veterans with graduating rates,
satisfaction, and meeting their priority needs, and to explore
further measures and make a few suggestions about what is still
needed to be done to ensure that all student veterans across
the United States are accomplishing their academic goals.
So first a few facts about the University of Arizona. We
have over 40,000 students of which about over 1,300 are student
veterans receiving GI benefits. They represent over three
percent of our total population. Our reservist population is
small with about 62 reservists.
Since 2009, our entering cohort of student veterans has
doubled and we are continuing to see significant growth.
Females account for about a third of our total student
population and usage of our main campus vet center has
increased 31 percent from fall of 2012 to 2013 with over 10,000
visits in one semester.
We did not know these numbers in 2008. And at that time, we
embarked using our nationally recognized disability resource
center as a vehicle to start to engage focused conversations
around our returning disabled vets. We also held a national
roundtable to try to bring the best minds to the table to talk
about how to support our vets.
Six years later, we use a constellation of coordinated
services to support our veterans and they include our vets'
education and transition services center. We have one large
facility in our student union. It is large in our center for
student involvement and leadership and we have simply added one
more center in our Arizona and health sciences area to support
our vets in public health, nursing, and our other medical-
related fields.
Our disability and resource center and adaptive athletics
programs is a critical partner. The Southern Arizona VA
Hospital, including providing on campus counseling and other
support, other medical support critically supports our vets.
The SERV class, which I will talk a little bit about,
focuses supportive campus, for credit classes for vets and is
making a difference and our College of Law Clinic engages the
University of Arizona law students to support other vets.
Our vet center is at the core of what we do. It is our
physical environment that creates sort of a USO type
environment for students to feel like they can meet other vets.
The Student Veterans Association is a part of it and it is the
anchor for our vets on campus.
That area has partnered with academic areas to create a
video for faculty to help them better understand our vets. We
work with admissions to make sure we are reaching out to our
veterans from the moment that they apply or even think about
becoming a University of Arizona student.
Career services has provided a particular focus with
specific employers like USAA and GEICO and Enterprise who are
focusing on hiring vets. And we are now working with academic
partners and the community to develop a coordinated web of
support for vets that they will be able to understand easily
anywhere virtually and physically on campus.
Disability resource center has done a lot of research and
we have learned a critical point about our vets, that they do
not view themselves as disabled in the way that the rest of
society does. They see themselves as needing to make
adaptations to learn. And we are using this data to inform how
we support our vets.
Southern Arizona VA health care I talked about. We have a
lead psychologist, Dr. Marks, female counselors, nurse
practitioners, and patient advocates who support our vets on
campus and off.
Our SERV program, which was really developed by Dr. Marks
and a colleague, is a focused for credit course and now
becoming an array of courses that focuses on resiliency,
leadership, is taught in cohorts, and so it builds on the
comradery that vets need, helps them understand what is
important to learning, including themselves, and how they
integrate their experiences as military veterans into this
environment. And it is making a difference. The students who
complete the SERV program have retention rates of over 90
percent. So we are looking to try to expand that program.
As we look at measuring our success and growing our
success, we know there is more to do. We survey regularly. We
focus that to use that to meet our needs. And we are now adding
a staff person in career services to make sure that our vets
who leave the university and graduate in high numbers will be
able to find jobs when they leave.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Melissa Vito appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Thank you for your testimony, Dr. Vito.
And, again, thank the entire panel for your testimony.
I will now yield myself five minutes for questions.
The first question is for everyone on the panel. What are
your thoughts on the VA comparison tool and why do you think
its functions are valuable for veterans?
We will just start left to right if we can, Mr. Dakduk.
Mr. Dakduk. Yes, Mr. Chairman. So I am a proponent of the
VA comparison tool. I think it needs to be updated with certain
information when it becomes available, including data on
completion rates for military veterans specifically, and that
needs to be included in there.
But by and large, I think it is a good system. I am glad it
has been rolled out and I am supportive of it.
Mr. Flores. Okay. Thank you.
And by the way, when each of you give your answers, if you
would tell us what you think needs to be added or changed about
the tool as well.
Mr. Hubbard.
Mr. Hubbard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Similarly, we think the comparison tool is a fantastic
opportunity for vets to see an aggregated view of information
that otherwise would have been unavailable. It would have
probably taken 20 Ph.D.s to pull all that information together
otherwise. So have a single view of that is a huge, huge
support to all student veterans.
As a first iteration, I think it is an excellent start. I
think that there is fine tuning that could be done.
Particularly there is parts of information that I think a lot
of student veterans would like to see in that view, some of
which would be supportive of their college search.
I think being able to reach out to particular universities
to take the information that they are getting, that they are
comparing these schools and being able to reach out to vets on
campus as another opportunity of informing themselves would be
very important.
Mr. Flores. Thank you.
Mr. Torres.
Mr. Torres. Thank you.
We actually think that the tool is a breakthrough. It is a
very important first step in the process. However, there are
two areas that I think that we could really stand to improve.
First, it does not calculate an individual veteran's
entitlement and track what part of the entitlement has been
used. So it is an estimator, which is great, and it is
informative. It really does not help the veteran shop easily
for what school they need to be--how it would apply to
different institutions that they are thinking about applying
to.
The second limitation of the tool is that while it was
designed to really limit the work burdens on schools, the
graduation rates that are being used are really not relevant to
what actually happens at the institutional level.
Over a third of students overall in the country transfer
from one school to another and, therefore, the completion rates
that are in the IPEDS numbers really do not bear any
resemblance to what actually is happening on there.
I believe my colleagues to the left could probably comment
on how they leverage information around transfers at their own
institutions.
But I believe that is a second step in terms of trying to
come up with a better way so that a veteran looking at their
pathways, which is the other piece, right, because the
completion rates include first-time, full-time students, which
is not what the veteran is, right? They are older and you have
to look at what are the odds of success for people who look
like them and what is their odds and by types of institutions.
So I think further segmentation is required, but I think,
again, it is a great start. But I think like everything else, I
think we need to continue to improve where we are headed with
the tool.
Mr. Flores. Mr. Ross.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me first say that I think transparency is incredibly
important to all of our students and particularly to veterans.
They deserve to get as much information as they can when they
are making college decisions. And this tool, I think, is
helpful in that regard.
I think Mr. Torres points out very importantly that the
information that is in there needs to be accurate. And as I
said in my testimony, under our new policies, if you have had
two years in the military, you will come to us as a transfer
student.
The military will be the transferring institution, that is
the way we will count it, as a way to enable students a clear
pathway into our institutions. If you do that, their data does
not count because they are transfer students.
And so I think we have got to be sure the data is right.
You know, we have a dashboard that we have recently put up that
tracks all sorts of metrics and information on success, student
success, and we want to be sure what we put there is the most
accurate information possible.
So, you know, I applaud the tool. I think it is a helpful
step. It can be improved, and we are happy to work with you to
do that.
Mr. Flores. Dr. Vito.
Dr. Vito. Thank you.
In my 27 seconds, I would like to support the comments of
Mr. Torres and Mr. Ross big time. I think it is a great first
step and I think focusing on the data and the multiple pathways
and then making it easy for vets to be able to compare
different institutions apples to apples in ways that will be
clear and easy.
I think that we sometimes forget how easy it is to do
things like that in other settings, and we need to use that
same model here. Thank you.
Mr. Flores. Well, thank each of you for your testimony.
And I want to say that some of the recommendations we saw
in your verbal and your written testimony were outstanding, and
thank you for that.
Thank you for the participation in the Million Records
project. That was also very helpful, provides great data.
I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Takano, for five
minutes for his questions.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross, I want to congratulate the University of North
Carolina and the intention to comply with the role of providing
veterans with in-state tuition for the University of North
Carolina.
Dr. Vito, is some effort going on in Arizona?
Dr. Vito. Yes. Actually, I was just writing a note to
myself that we do virtually the same thing.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Very good. Thank you.
Dr. Vito. You bet.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Dakduk, in line with the spirit of what has
passed through our committee and the bill that we passed
through the House to require that in-state tuition be offered
to veterans in respective states at state universities, are
your members lowering tuition for veterans and has your
association urged that your members do that?
Mr. Dakduk. Absolutely. I think you can look at our best
practices guide that I am happy to share with you, Congressman
Takano, and the rest of the Members of the subcommittee.
One of the things you will find at private sector
institutions is how many of them buy into the Yellow Ribbon
program and how many of them buy into the Yellow Ribbon program
at the full unlimited rate for the unlimited number of student
veterans that want to attend that.
Mr. Takano. But have they lowered tuition for veterans
commensurate with what the public universities are doing?
Mr. Dakduk. I am happy to point you to a number of our
member institutions----
Mr. Takano. Okay. I would be interested----
Mr. Dakduk [continuing]. Where veterans can go full time at
virtually a zero rate unless they choose to pull out Title 4
funds.
Mr. Takano. Well, I have not heard that you said they are
actually lowering the rate, but I would be interested in that
information. I am not convinced that the for profit sector is
really serving our veterans.
Can you tell me the credits that veterans earn, are they
generally transferable to regionally accredited schools?
Mr. Dakduk. That is a systemic problem throughout all of
higher education, the transferability of military credits and
experience. And it is an issue that we have been looking at.
Mr. Takano. But the credits that veterans earn at your
member schools which are generally nationally accredited, to my
understanding, but my understanding is that these credits are
not transferable to universities such as the University of
North Carolina who are regionally accredited. Is that true?
Mr. Dakduk. It depends. But I would also offer this. We
might want to talk to the institutions on why they are not
receiving those credits or accepting them. I think that is one
of the big issues I have called for while I am here at APSCU
and when I was at Student Veterans of America.
Mr. Takano. But we also have the question of why aren't
your members seeking regional or obtaining regional
accreditation; do we not?
Mr. Dakduk. Well, it is different. It is different for
different types of programs and different types of
institutions. Remember nationally accredited and regional
accreditation is recognized by the Department of Education and
this Administration.
Mr. Takano. Well, that is another separate issue. But the
fact remains that the credits are not fungible and many
students will enroll in these programs and do not know that
they cannot transfer the credits they earn at your member
institutions to the state universities and university systems,
correct?
Mr. Dakduk. Our association and our member institutions are
committed to consumer education and we want to make sure that
we give this information to student veterans, student
servicemembers, and their families to make sure they make the
best choice when they choose an institution and understand
transferability of military credits.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Hubbard, to what extent did your research project look
at the success of certificate and degree programs actually
leading to employment?
Mr. Hubbard. Thank you, Congressman Takano, for the
question.
We did look at that very specifically. It was not
differentiated from any of the other degrees. Our research
looked at everything from certificates all the way up through
Ph.D.s and everything in between.
Mr. Takano. We have introduced legislation to require
schools to disaggregate and disseminate data on student
veterans.
Do you think it would be helpful to VSOs like SVA, the VA,
prospective students for this disaggregation and dissemination?
Mr. Hubbard. Without question.
Mr. Takano. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Takano.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick, you are recognized for five minutes for
questions.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Thank you, Chairman, for having this
important hearing.
Thank you, Ranking Member Takano.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for your testimony
today and extend a special thanks to President Ann Hart Weaver
at the University of Arizona and to you, Dr. Vito, for your
testimony and the great work you are doing for our veterans.
I am extremely proud to say that my alma mater, the
University of Arizona, has demonstrated a strong commitment to
helping its student veterans achieve success. And I am
particularly proud of the university's number one ranked
disability resource center and the model it has developed for
integrating disabled student veterans into the campus
community.
I would also like to thank Northern Arizona University in
Flagstaff, Arizona where I live for submitting a statement for
this hearing today. Northern Arizona University is nationally
recognized as a leader in higher education services and support
for its student veterans.
We know that a veteran's first year is the most critical
for a successful transition from military to student life, and
Northern Arizona University is leading the way by introducing
an innovative transition program this fall that is tailored to
the needs of its student veterans.
Great ideas come from Arizona and I believe this committee
has already learned a great deal from our University of Arizona
witness and from the Northern Arizona statement for the record.
I look forward to learning more about what University of
Arizona and Northern Arizona University are doing and hoping we
can use their best practices to ensure that our student
veterans are equipped for success across the country.
And I do not have any questions. I thank you again for your
great testimony, and I yield back.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Congresswoman Kirkpatrick.
Ms. Brownley, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I wanted to just follow-up on Ranking Member Takano's
questioning around the in-state tuition issue. And I heard
several of you testify about certain veterans getting in-state
tuition and I just wanted to get a further clarification on
what that means exactly.
Mr. Ross. We are in the process now of working with our
legislature to determine exactly who would qualify and who
would not. What we have asked them to consider is those
veterans that have separated in our state and done so within a
certain period of time.
Obviously there is a cost to the state for the
differential, and so we are encouraging them to make this as
broad as possible, understanding the fiscal cost of it and the
effect on our budget.
But we think the return for the state in the long term
makes this a good investment, and the reason we feel that way
is we have every indication from employers that veterans that
come out of our institutions make some of their best employees.
They have great work ethics. They are disciplined. They come
with a can-do attitude. And so we believe that our employers
will benefit from these individuals.
We have a history in North Carolina of being able to
attract some of the best and brightest from around the country
because we have some great educational institutions public and
private, and many of them stay in our state, which helps
increase our educational attainment, which we believe we are
going to need to do to meet the workforce demands of the
future.
So attracting veterans to our institutions, keeping them in
our state is a good investment, we believe, for North Carolina.
And so we are working with our legislature to iron out those
particular details, but we believe they are very receptive to
the idea of doing as much as they possibly can for as many
veterans as possible.
Ms. Brownley. Dr. Vito.
Dr. Vito. And in Arizona, we are similar actually to what
Mr. Ross had stated. We do ask that our veterans demonstrate an
Arizona driver's license, in-state lease, and some evidence of
actually being in Arizona outside of service, but those vets
are able to receive in-state tuition.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Mr. Hubbard, in terms of your good work, I will say, and in
terms of collecting information on the Million Records project,
did you look at all or evaluate the VRAP program and, you know,
to determine, to look at that to see if it is successful, how
it is working at all?
Mr. Hubbard. So for our first cut at the Million Records
project, we did not. This research was to understand a baseline
of how veterans are faring in higher education. It was just
simply too difficult to capture all of that data and have an
accurate clean methodology.
So that is something that we have looked at, including
further study, and we have recommended to this committee
previously to encourage further data. There has been a lot of
great legislation that Representative Takano and also the
chairman have put out there and we encourage more of that. I
think in future studies, that will be something we will be
looking at.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
And I have another minute here. I wanted to give a shout
out to a university in my district, California State University
at Channel Islands. They have a wonderful program for veterans
and I think part of the success of the program is they have
sort of a buddy system or kind of a peer-to-peer network, so
veterans really partnering with other veterans to make sure
that they are successful in school.
And, Dr. Vito, you talked about a coordinated web of
support that you are building at your university. And I am just
wondering, it seems as though at least anecdotally there are
better outcomes. The retention rate is better when programs
like this exist within an educational institution and was
wondering if you could make a comment.
Dr. Vito. Absolutely true. Thank you for your question,
Congresswoman.
What we find and that is our student vet center acts as
that peer-to-peer place and vets do work with each other. They
connect with each other. We hire vets. It is staffed by vets
who are there on student work study and supporting other vets.
Part of the power of our SERV program, and those are our
courses for credit and actually we are developing a resiliency
minor as an outgrowth of this, is that students go into those
courses as part of a cohort to build comradery, to have each
other, and to process that.
So we see the power of working together as critically
important. In the military, that is such a part of the
experience and then you come to a large campus and the sense of
isolation and culture clash is so overwhelming that making sure
that intentionally we create those opportunities is fundamental
to the success of our vets.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much.
Dr. Vito. Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. And, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Flores. Congresswoman Brownley, thank you.
And, Ms. Titus, you are recognized for five minutes for
questions.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate what you are doing on your two campuses to
support veterans. I would like to focus a little more
specifically on the STEM fields. I hear often from businesses
that we lack people in this country trained in the STEM fields,
and I think that veterans are really in position to take up
that slack because many of them have gotten training while in
service in medical and technical fields.
But these degrees often require more money because of lab
courses and things and often take longer because there are more
requirements.
I have got a bill that I am working on that would set up
kind of a bridge program for veterans that would help through
the GI Bill make up in those two areas.
I wondered if you all would comment on it from the
standpoint of institutions and maybe you from the standpoint of
a student.
Mr. Ross. Thank you. Yes, ma'am.
You know, I think that you are exactly right, that the STEM
fields are one that we are all concerned about. And I would say
just a couple things.
One is if you look at the data for our veteran students, it
is more heavily weighted, frankly, to STEM fields, particularly
in engineering because of some of their prior training and
experience.
You know, I can tell you quickly one story about a young
man who is graduating this week from Western Carolina
University who entered NC State, spent two years, volunteered,
became a medic, was deployed to Iraq, came back from Iraq as a
medic, and entered Western Carolina because of their emergency
medical program. He got there and got interested in biology and
became a biology major and is graduating this spring, coming to
Washington for a very highly selective post doc at the National
Institute of Health.
So veterans can find their way and be incredibly successful
in the STEM fields, but it does require some extra effort. And
so anything the Congress can do to assist that, I think, would
pay dividends for the country and for certainly the veterans.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Ms. Vito. Thank you, Congresswoman. It is a great question.
At the University of Arizona, we see our top three majors
as pre business, actually applied science, and international
service. And so science is our front and center and they are
front and center at the University of Arizona.
I think that we have some specific programs that target
student deficiencies around math to try to help students bridge
in to be successful and the type of work that you have
described that would acknowledge maybe a lengthened academic
path without financial penalties could be really important to
encouraging students getting into STEM.
I know the report that was done with the clearinghouse and
Student Veterans Association also made a couple of
recommendations about how we might grow veterans' participation
in STEM. And so I think that we are fully supportive, but
academic preparation to succeed in the STEM fields is really
important and making sure that that is built in to whatever we
do, I think, would be a critical component.
Ms. Titus. Do you look at any equivalency between certain
college credits and experience in the military so that you do
not have to retake a course that you have already been doing in
the field?
Ms. Vito. At University of Arizona, our branch campus
University of Arizona South is able to accept fully all credit
earned through the military. University of Arizona has a more
deliberate analysis that is done about what transfers and what
does not transfer.
And so I would acknowledge that it may not be a perfect
process and your question raises a larger national discussion.
Mr. Ross. It does, and we are certainly involved in that
discussion and looking hard at prior learning and how it can be
transferred to credit. I mean, if you have got somebody coming
back from Iraq and they know how to speak Urdu, maybe we should
be giving them credit for it.
But we have developed a program that we are near kicking
off which we think is exciting that allows medics to enter into
a physician's assistant program at our medical school. And we
are excited that that will enable them to use their prior
experiences and what they have learned in the military and move
through that program more quickly.
So that is the kind of thing we need to think more about,
and I think with encouragement, we certainly want to do that.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Mr. Hubbard.
Mr. Hubbard. I think you make an excellence point,
Congresswoman. As the Department of Defense invests billions of
dollars in STEM fields, STEM related MOSes, technical fields
that could be taken advantage of as they exit the military,
that investment is completely lost, it evaporates as
individuals exit the service and then go on to, say, another
major that is unrelated.
Taking advantage of that investment and reinvesting it in
the economy by encouraging individuals to go into the STEM
fields is absolutely a top priority for Student Veterans of
America.
I think as we look at this, we have seen across the board
many students would pursue those degrees. They simply cannot
afford to and that is a major problem for a lot of these
student vets.
Ms. Titus. Yes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Ms. Titus.
A couple of closing comments before we excuse the panel and
move on to the next panel.
Mr. Ross, I was pleased to learn that your governor on
Tuesday of this week has announced his support for in-state
tuition in North Carolina and so we hope that you and the
governor are successful with your General Assembly.
Also, there was some dialogue before about for profit
schools and I would note that there is no lack of regulation of
the education industry, and that is all the education, public,
private, and for profit.
The VA, the Consumer Federal Protection Bureau, the Federal
Trade Commission, U.S. Department of Education, State Attorneys
General, State licensing agencies, State departments of
education, State approving agencies, and accrediting
associations all have a responsibility to monitor all sections
of higher education.
If there is a systemic problem, which I do not believe
there is, the only conclusion I can draw is that multiple
government agencies at all levels have failed to monitor the
education industry and enforce the statutes and regulations now
in place.
With that, we will conclude the participation of this
panel. Mr. Dakduk and Mr. Hubbard, thank you for your service,
thank all of you for your support of our Nation's veterans, one
of our most valuable resources, and thank you in particular for
the innovative ideas that you shared with us today. You are now
excused.
On our second panel, we welcome back a frequent flyer to
this subcommittee. Mr. Curtis L. Coy is the deputy under
secretary for Economic Opportunity at the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs.
Thank you for joining us again, Mr. Coy. You are now
recognized for five minutes whenever you get settled in.

STATEMENT OF CURTIS L. COY

Mr. Coy. Well, good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Takano, and other Members of the subcommittee.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss the Department of
Veterans Affairs' efforts to help veterans achieve success in
their academic and educational endeavors.
VA is committed to ensuring that our Nation's veterans,
servicemembers, reservists, and qualifying dependents receiving
VA education benefits have access to high-quality educational
opportunities that will enhance their ability to meet their
academic and career objectives.
VA's VetSuccess on Campus program provides veteran students
seamless access to VA benefits and services and supports their
successful integration on college and university campuses.
In fiscal year 2013, we grew the program from 32 campuses
to 94 with a total of 79 vocational rehabilitation counselors
across the country.
I visited our VSOC site at Florida State University and
Tallahassee Community College just last week. I was impressed
with both administrations and particularly the president's
direct involvement with respect to their veteran programs.
We are continuing our efforts to enhance support to
veterans on campus across a wide range of benefits and
services. VSOC counselors also collaborate with VA medical
centers and campus counseling centers to ensure that students
are aware of mental health services and receive referrals as
necessary to support their needs.
Recently we developed a pilot program with the Corporation
of National and Community Service for AmeriCorps' volunteers at
eight of our VSOC campuses.
Public Law 112-249 was enacted in January 2013. It enhances
and complements the provisions of the executive order, requires
VA to develop a comprehensive policy to improve outreach and
transparency to veterans and servicemembers. We have made
significant progress in implementing both the law and the
executive order.
Some of those highlights include we have partnered with
Department of Education, Defense, Consumer Protection Finance
Bureau, Federal Trade Commission, Department of Justice, and
the National Association of State Approving Agencies.
We submitted a report to Congress in April of 2013 as
required by the law. Currently piloting an online assessment
tool called CareerScope. We launched a GI Bill comparison tool
in February to help veterans become informed post secondary
education consumers. As of yesterday, over 106,000 unique
visitors have used the tool and looked at 250,000 different
schools.
We launched the GI feedback system which centralized online
reporting for veterans, servicemembers, and reservists to
report negative experiences with educational institutions. We
launched that the end of January of this year. As of this past
Monday, there have been over 18,000 who have visited the site,
4,500 have logged into the system, and 1,400 have submitted
complaints or feedback.
In March, we began transmitting those complaints to FTC's
consumer sentinel database where they are accessible by law
enforcement agencies.
We have completed several other activities, for example,
recently updating the school certifying official handbook,
published student outcome measure definitions on education's
college navigator, registered the GI Bill trademark, and began
enforcing the legal terms of that trademark.
We also established an agreement with SVA to create the new
education completion database for Post-9/11 GI Bill and
Montgomery GI Bill programs.
VA also established agreement with the National Student
Clearinghouse to match VA records and provide graduation and
program completion.
In March, as you know, this year, SVA released their
Million Records project report. The results of the study show
that continued research on veteran graduation rates is
imperative.
As of this summer, we will mark the fifth anniversary of
the Post-9/11 GI Bill, an important milestone certainly, but we
believe that the success of the program is more longitudinal.
Eligible veterans have 15 years to use their richly earned
benefits. We hope to have some preliminary success outcomes
late this summer or early fall. We have some already on
persistence data.
VA has worked with key stakeholders to ensure veterans are
utilizing their education benefits efficiently and effectively.
We will continue our efforts to ensure that veterans are
informed consumers and schools meet their obligations in
providing education and training to this Nation's next greatest
generation.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Takano, and Members, we are
rowing hard. This concludes my statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions that you or other Members of the
subcommittee may have.

[The prepared statement of Curtis L. Coy appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Flores. Mr. Coy, thank you for your testimony. Thank
you for your service to our Nation's veterans.
And I will recognize myself for five minutes for questions.
Share with us what feedback you have received so far about
CareerScope and when you are doing that, tell me about what
students are saying about whether it is helpful in finding a
school and then let's walk forward and tell me what your plans
are for future functionality and tweaks and improvements and so
forth.
Mr. Coy. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. I just want to be clear.
Are you talking the CareerScope tool or the comparison tool?
Mr. Flores. CareerScope tool.
Mr. Coy. The CareerScope tool. The CareerScope tool is an
assessment device for students or for anybody to go in and use
it. We have had about 10,000 people use it. It is also used by
our Vocational Rehabilitation & Employment counselors across
the country as well.
The feedback we have received so far has been good. It is a
useful tool. It certainly does not solve all things, but it
gives that individual a direction to head as they go forward in
their school selection.
Mr. Flores. Okay. And can you go into some of the funding
issues that you ran into in the development of the CareerScope
tool, the complaint system, and the comparison tool, all three
of the systems that you talked about in your testimony.
Mr. Coy. Just to understand, what issues we had with
funding?
Mr. Flores. Yes, sir.
Mr. Coy. Well, these were all tools that were as a result
of the Public Law, the President's executive order, and
initiatives that we were doing within VA as well.
With respect to the complaint tool or feedback tool, we
leverage what the Department of Defense did. We took their
system. We modified with the contractor that developed their
tool and we modified it for the VA. So it was a minimal
expense, if you will, for that.
For the comparison tool, it was sort of an in-house effort
and we strung that together with, my terms, duct tape and
chicken wire and put it together. It is a fantastic success
story. We took data from over 23 disparate sites and it is now
at one place.
As far as the CareerScope tool, that is a commercial off-
the-shelf item. What we did, our investment in that, was put it
on the site, pay the licensing fees, and actually doing the
market survey with respect to that.
Mr. Flores. Okay. And by the way, thanks for your help with
the Million Records project. Appreciate the VA's involvement
with that.
Mr. Coy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Flores. How does the VA define success and what are the
barriers that you think are still in place when it comes to
veterans accessing a quality education and the assistance they
need while pursuing their degrees?
Mr. Coy. We are looking at a lot of different success
factors as we go forward. Certainly defining success is a
challenge as you might imagine.
You have heard testimony earlier here today as well as
prior testimony that veterans are nontraditional students. And
so what we find in nontraditional students is many of them
start full time, then they go part time, then they stop and say
when the kids get older, you know, I will go back to school.
And so defining what that success is is hard.
We are doing a number of different things. We currently
have seven measures that we hope to be rolling out in the next
several months. One is retention rate. That measures the
student attendance at the same institution over time.
There is persistence rate and what that does is it measures
veteran students full time and part time across the board. And
I have some preliminary numbers that are interesting.
We also are measuring the transfer rate. We are measuring
graduation rates, certificate completion, the number of years
to complete a degree or certificate, and the number of
institutions veterans attend to complete their degree or
certificate.
As you heard this morning, the current IPEDS graduation
rate tool is over a six-year time frame, but it does not allow
for any transfer in or out. So that is certainly a challenge
because no matter what we do, it is going to want to be
compared to one or another.
Interestingly as I go out and talk to many folks, I suggest
to people that there were 16 million veterans who served in
World War II. Eight million of them went to school on the GI
Bill and, as we all know, that spawned the greatest generation.
But when you ask what the graduation rate was, how many
certificate completions, and any of those kinds of things,
there has never been any of that sort of information because it
is hard. And so defining the success outcomes, we are going to
put this on the table, the Million Records project, put a stick
in the ground. We are also doing similar type things.
The other issue or concern that makes it a little bit hard
is that schools input this data. So the data sometimes is only
as good as the information that we get out.
Interestingly, though, is as we go forward with the
comparison tool and we start publishing some of that data on
there, what we will find is schools and institutions sort of
center themselves.
For example, we went out before we launched the tool and we
sent out all this information and said would you validate this,
tell us. There were 400 schools within a week that said, no, we
want to sign up for the Principles of Excellence as well. We
did not know anything about it.
So publishing those things, I think, will be a great
opportunity for schools to center themselves.
Mr. Flores. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Coy.
And I am sorry to my colleagues for going over. I will give
you all an extra minute and 15 seconds each if you would like
it.
So I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Takano, for six
minutes and 15 seconds.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Coy, thank you to the VA for creating these online
tools for our veterans.
With regard to the comparison tool, do you think that
knowledge about default rates, student loan default rates would
be relevant for a prospective student to be able to make a
judgment about the potential for success at a particular
institution?
Mr. Coy. Yes, sir, I do, and it is on the comparison tool.
Mr. Takano. Oh, so the comparison tool does make clear to
the veteran what percentage or just what the default rates are
at a particular institution?
Mr. Coy. Yes, sir, it does. But I just want to make sure
that I clarify that. That is for the school itself. It is not
veteran specific. So when we say the default rate is X, it is
for all the school, not just veterans.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Is there----
Mr. Coy. It is not veteran specific.
Mr. Takano. Is there a possibility of being able to make
that comparison possible in the future?
Mr. Coy. Anything is possible, sir. The issue is that we
get that loan default rate from the Department of Education and
so we would essentially almost have to set up a whole new
cohort for them to help us track that.
Mr. Takano. Okay. Thank you for letting me know that.
Are prospective students able to figure out whether the
institution is regionally or nationally accredited?
Mr. Coy. That is not currently on the tool. However, comma,
we do for each school that is looked up have a link to the
Department of Education's college navigator. And if you were to
click on that link and go into this huge pile of information
that is on college navigator, you would be able to find that.
Mr. Takano. Do you think making it very user friendly for
the student to be able--I mean, I think that is an important
consumer information to make that user friendly. Is that a goal
of yours to make it more clear and easy for the student to
discern whether the institution that they are looking at is
nationally or regionally accredited?
Mr. Coy. The short answer is, yes, sir, I do. The longer
answer, if I may, is the issue of whether it is regionally or
nationally accredited, and I think I understand why, but to
making sure that the veteran understands what that means.
Mr. Takano. Yes.
Mr. Coy. That is the bigger issue. So rather than just tell
somebody this is a regional or national accredited institution,
giving them the perspective on what that means, that is a
little bit of a bigger challenge.
Mr. Takano. But you view it as an important piece of
consumer information that the student should understand?
Mr. Coy. I would suggest, sir, that probably, and this is
my opinion and the opinion that we found in a number of
different instances, and that is on the comparison tool, we
list whether that school is a private university, a for profit
university, or a public university. So it labels that and I
think that in some way touches on the accreditation issue.
Mr. Takano. In some way, but many students may not
understand which institutions are regionally or nationally
accredited and what that might mean in terms of the fungibility
of those credits.
Let's switch over to the complaint tool that you have. What
are the most common complaints you have heard that you have
received through the system so far?
Mr. Coy. The top issues that we have--and if you were to
look at the tool, there are buttons that you can push, and then
you go into sort of a verbal explanation--the top three buttons
that we have received back is financial issues, quality of
education, and then there is a button for other and that comes
in number three.
Mr. Takano. Okay. How do you ensure that the system is not
being flooded with false complaints?
Mr. Coy. We do not other than we would know. And the reason
we know is the goodness of the tool is that the front end of it
is automated, in other words, that you can go in and--but the
back end, meaning when somebody hits submit, every single one
of those complaints is reviewed by our staff.
And the decision and determination is made that probably
about half of the, quote, complaints are on benefits issues
that VA controls. For example, my housing allowance check is
late or why did it go from $10.00 to $20.00 or vice versa. And
we typically resolve those issues up front.
The other issues that come in are sent directly to the
school and the school has 90 days to complete and respond back
to us. And so we have not seen, if you will, the system being
flooded with false complaints. We have seen there have been
some complaints that has driven to direct about 25 risk-based
reviews of schools that we have gotten complaints on.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
My time has gone over. I yield back.
Mr. Coy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Mr. Takano.
Ms. Brownley, you are recognized for questions.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Coy.
You were talking in your testimony about the challenges of
defining success and you talked about the seven measures, I
think, that you are going to roll out.
So when is this rollout going to occur?
Mr. Coy. We expect these measures to be available sometime
in the academic year 2015 which begins in August of this year
and ends 31 July of next year. So trying to give us as much
wiggle room as possible, we said we are going to have these
things out.
I am personally hoping that we will begin having some of
the initial results late summer, early fall. We already have
some of those results that are interesting, for example,
persistence rates.
Ms. Brownley. So in all of these areas, you will be
collecting data and input across the board for all veterans who
are enrolled in school?
Mr. Coy. Yes, ma'am. And much of that data schools are
reporting now and now it is a matter of getting the information
and sort of making sure that we are reporting it accurately.
Ms. Brownley. And in terms of the measurements, did you
ever consider an additional measure which is to say did the
veteran find employment and gainfully employed and if the
veteran majored in let's say business administration, were they
able to go and find a job in the field of their interest?
Mr. Coy. Yes, ma'am, we have considered that. We are
looking at that. We have included a question similar to that in
our voice of the veteran survey. That is being mailed out to
about 26,000 veterans as we speak. It is a survey that is being
done by J.D. Power and we hope to have those results in the
fall of this year as well.
Clearly a challenge, but we have talked with a few other
government agencies in terms of being able to get that
information with respect to employment and be able to do that.
Most of the, if you will, education versus employment would
initially come in terms of, if you will, dollars. In other
words, I make $10.00 a year now and after your degree or your
training or your certificate completion, how much do you make
the following year, if you will.
Ms. Brownley. And so these measurements and the collection
of data then, you know, how will you utilize that as you get
the results to sort of be hopefully in a model of continuous
improvement and a model of always being focused on improving
success?
Mr. Coy. The challenge of this data is that you almost have
to look at it by year and then you look at it by various
aspects. So, for example, we have persistence data and we break
it down into essentially three categories.
In other words, when you start in a certain year, how many
started full time and then came back the next year full time,
the next year full time, the next year full time. Then how many
started part time, came back part time, came back part time.
Then how many came back--started either way, full time, part
time, and stayed going to school.
Then you have that by year. We started the Post-9/11 GI
Bill in August of 2009. So now we are getting data for 2009,
2010, and then we have, if you will, the next year which is
2010 and their next four years.
And the challenge, as I stated in my oral statement, was we
have to be looking at this over the course of 15 years because
that is what a veteran has.
In addition to that persistence data, you can also begin
slicing it as how many of them are going after a bachelor's
degree, an associate's degree, a certificate, and so the list
goes on.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
And I will yield back.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Ms. Brownley.
Ms. Titus, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Just following up on Ms. Brownley's comments, I appreciate
that you all are doing this massive study and it is over a 20-
year period. I understood it, but I hope we do not wait until
the 20 years is up when you get all the data to come up with
some suggestions and some improvements because that often tends
to be the case.
Also, sometimes the right hand does not know what the left
hand is doing and we have different programs and different
departments or agencies who might be working on similar kinds
of efforts.
I have a bill with Representative Cook to do a similar kind
of study of the Department of Labor's Veterans' Employment and
Training Service, so I know they have an effort too.
I wonder if you could talk about how you all coordinate or
if you see any ability for us to use the results from the two
studies to just provide a better, more effective way for our
veterans to transition into the workplace.
Mr. Coy. Thank you, Congresswoman. That is a great
question.
And we work with our colleagues at Department of Labor,
VETS often. In fact, I was over at the Labor building just last
week, I believe, and I commented I should just get a badge
because I am over there.
We started our collaboration, our significant collaboration
or at least I did with the VRAP program. As you know, we
partnered with the Department of Labor on that program. We work
with the Department of Labor and the VETS program a lot.
When we start talking about our employment projects and
programs that we are doing, as you know, we recently launched a
new employment center on e-benefits, we worked with the
Department of Labor across the board to develop that employment
center.
We very much coexist with them. They have over 2,500
American job centers with well over 2,500 DVOPs and LVERs in
those American job centers. We believe that that is a wonderful
tool for veterans to be able to leverage and use when they
start looking at their employment goals as well.
So there is really I do not think any project that we have
undertaken in the last three years that has not involved our
colleagues at the Department of Labor.
Ms. Titus. Well, that is good to know. And I hope that we
can move forward with the study of their program like the one
that you are doing so we can be sure that it is operating most
effectively. But Mr. Cook and I will be pursuing that and I
hope you will help us with that.
Also, now, just a more specific question about Las Vegas
which is the area I represent. There is a school there right
next to the airport that provides technical training for
students who are interested in working in the aviation field.
This is part of chain of schools around the country.
But because of the rules you have, they have to be in
existence for two years before anybody can qualify to receive
veterans' benefits to help them pay to go to school there
despite the fact that this company has schools operating in
other places around.
Is there not any way to have some kind of flexibility when
it comes to evaluating schools where students can get the GI
Bill because their colleagues in another state where the school
is operating are able to do that?
Mr. Coy. The short answer is we would be happy to look at
that, you know, on an individual basis. And I will take that
back and we will get back to your staff.
Generally to be approved for GI Bill benefits, if you will,
there are two key rules to be followed. One is the two-year
rule. In other words, the school has to be in operation for at
least two years.
Ms. Titus. Yes.
Mr. Coy. These are both in statute, by the way. They are
not policy decisions by the VA.
And the other is the 85/15 rule which means that at least
15 percent of the students that are going to that course are
nonveterans. Both of these statutes were developed so schools
would not pop up for veterans only and abuse the GI Bill in
some way, shape, or form----
Ms. Titus. I appreciate that.
Mr. Coy [continuing]. And so on and so forth.
Ms. Titus. Yes.
Mr. Coy. We will certainly look at your or that individual
aviation school. Those approvals are handled by the State
approving agencies, so there is sort of a twofer there. One is
the statute that I just mentioned.
Ms. Titus. Yes.
Mr. Coy. The other piece is oftentimes there are state
requirements as well which is why we have the State approving
agencies in each state. But we will be happy to look at that,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I appreciate your help.
Mr. Coy. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Titus. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Flores. Thank you, Ms. Titus.
Thank you, Mr. Coy. You are now excused.
I thank everyone in the audience for your attendance today
and for the frank discussion that we have had regarding
educational opportunities for our veterans and how to improve
success for our student veterans.
Finally, I ask unanimous consent that all Members have five
legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and to
include any extraneous material in the record of today's
hearing. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
If there is nothing further, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of Michael Dakduk

Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano, and members of the
subcommittee, I am writing on behalf of the Association of Private
Sector Colleges and Universities (APSCU), our member institutions,
their faculty and the nearly four million students who attend private
sector institutions. We are grateful for the invitation to offer our
views on the importance of successful educational outcomes for our
returning servicemembers and veterans, the VetSuccess program, and the
implementation of the ``Improving Transparency of Education
Opportunities for Veterans Act of 2012'' (P.L. 112-249).
Since 2009, over one million veterans have used Post-9/11 GI
benefits to pay for their educations. Private sector colleges and
universities have educated more than 325,000. Private sector
institutions continue to grow as the education choice for veterans
because our schools offer focused academic delivery and flexible
schedules, which veterans favor.
We understand the challenges that arise when our military men and
women transition back to civilian life and enter into postsecondary
education. Our military and veteran students are not the fresh-out-of-
high school, first-time, full-time student living on campus and
attending college thanks to the generosity of family. Our military and
veteran students are like many of our new traditional students--
working, with a spouse and children and paying for their education with
money they have earned. Given the student profile of veterans enrolled
in higher education today, many are not captured in the Integrated
Postsecondary Education Database Systems (IPEDS), which is narrowed in
scope in tracking first-time, full-time students. However, new
partnerships and initiatives have been introduced to better understand
the success of veterans in higher education.

Measuring Student Veteran Success

Most recently, Student Veterans of America (SVA) in partnership
with the National Student Clearinghouse and Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) released the results of their Million Records Project.
During my tenure at SVA as executive director, I was responsible for
brokering this partnership leaving me with an appreciation for the
details captured in the report and the gaps in research on student
veteran outcomes. In regards to the Million Records Project, I found
the following items of interest:

The overall completion rate was approximately 52%,
above nontraditional peers.

Existing research on post-WWII and Vietnam veterans
indicate that the vast majority of veterans complete their
postsecondary programs; post-Vietnam-era veterans have GPA's
greater than or equal to their peers.

Recent research (2010) conducted by the VA showed that
63% of veterans self-reported as completing their postsecondary
training. Over half of the post-9/11-era respondents said they
completed as well.

While the private nonprofits had the highest
completion rates (64%), approximately 22% later completed at a
public or proprietary institution.

The completion rate for the private sector was
approximately 45%.

Private sector institutions had higher proportions of
veterans completing degrees faster. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Cate, C.A. (2014). Million Records Project: Research from
Student Veterans of America. Student Veterans of America, Washington,
DC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overall, the report suggests that student veterans are succeeding
at levels comparable to, if not greater than, their peers. This refutes
previous notions that student veterans drop out in high numbers.
Additionally, the Million Records Project provides the framework
for future research and data collection efforts on military veterans
pursuing postsecondary education. Moving forward, we expect that new
data will be available for Congress and the public to analyze given the
President's recent issuance of Executive Order 13607, or Principles of
Excellence. Section 3(c) of the order states:

``The Secretaries of Defense, Veterans Affairs, and Education
shall develop a comprehensive strategy for developing service
member and veteran student outcome measures that are
comparable, to the maximum extent practicable, across Federal
military and veterans educational benefit programs, including,
but not limited to, the Post-9/11 GI Bill and the Tuition
Assistance Program. To the extent practicable, the student
outcome measures should rely on existing administrative data to
minimize the reporting burden on institutions participating in
these benefit programs. The student outcome measures should
permit comparisons across Federal educational programs and
across institutions and types of institutions. The Secretary of
Education, in consultation with the Secretaries of Defense and
Veterans Affairs, shall also collect from educational
institutions, as part of the Integrated Postsecondary Education
Data System and other data collection systems, information on
the amount of funding received pursuant to the Post-9/11 GI
Bill and the Tuition Assistance Program. The Secretary of
Education shall make this information publicly available on the
College Navigator Website.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The White House Office of the Press Secretary. Executive
Order--Establishing Principles of Excellence for Educational
Institutions Serving Service Members, Veterans, Spouses, and Other
Family Members, The White House, Washington D.C., accessed April 24,
2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/04/27/executive-
order-establishing-principles-excellence-educational-instituti
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We understand that the process for collecting outcomes data on
student veterans is already underway. We suggest a concept similar to
the Million Records Project be further explored as a compliment to the
IPEDS system. Congress, though, should be keenly aware of the
limitations of IPEDS in its current state. As of today, IPEDS does not
disaggregate data based on military or veteran enrollment.
We have provided recommendations for tracking student outcomes in
our proposal for the reauthorization of the Higher Education Act (HEA).
Our proposal offers thoughts around five key areas: retention and
progression rates; completion and return on investment; employment of
graduates; earnings and/or salary gains; and graduate satisfaction. We
believe the Common College Completion Metrics as proposed by the
National Governor's Association Chair's Initiative provides a good
foundation for advancing dialogue around student outcomes and success
metrics. \3\ Conceptually, this model may be applied to veterans using
the Post-9/11 GI Bill and other Title 38 programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Association of Private Sector Colleges and Universities(APSCU),
Reauthorization of the Higher Education Act, accessed April 22, 2014
http://www.career.org/policy-and-issues/federal-issues/hea/upload/HEA--
Reauthorization--Proposal--032013.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At a minimum, though, we should appreciate the unique life
experiences of veterans and servicemembers. They differ drastically
from the 18 year old, first-time, full-time college student. Current
federal databases are lacking when it comes to tracking student veteran
success. They should be updated, or new proposals should be explored,
to fully capture the success of new learners that take a different and
sometimes longer path to completion.

Vetsuccess on Campus

Since the initiative launched in 2009, the VetSuccess on Campus
(VSOC) program has expanded to 94 sites. While only one VSOC site is
located at a private sector institution, ECPI University, it remains a
valuable addition to their veteran support network.
ECPI University has 10 campuses throughout Virginia, North
Carolina, and South Carolina. In addition to their ground locations,
ECPI University provides online courses and programs that are flexible
for adult learners like veterans and servicemembers. ECPI University
officially welcomed their new VSOC counselor to the Virginia Beach
campus in October 2013.
According to university officials, since being assigned to ECPI
University the VSOC counselor has averaged seeing over 100 veterans per
month. She also manages a case load of roughly 40 Vocational
Rehabilitation and Employment, or Chapter 31, veterans. Executive
Director of Military Affairs at ECPI University and retired Navy
Captain, Bob Larned, said the following regarding their VSOC counselor,
``She has an open door policy and always works around her schedule as
necessary to see someone. She has put the word out via the student
veterans organization on campus that she will assist any veteran, not
only those attending ECPI University.''
I have long been a proponent of providing resources to veterans by
meeting them where they are located. In the case of student veterans,
placing counselors on campuses is a smart approach for connecting with
many college-going veterans that may not visit VA centers.
In the event VSOC is expanded, it would be helpful to student
veterans for VA to consider diversifying the scope and reach of VSOC
sites by including more private sector institutions.

Improving Transparency of Education Opportunities Act of 2012 (P.L.
112-249)

In 2012, APSCU along with other higher education groups and veteran
advocates sent a coalition letter to this committee calling for more
consumer education and supports for student veterans. Congressman Gus
Bilirakis quickly responded by sponsoring H.R. 4057, the ``Improving
Transparency of Education Opportunities Act of 2012'' (P.L. 112-249).
We remained supportive of the bill from its inception to eventual
passage. Regarding the implementation of the law, we look forward to
working with the Department of Veterans Affairs and other agencies to
strengthen supports for servicemembers and veterans.
Finally, we want to work with you to ensure servicemembers and
veterans are armed with the tools and resources to make an informed,
thoughtful decision about which educational opportunities will best
prepare them for the workforce. In short, we share your commitment to
veteran success.
Thank you for allowing APSCU to provide our thoughts on important
topics related to the military and veteran student community. We
welcome the opportunity to work with this subcommittee and members of
Congress to support student veterans and student servicemembers.

Executive Summary

On behalf of APSCU, our member institutions and the military and
veteran students we serve we welcome the opportunity to provide our
views on the importance of successful educational outcomes for our
returning servicemembers and veterans, the VetSuccess program, and the
implementation of the ``Improving Transparency of Education
Opportunities for Veterans Act of 2012'' (P.L. 112-249).

Measuring Student Veteran Success

Measuring student veteran success is not fully
reflected in current federal databases

Recent and previous studies show that veterans perform
at or above their peers

New methods for tracking nontraditional students, like
veterans, should be explored

Vetsuccess On Campus (VSOC)

he program provides important access to services and
supports to veterans on campus

VSOC is on 94 campuses; only one is located at a
private sector institution

Future program expansion should take into account the
diversity of veteran enrollment

Improving Transparency of Education Opportunities Act of 2012
(P.L. 112-249)

APSCU was an early supporter of H.R. 4057, now P.L.
112-249

APSCU remains supportive and looks forward to working
with VA on implementation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statement Presented by Ricardo D. Torres

Chairman Flores, Ranking Member Takano, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for inviting me to speak with you on this
important topic. We are honored by the opportunity to help inform this
very timely discussion on Defining and Improving Success for Student
Veterans. I am Ricardo Torres, President and CEO of the National
Student Clearinghouse (``Clearinghouse''), a nonprofit organization
serving the education community by facilitating the exchange and
understanding of student enrollment, performance, and related
information. We work with colleges and universities that collectively
enroll 96% of all students in our nation's degree granting, Title IV
Student Loan Program institutions. Through our partnerships with these
institutions, we work to reduce administrative burdens on students and
school administrators, allowing them to focus more on achieving
successful educational outcomes.
We are proud to have supported the Veteran's Benefits
Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Student
Veterans of America and to have enabled the groundbreaking Million
Records Project, which provided this committee with never before
available information regarding the success of the programs you have
funded to provide education opportunities for our veterans. Today, we
would like to suggest some powerful possible ways we can further help
you evaluate and facilitate veterans' education programs.

What is the National Student Clearinghouse?

The National Student Clearinghouse is the nation's trusted source
for education verification and student educational outcomes research.
More than 3,600 colleges and universities, including public and
private, for-profit and nonprofit institutions, participate in the
Clearinghouse. Participating institutions provide access to actual
enrollment and degree information on each of their students to us. As a
result, only the Clearinghouse can offer access to a nationwide
coverage of enrollment and degree records--encompassing more than 144
million students and growing. Through our verification, data exchange
and reporting services, the Clearinghouse saves higher education
institutions nearly $500 million dollars annually. Most Clearinghouse
services are provided to colleges and universities at little or no
charge, including enhanced transcript and research services, enabling
institutions to redistribute limited staff and budget resources to more
important student service efforts. The Clearinghouse is a nonprofit
that does not receive state or federal appropriations. Our data process
is supported through the fees we collect from third-parties for
services provided on behalf of our participating institutions.
Today, the Clearinghouse is also the leading provider of
educational reporting, verification and research, on behalf of its
participating institutions, to the nation's colleges and high schools,
the student lending community, the Department of Education, state and
other educational agencies, students and alumni, and thousands of
employers and other organizations. All of the Clearinghouse's services
are designed to facilitate an institution's compliance with the Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act, The Higher Education Act, and other
applicable laws.
The Clearinghouse was founded over 20 years ago to cost effectively
address Title IV program inefficiencies. Before the launch of the
Clearinghouse in 1993, student lenders had no dependable way to
determine if a borrower was still in school and eligible for a loan
deferment. Institutions spent thousands of hours each year processing
20 million deferment forms. Students were often mistakenly placed into
default status, jeopardizing their credit rating and artificially
inflating the reported default rate on these federally guaranteed
loans. The higher education community created the Clearinghouse to
simplify and standardize student deferment reporting. Instead of
submitting millions of individual deferment forms to hundreds of
lenders, schools now transmit a single electronic report of all their
enrolled students to the Clearinghouse. The Clearinghouse matches each
enrollment record to electronic lists of student loan recipients and,
whenever a match occurs, forwards the relevant enrollment data to the
appropriate lender. The success of our efforts to reduce higher
education's student loan reporting burden is best evidenced by the fact
that over 3,600 institutions have chosen to participate in the
Clearinghouse. All of the nation's guarantee agencies, the Department
of Education's Direct Loan Servicer, and most student loan servicers
participate in the Clearinghouse as well. Think of us as a back office
to the university's registrar, financial aid officer, and institutional
researcher. The Clearinghouse is the largest electronic education data
exchange ecosystem in the country, with over 1 billion secure and
legally compliant transactions annually.
The public-private partnership approach used by the Clearinghouse
can be a model for a better way to serve our veterans while reducing
the burdens on both government and educational institutions. The
Clearinghouse helps educational institutions improve efficiency, reduce
costs and workload, and enhance the quality-of-service they provide to
their students and alumni, lending institutions, employers, and other
organizations. We provide our services as an agent to our participating
institutions, supporting their administrative, student access,
accountability, and analytical needs. Moreover, through our educational
research services that access our unique national dataset of student
enrollments and degree outcomes, the Clearinghouse also serves as a
valuable source for longitudinal and other studies on educational
progress.

Clearinghouse Research and the Million Records Project

The National Student Clearinghouse Research Center (``Research
Center'') is the research arm of the National Student Clearinghouse.
The Research Center works with higher education institutions, states,
districts, high schools, and educational organizations to better inform
practitioners and policymakers about student educational pathways.
Through accurate longitudinal data outcomes reporting, the Research
Center enables better education policy decisions leading to improved
student outcomes. The unprecedented nationwide reach of our information
resources takes education researchers beyond the limitations of
institutional data to provide the most accurate picture of student
outcomes ? even when students transfer among multiple institutions, in
different states, and over long periods of time ? while still being
respectful of student privacy.
Working in partnership with the Student Veterans of America and the
Department of Veterans Affairs (``VA''), the Research Center
participated in a groundbreaking research project that broadens
perspectives and informs many of the pressing questions about the
educational pathways and outcomes of student veterans. As part of the
Million Records Project, we searched our unique dataset to help inform
the nation about the return on our federal government's investment of
the more than $20 billion spent to provide education benefits to
veterans. Through this public-private partnership, for the first time,
comprehensive national statistics on the postsecondary outcomes of
veterans from Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom
were made available, including degree completion, time-to-degree, and
field of study preferences.

The Unique Enrollment Patterns of Veterans

One of the clear observations that emerged from the data that we
provided to make this study possible is the highly non-traditional
nature of veterans' educational pathways. Student veterans are more
likely to transfer or change institutions, and take longer to complete
a degree or certificate, than other students. This makes defining
success and measuring success for these veterans a particular
challenge. The current federal Department of Education metrics that
define successful outcomes for students and institutions are based on a
definition of ``first-time full-time'' students. This is the basis of
the standard Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (``IPEDS'')
institutional retention and graduation rate. It counts as a success
only those students who have no previous higher education experience,
enroll full time in a degree granting program, and graduate from the
same institution where they started. Only three-quarters of degree-
seeking students today begin by enrolling full time, and nearly one-
quarter of those who complete a degree do so somewhere other than the
institution where they started. So, using the standard definitions to
measure the success of student veterans would be like computing
baseball players' career statistics by only counting members of the
starting lineup who never changed teams, and ignoring everyone else on
the team's roster completely.
For student veterans, the rates of institutional mobility are
particularly high. The data provided by the VA for the SVA's Million
Records Project, matched to the Clearinghouse's unique enrollment
database, show that recipients of the Montgomery GI Bill and the Post-
9/11 benefits are much more likely than other students to enroll at
more than one institution in pursuit of their degrees. The SVA report
shows that these students are older, take longer to graduate, and more
likely to stop out and change institutions due to external
circumstances, like reserve mobilizations, job changes, or family
status changes. They may also try to combine credits earned online
while on active or reserve duty with on-campus courses in a new degree
program after their service.
The Million Records Project clearly demonstrated that today's
veterans are capable and determined when it comes to pursuing
postsecondary educational goals. Using the Clearinghouse's unique
ability to track and measure student outcomes across institutions,
states and sectors, the Million Records Project has demonstrated that
more than half of veterans benefit recipients since 2002 have completed
degrees, in spite of the challenges and hurdles they faced. It is a
great disservice to the hard work, dedication, and perseverance of our
veterans to continue to define and measure their postsecondary success
using only the traditional yardstick designed for 18-year-old students
who enroll full time at a single institution. It also creates undue
hardships for student veterans when the simple act of transferring
credits or changing institutions generates new administrative hurdles
and burdensome, time-consuming requirements for obtaining and retaining
the tuition benefits that were promised to them when they enlisted.

Meeting the Challenge of the Influx of Veterans Into Higher Education

Given the influx of veterans expected to enroll in higher education
programs over the next few years, it is important that we have the
ability to successfully meet veteran program demands in a way that
responds to the varied needs of these non-traditional students. The
Clearinghouse is offering suggestions regarding what can be done to
help ensure veteran success in two areas: 1) facilitating entry to
colleges and universities and 2) enabling continued enrollment
sufficient to accomplish what the veteran set out to do.
The first opportunity to assist veterans is facilitating entry to
colleges and universities. The newly released GI Bill College
Comparison tool was an important breakthrough in providing information
to veterans about their benefits in a school-specific manner.
Unfortunately, the tool has two limitations for which we would like to
offer solutions. First, the tool does not calculate an individual
veteran's entitlement and track what part of that entitlement has been
used. Veterans can only designate themselves as belonging to one of 10
categories based on their recollection of their number of post 9-11
months of active duty service. The tool is, as it describes itself, an
estimator. Although this information is informative, it does not fully
remove the barriers necessary for a veteran to easily shop for a
school.
The second limitation of the tool is that it does not provide
information on the graduation rates that is accurate or relevant to the
unique enrollment patterns of veterans. In authorizing the creation of
the tool, the Committee and the VA wisely chose measurements of
graduation rates that would not place an additional reporting burden on
institutions of higher education. It is clear that duplicative
reporting burdens take institutional resources away from directly
serving the needs of enrolled veterans. The graduation rate metric
chosen was the IPEDS rate which, as we pointed out, is based on first-
time full-time 18-year-old students, a population that has little
relevance to the educational patterns of veteran adult learners. This
metric also does not account for student mobility which, as the Million
Records Project shows, is particularly high for veterans. In addition,
a degree based graduation rate may be misleading or uninformative to a
veteran who wishes to achieve a certificate or take a few specific
courses for a workforce credential. The tool was an important step in
the right direction, but can be misleading in helping veterans
understand the probability of graduation at an institution for people
like them.
The National Student Clearinghouse has solved the problem of
providing accurate information while not increasing reporting burdens
on institutions through its work with the education community on the
Voluntary System of Accountability (VSA) and the Student Achievement
Measure (SAM). By using our data that tracks students across
institutions, not limited to first-time full-time enrollees, VSA and
SAM schools can provide students with a graduation rate that is not
subject to the first-time full-time IPEDS limitation. With the recent
addition of veteran status as a data field for the information on
individual students that schools supply to the Clearinghouse, we could
easily calculate a graduation rate that is not restricted to the
limitations of IPEDS and is also veteran-specific. This can enable
great schools, like those in the University of North Carolina system,
to claim full credit for the success of their support services in
ensuring the successful program completion of their veterans.

Meeting Enrollment Challenges

In their ongoing dialogues with us, institutional administrators
have reported recent improvements in their interactions with the
Veteran's Administration. Even with the VA's hard work, there is still
a significant lag time between the concept of a system improvement and
its actual implementation. There is also great concern around the
scalability of existing processes. Development of new technology can
require a significant investment of federal dollars, institutional
resources, and staff time. Given the large influx of members of our
armed forces expected to join the ranks of veterans in the next few
years, the problems of multiple aging systems will become even more
acute.
Veterans and the schools serving them face a continuous stream of
administrative complexities around activities, such as certificate of
eligibility processing, residency verification, kicker processing,
previous credential accumulation assessment, applicability of
credentials to degrees, retaining benefit on transfers, and
inconsistency in branch of service requests. Registrars at institutions
have pointed out some of the challenges to us:

Schools and VA customer service representatives do not
have access to the same data at the same time and, therefore,
see inconsistent or incomplete information regarding benefits
eligibility. This makes it extremely difficult to counsel
individual veterans.

The VA Once technology is a legacy system and is no
longer being updated. Instead of transferring critical data
through batch processing from their other systems, schools must
manually enter data for each individual veteran.

Some student veterans were given enhanced benefits
upon enlistment. Determining the level of this ``kicker'' can
further delay the ability to establish eligibility and result
in additional challenges in maintaining enrollment for
students.

Residency and proof-of-residency requirements for
veterans are determined on a state-by-state basis (in part
because House Bill H.R. 357 has not yet been passed by the
Senate), which adds to delays.

Establishing the eligibility for Post 9-11 benefits,
which includes checking character of discharge and the amount
of credible service through the Department of Defense, results,
can further delay the enrollment and registration of student
veterans.

Inconsistencies between the requirements for veterans'
education benefits and those for Title IV cause challenges for
institutions. A veteran who needs supplementary aid and wants
to qualify for Title IV must register as degree seeking, even
if he or she is seeking a credential that requires fewer
courses.

As pointed out in the discussion regarding the complexity of
education pathways taken by veterans, issues of transfer and transfer
of credit pose a particular challenge for these mobile students.
Department of Veterans Affairs has worked with the American Council on
Education (ACE) to solve many of these challenges by providing
recommended credits that can be awarded for military training and
experience as well as resources to colleges and universities to assist
in evaluating and accepting these credits and applying them toward
degrees. Despite this work, schools report to us that challenges
remain, including:

Delays and difficulties in accessing information
regarding postsecondary course work a veteran may have taken
before military service to ensure transfer of these credits.

No way to easily understand how acquired military
credits translate into time to graduation.

Delays and difficulties in determining remaining
veterans' benefit entitlement when a veteran transfers. In mid
semester, a veteran and his or her institution can often be
surprised to learn that benefits are exhausted and the veteran
faces a tuition bill.

Some of these challenges result from multiple programs with
divergent requirements. The possibility of a new and additional GI Bill
will simply add to complexity and the potential for confusion.
Individually, these procedures serve a purpose, but they could be
greatly simplified to enable the enrollment of the veteran at the
institution of his or her choice. One solution we recommend is two-
fold: first, employ electronic document ordering capability in the
eBenefits portal, enabling veterans to securely and privately send
their benefits summary directly to the veteran's certification office
of their chosen institution. Second, in collaboration with ACE, the
Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Defense allow the
Clearinghouse to be the repository of active duty and veteran
competencies, academic credits, and credential aggregation providing a
one-stop data shop for veterans to enable efficiency in enrolling in a
postsecondary institution or applying for employment. Providing a way
for a student veteran to authorize a secure eBenefit financial summary
to be sent to an institution where they have applied would further
facilitate the process.

Ensuring Successful Program Completion

One of the biggest barriers to completion we have heard from
veterans and the institutions serving them is uncertainty and delays in
tuition assistance requests and aid disbursement. Current remediable
pain points include:

Manual processes necessary for repetitive end-of-
semester completion status reports, interim add/drop and major
change processes, uploading of course catalogs, and constant
reporting outside normal cycles; and

Delays and uncertainty in determining entitlement
balances.
Leveraging our Title IV experience, we can certainly enable a
significant improvement in reporting these requirements, thereby
allowing school staff to spend more time serving student veterans and
allowing the veteran to be less focused on paperwork and more focused
on classwork and homework. The manual processes we noted are very
reminiscent of the challenges in the Title IV loan program which we
were created to solve.
One available tool is our open source application, Meteor, which
provides an integrated view of student debt and could be connected to
the VA benefits database to provide the veteran with an integrated view
of all financial aid, debt, and benefits. This application could be
leveraged to provide an integrated financial snapshot of all benefits
and aid in order to help financial aid administrators counsel veterans.
Meteor displays real-time summary and detail loan information on a
borrower's student loans from the various data providers in the Meteor
Network. Secure, online access is available to students, borrowers, and
financial aid professionals through a Meteor access provider.
Individuals can see their cumulative debt and can utilize unique tools,
such as payment plan and income-based repayment calculators, helping
them to avoid over borrowing. Financial aid professionals can compare
the information submitted for an individual borrower by all sources on
the Meteor master screen, allowing them to pinpoint issues at specific
organizations in order to assist students with problem resolution.
Adding a link to the Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of
Defense benefit databases would give the student veteran up-to-the-
minute information without reporting delays. This would allow a veteran
to register for courses with confidence without the risk of learning
midsemester that his or her benefits had been exhausted.

Measuring Success

Educational success for veterans can only be measured by the answer
to one question: did the veterans achieve the goals they intended when
they enrolled. For many, this is an associates, bachelors, or graduate
degree. For others, it may be a certificate of skills or similar
credential that gives them entry to the workforce. Whatever the goal,
veterans also face challenges staying enrolled due to re-mobilizations,
employment changes, and family circumstances. Student veterans take
longer to graduate, and change institutions more often, than
traditional students. This not only makes it harder for the students to
maintain momentum and focus on their goals, it also makes it harder for
colleges, universities, and policymakers to track their progress and
measure their success. For example, traditional reporting metrics, such
as degree completion within 150% of normal program time, are clearly
inadequate for student veterans. According to the Million Records
Project, only 43% of student veterans who successfully completed an
associate's degree did so within three years, while nearly one-third
(31%) took more than six years. We assume that this is due to extensive
stopouts, transfers and re-enrollments, but we do not know enough of
the details to address the challenges. Those who wish to serve veterans
better, whether through campus support programs, college transfer
policies or VA benefit policies, need better information in order to do
so.
We need further research, like the Million Records Project, but
with more details and greater focus, to determine which veteran support
programs are working best to serve the needs of veterans today and
which need to be improved or modified. We need to use longer tracking
periods, with more term-by-term enrollment details, to fully capture
the success of student veterans who stop-out and return to college, and
to understand why not for those who do not return. And we need better
information about the potential administrative and financial
constraints that veterans face and their effect on student success to
assess the effectiveness of veterans' education benefits programs. By
combining the data of the Department of Veterans Affairs, Student
Veterans of America, and the Clearinghouse in a manner similar to the
collaborative model of the Million Records Project, additional
breakthrough research could be accomplished within a year.
In particular, we propose a research project that would build upon
the Million Records Project with more detailed data on individual
enrollment patterns before, during, and after receiving VA benefits,
with longer tracking periods to capture more of the range of successful
degree pathways, and with additional data collected from colleges and
universities on the types of support programs available to veterans at
the specific institutions in which they enrolled. This would allow us
to answer key questions like:

How do the education success rates of student veterans
compare to those of non-veterans of similar age, at similar
institutions, and enrolled within similar time-frames?

How do veterans' enrollment behaviors like stop-outs,
transfers, and multiple-institution enrollments affect success
rates?

Where are focused interventions, such as reducing
administrative burden, delivering more timely and accurate
eligibility information, and streamlining benefit disbursement,
likely to have the most impact?

Which on-campus veterans support programs have the
highest impact on success rates, both at the starting campus
and at any subsequent institutions where a veteran transfers?
We firmly believe that student veterans should have a level
administrative playing field with other students when it comes to
attaining success in pursuit of their educational goals. One way to do
this is to eliminate the extra hurdles that student veterans must
overcome to certify their eligibility for benefits, access those
benefits, and continue to receive those benefits. The second is to
provide policymakers, institutions, and veterans with the research to
enable them to assess what is working and what needs improvement.
Providing these two types of support will increase the probability of
success for all student veterans. Our veterans deserve our support to
ensure that they can attain their education goals and successfully move
into the workplace.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.

Curriculum Vitae Relevant to the Testimony of the National Student
Clearinghouse

Ricardo D. Torres, President and CEO
Mr. Torres joined the National Student Clearinghouse as its
President and CEO in 2008. The Clearinghouse, a nonprofit organization
founded in 1993, is the nation's trusted source for education
verification and student educational outcomes research. Its
participants include more than 3,600 U.S. colleges and universities. In
the last year, the Clearinghouse processed over one billion digital
transactions.
Prior to joining the Clearinghouse, Mr. Torres had a long and
distinguished career in the private sector, both in the U.S. and
abroad, including serving as COO at Best Practices, a nationally-
recognized provider of emergency medicine and physician practice
management, and COO of a division of Capital One (a financial services
company). Mr. Torres has also held management positions in leading
organizations such as PepsiCo and Philip Morris/Kraft Foods (now known
as Altria Group). His diverse background includes financial and
strategic planning, marketing and sales, general management, and
executive leadership.
Mr. Torres is a board member of the John Tyler Community College
Foundation, American Association of Community Colleges (AACC), the
National College Access Network (NCAN), and the Cesar Chavez Public
Charter Schools for Public Policy. He also serves on the Advisory Board
of Cohesive Knowledge Solutions (a knowledge management company). He
was a recipient of the Washington Business Journal's 2013 Minority
Business Leader Award. Mr. Torres recently wrote an article, entitled
``Barriers to Electronic Movement of Credentials,'' which was published
on September 10, 2013, in the Stanford University's digital
publication, Transcending the Maze. Mr. Torres holds an MBA in
International Finance from Georgetown University and undergraduate
degrees in both Marketing and Management from Manhattan College.

Federal Contracts Relevant to the Testimony of the National Student
Clearinghouse

The National Student Clearinghouse has a contract with the U.S.
Department of Education to process weekly changes to the higher
education enrollment status of direct loan recipients for the purpose
of servicing these loans. The current annual contract amount is
$2,800,000.
2013 Memorandum of Agreement with the Veterans Benefits
Administration for a) the transfer to and use of VA data by the
National Student Clearinghouse for the purpose of a data match to
support a postsecondary education completion database of Post-9/11 and
Montgomery GI Bill beneficiaries, and b) providing these data services
based upon funding provided by Student Veterans of America. There was
no cost to the Department of Veterans Affairs or the Veterans Benefits
Administration; however, the Student Veterans of America funded the
research in the amount of $286,521.

Prepared Statement of Thomas W. Ross

Mr. Chairman, Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today about defining and improving academic success for
student veterans.
I am Tom Ross, President of the University of North Carolina
system. We enroll more than 220,000 students on 16 university campuses,
and employ roughly 50,000 faculty and staff across the state.
Approximately 8,000 \1\ of our current students use VA educational
benefits to pay for some or all of their post-secondary education.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ UNC: Fall 2013 data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
North Carolina is a big military state. We are home to 800,000
veterans. Our state has six major military installations with the
third-largest active military force in the country, comprising 120,000
personnel, 12,000 members of the National Guard, and their nearly
145,000 spouses and children.
I know that this subcommittee and Chairman Miller have a special
interest in public institutions of higher education extending in-state
tuition rates to certain veterans who may not qualify under current
state law. I want to be clear that the University of North Carolina
supports--and has always supported--extending in-state tuition to
certain veterans and their families. We appreciate the leadership shown
by Chairman Miller and this subcommittee on this issue. While North
Carolina is not currently one of the states that offers in-state
tuition to certain veterans and their families, please know that we are
working aggressively with members of the North Carolina General
Assembly to enact legislation to change this situation in the short
session that begins later this month, and we are optimistic we will be
successful.
As the state's public University, we are committed to offering
students access to high-quality, affordable educational programs. We
are working hard to enroll, educate and graduate as many academically
prepared service members, veterans and their dependents as possible.
Our motivation is simple: the success of student veterans and their
families attending UNC institutions is vital to the success of the
University and our state's future.

Federal Oversight

After the Post 9/11 GI Bill became law in 2008, UNC institutions
experienced a surge in applications for admission from military-
affiliated students for the 2009-10 academic year. Programs such as the
VA's Yellow Ribbon Program emerged. Military-affiliated students were
often confused about how their Montgomery GI Bill and the new GI Bill
worked together. In 2010, Congress made changes to the Post 9/11 GI
Bill. In parallel, in March 2011 and again in December 2012, the
Department of Defense (DoD) asked institutions participating in the
``Voluntary Education Partnership'' to sign new Memoranda of Agreement
as a condition of permitting active-duty military to use Tuition
Assistance funds to pay for their higher education on campus. The DoD
continues to refine the agreement.
Concurrent with these changes and requirements, President Obama in
April 2012 issued Executive Order 13607, ``Establishing Principles of
Excellence for Educational Institutions Serving Service Members,
Veterans, Spouses, and Other Family Members.'' Subsequently, in May
2012, the Department of Veterans' Affairs asked institutions of higher
education to commit to certain ``Principles of Excellence'' contained
in the President's Executive Order by August 1, 2012. In August 2013,
the Department of Education launched an effort to have campuses sign
its ``8 Keys to Success'' pledge in support of student veterans.
To be clear, the University of North Carolina system agrees with
the spirit of and intent behind each requirement or program. We hope
that the federal agencies involved in these initiatives continue to
work toward coordination of effort. We also ask to be included--on the
front end--in any new federal initiatives, programs or requirements of
higher education in support of veterans. UNC is proud of our self-
imposed standards of excellence, and we believe we are well positioned
to offer perspective and constructive feedback as future endeavors are
contemplated. We have much to contribute to the national dialogue.

The UNC System Self-Imposes Strong Standards for Serving Veterans

In October 2010, the University of North Carolina system convened a
working group of students, faculty, and administrators from across the
16 campuses to evaluate and recommend specific action steps for
improving how the University and its individual institutions serve
veterans and their families. Called UNC SERVES (UNC Systemwide
Evaluation and Recommendation for Veterans Education and Services),
this working group was presented with four questions:

How are UNC campuses currently serving active service
members, veterans and their families?

What are the accepted best practices for serving these
students?

What can the University reasonably do to improve
access to, retention and graduation of active-duty and veteran
students?

What are metrics of success for the University in
serving these students?

The UNC SERVES working group was charged with developing a
comprehensive report to the President with recommendations for:

Evaluation of current state of military and veteran
affairs on UNC campuses;

Institutional, systemwide, and state/federal statutory
policy changes, regulations and/or guidelines to improve
access, retention and the graduation of active service members,
veterans and their families on UNC campuses;

Institutional and systemwide best practices to improve
access, retention and the graduation of active service members,
veterans, and their families on UNC campuses; and

Opportunities for institutional and systemwide
improvement.
The working group also was asked to consider the following factors:

Diversity of campuses, including size, capacity, and
number of active service members, veterans, and their families;

Constrained resources--Consider all options, but
prioritize no-cost, low-cost recommendations;

Return on investment; and

Costs should accompany each recommendation, if
possible.
The UNC SERVES working group issued its report to me in April 2011.
The report included recommendations for improvement at both the system
and individual campus levels. The Chancellors and I quickly embraced
the recommendations, and our UNC (system) Faculty Assembly passed a
resolution in support of UNC SERVES.
UNC System Progress With Self-Imposed Standards for Serving Student
Veterans
The University is making great strides toward implementing these
recommendations. As a follow-up to the initial UNC SERVES report, the
University system office issues an annual ``UNC SERVES Resource Guide''
that summarizes campus and system progress toward each action item. The
Resource Guide also offers examples of campus initiatives, such as
North Carolina Central University's Veterans Law Clinic and
Fayetteville State University's Veterans Business Outreach Center.
Within the Resource Guide, we publish a ``matrix'' of campus-by-campus
progress toward each UNC SERVES recommendation. The most recent matrix
is attached to my testimony. The UNC SERVES report and Resource Guides
also are found online at: http://www.northcarolina.edu/frc/uncserves/
serves.html
Because serving student veterans appropriately requires leadership
from the top, I am working with our 16 university Chancellors to
aggressively implement UNC SERVES recommendations. To improve
coordination of effort, our campuses have established Military Affairs
Committees, and the UNC system periodically convenes the Military
Affairs Council, a coordinating body with representatives from every
campus.
The UNC Board of Governors is equally engaged. In June 2013, the
Board approved a Military Student Success Policy that provides
framework for a comprehensive network of services for military-
affiliated students. In August 2013, the also Board established a
Special Committee on Military Affairs, with a particular focus on
fostering success for the University's student veterans. A copy of the
Military Student Success Policy is submitted with my testimony.
In very short order, I will establish internal University
regulations for implementing the requirements of the Board's policy and
promoting the general welfare of service members, veterans, spouses,
and dependent family members attending our constituent institutions.
Under this new policy, any individual who has completed at least two
years of cumulative active-duty service in the United States Armed
Forces will be considered a transfer student in the admissions process.
The service branch is the transfer institution of record, and the
military transcript is the starting point for evaluating the veteran's
military learning for academic credit.

Data Collection and Reporting

The University of North Carolina has implemented systemwide,
uniform data collection procedures to ensure that we can identify and
track the academic progress of service members, veterans, spouses, and
other dependent family members. The University will evaluate and
publicly report matriculation trends, including retention rates,
graduation rates and length of time to degree. This information will
also help us better understand preference trends among student
veterans, including program choice and preferred delivery methods.
National efforts to gather and provide information on student
veteran success are also important. If we wish to truly understand
matriculation and graduation trends of student veterans, the data used
must be accurate. The Student Veterans of America (SVA) Million Records
Project is a great step in the right direction. I am especially glad
that the Million Records Project uses National Student Clearinghouse
data for its analyses, as this is currently the most reliable database
for tracking student persistence and outcomes. The University of North
Carolina enjoys a great working relationship with the SVA, and we
routinely provide our enrollment data to the National Student
Clearinghouse.

UNC Institutions Aligning Academic Programs to Student Needs

Individual UNC campuses have a long history of working with
military-affiliated students and North Carolina's military
installations. Several of them--Fayetteville State University,
University of North Carolina Wilmington, University of North Carolina
at Pembroke, and East Carolina University--have academic advisors
located on post at Fort Bragg, aboard Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune,
or at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base. These campuses' geographic
proximity, coupled with their regional focus, naturally align with
serving these specific communities.
Representing all UNC institutions, the UNC system office has
academic advisors at Fort Bragg, aboard Camp Lejeune, and at Coast
Guard Air Station Elizabeth City. UNC system personnel also hold
academic advising office hours at the Camp Lejeune Naval Hospital,
where the academic advisor is available to all hospital personnel,
Marines and sailors from the Wounded Warrior Battalion East, the
Traumatic Brain Injury Clinic, and Marine Corps Air Station Cherry
Point.
UNC campuses offer specialized programs of interest to veterans and
active-duty military service members. Veterans are attracted to these
programs because their military learning and experiences align with the
academic programs and help prepare them for their desired career. In
addition, many courses are structured to accommodate an adult student's
lifestyle. Many student veterans have family responsibilities, part-
time or full-time employment, and other obligations. Examples of such
academic programs include:
East Carolina University: Bachelor of Science, Industrial
Distribution and Logistics
Fayetteville State University: Bachelor of Arts, Intelligence
Studies
North Carolina A&T State University: Ph.D., Leadership Studies
North Carolina Central University: Bachelor of Science, Criminal
Justice
North Carolina State University: Bachelor of Arts, Leadership in
the Public Sector
North Carolina State University: Master of Geospatial Information
Science and Technology
UNC--Chapel Hill: Master of Arts, Military History
UNC--Chapel Hill: Master of Business Administration (MBA@UNC)
UNC--Chapel Hill: Master of Public Administration (MPA@UNC)
UNC--Charlotte: Bachelor of Science, Neurodiagnostics and Sleep
Science
UNC--Greensboro: Bachelor of Arts, Liberal Studies
UNC--Pembroke: Bachelor of Interdisciplinary Studies, Public and
Non-Profit Administration
UNC--Wilmington: Master of Arts, Conflict Management and Resolution
Western Carolina University: Bachelor of Science, Emergency and
Disaster Management
Winston-Salem State University: Master of Science in Rehabilitation
Counseling
Centralized Information Sharing and One-Stop Shopping for Veterans
We understand that veterans are nontraditional students. Student
veterans come to us from the highly structured, bureaucratic
environment of the military and are often uneasy with the loosely
structured, bureaucratic environment of the University. University
admissions and enrollment processes for veterans can be complex,
sometimes requiring visits to different departments across campus. One
of our top priorities is centralizing information sharing, using a
technology-based platform that provides a virtual ``one-stop-shop'' for
veterans. This enables us to provide reliable and consistent
information in response to the questions most commonly posed by
veterans. In addition, as unique situations arise, veterans always have
the name and contact information for specific campus-based staff who
are readily available to ensure that their questions can be answered.
All campuses are encouraged to go beyond a technology-based solution
and provide a centralized physical location where veterans can access
the resources they need. Many UNC institutions already have veteran's
centers in place, and several others are working to establish them. To
access the University's virtual one-stop-shop: http://
www.uncserves.northcarolina.edu
Another technology-based resource now in development is the North
Carolina Military Educational Positioning System, or ``NCMEPS.'' This
website provides military-affiliated students the resources they need
to explore with greater ease North Carolina's higher education
options--both public and private--the tools to successfully navigate
the application, admission and enrollment process; and the knowledge to
persist, graduate and pursue their career goals. To cite one example,
the GI Bill module allows users to answer a series of questions about
their personal circumstances to learn more about how to maximize their
VA benefits. While the website was conceived by the UNC system, the
goal is to help prospective students find, apply, and pay for the North
Carolina college or university that is right for them. The website,
which is live and available to student veterans now, will be fully
functional by July 1, 2014. To access the NCMEPS: http://
www.ncmileps.northcarolina.edu

Working With Community College Partners

The University of North Carolina system works closely with the
North Carolina Community College System to create degree programs and
transition pathways that are geared toward active-duty service members,
veterans, and their families. A Comprehensive Articulation Agreement
(CAA) between the two systems, revised and expanded in February, helps
facilitate a smooth and seamless pathway for students transitioning
from a community college to the University. This statewide agreement
governs the transfer of certain academic credits among all North
Carolina community colleges and North Carolina public universities.
In addition, some UNC institutions have separate articulation
agreements with selected community colleges that are specific to
certain majors and enable students to progress from an Associate in
Applied Science (A.A.S.) degree to a bachelor's degree. Major study
areas include Information Systems and Engineering Technology, both
directly applicable to military education requirements. Specific
examples include:

Fayetteville State University, North Carolina State
University, UNC Pembroke, and Western Carolina University have
partnered with Fayetteville Technical Community College and the
United States Army Special Operations Command, Special Warfare
Center & School at Ft. Bragg to develop an Associate of General
Education (A.G.E.) degree that awards credit for military
learning with seamless transition to Bachelor degree programs
in areas such as Intelligence Studies, Criminal Justice, and
Interdisciplinary Studies (http://www.soc.mil/swcs/education/).
This Associate's to Bachelor's degree pathway was created
specifically for active-duty soldiers in the U.S. Army Special
Operations Command.

UNC Wilmington and Coastal Carolina Community College
have partnered with the United States Marine Corps to offer
undergraduate and graduate courses and the Associate,
Bachelor's and Master's degrees on the community college campus
and aboard Camp Lejeune for active-duty and veteran Marines and
their spouses or dependents (http://www.uncw.edu/onslow/) and
(https://www.coastalcarolina.edu/military-partnerships/).

NCSU Engineering Online is a unique partnership
between North Carolina State University and other North
Carolina institutions to extend the offering of NC State's
undergraduate engineering instruction throughout the state.
Through Engineering Online, students can complete a site-based
pre-engineering program at Craven Community College, Johnston
Community College, UNC Asheville or UNC Wilmington, and later
transfer to NC State to complete their Bachelor's degree in
Engineering.

Closing

We believe that this ``one-stop shop'' approach works well for the
University, for student veterans, and for the military. But the primary
reason we have taken this approach is because we care deeply about the
whole soldier. (I use to the term ``soldier'' to represent all of the
men and women in uniform, including airmen, marines, guardsmen, and
sailors, as well as our veterans.) We care about providing them with
access to a high-quality, affordable education in support of their
personal or professional goals. We care about the families that they
leave behind when they deploy or return to upon separation from
service. We care about the kit and equipment they carry down range.
Our efforts in this regard are not because a government agency
requires us to do something. We are committed to supporting student
veterans because of North Carolina's longstanding pride and support of
the military. The service member who deploys may be our family member,
friend or neighbor. The family that they leave behind may be our
family. Higher education is crucial to the mission because the most
important weapon that a service member carries is not an assault rifle,
but rather his or her mind. They need to be able to adapt to changing
environments, use critical thinking skills, learn a foreign language,
employ negotiation skills, and apply conflict management lessons. Their
kits and equipment must be the latest and greatest things because they
need the ability to gather intelligence, execute a mission, and come
home safely. And, when our service members make the transition from
active duty to veterans in civilian society, we selfishly want them to
remain in North Carolina for the long term. It is no secret that
veterans make great employees, often start and grow successful small
businesses, and make other economic and civic contributions, as well.
The University of North Carolina can and should be a natural place
of transition for veterans. They have earned an educational benefit,
and that benefit can be the ticket to a brighter future. It is our duty
to help make it happen.
Our faculty report that they enjoy having veterans in their
classes. I've attached to my testimony is a letter from a faculty
member about her personal experience with service members in her
classroom. As a group, student veterans attend classes regularly, take
their assignments seriously, are attentive and provide a unique
perspective in class discussions. All students benefit from their
presence in the classroom.
Finally, the University of North Carolina system is committed to
partnering with the military because national security should be a
priority for all us--not just for the less than one-half of one percent
of us who serve in the armed forces. We can all do something to
contribute. The faculty, staff and students of the University of North
Carolina stand ready to do our part.
Thank you, Mister Chairman. This concludes my testimony.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Curtis L. Coy

Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Takano, and other
Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss
the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) efforts to help Veterans
achieve success in their educational endeavors. I will discuss
implementation of the VetSuccess on Campus (VSOC) program, Public Law
(P.L.) 112-249, and the ``Million Records Project'' undertaken through
a partnership with the Student Veterans of America (SVA) and the
National Student Clearinghouse (NSC).
We are committed to ensuring that our Nation's Veterans,
Servicemembers, Reservists, and qualifying dependents receiving VA
education benefits have access to high-quality educational
opportunities that will enhance their ability to meet their academic
and career objectives. The expansion of the VSOC program, the outreach
efforts enacted in accordance with P.L. 112-249, and the data being
made available as a result of the Million Records initiative will help
foster educational success and provide information on how Veterans are
performing in their educational pursuits. My testimony today will
highlight the achievements made through these efforts.

VetSuccess on Campus (VSOC)

Beginning in 2009, VA's Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment
(VR&E) Service has worked to implement and expand the VSOC program,
deploying Vocational Rehabilitation Counselors (VRC) to select school
locations to help students succeed during their transition from active
duty to the college environment. VR&E Service continues to enhance all
aspects of the VSOC program to increase its effectiveness. In fiscal
year (FY) 2012, VA had a total of 32 VSOC campus locations. In FY 2013,
62 additional VRCs were added to the VSOC program, which now includes
79 VRCs located at 94 institutions of higher learning (IHL).
The VSOC program and counselors, through education and career
counseling (Title 38, Chapter 36) services, provide students seamless
access to VA benefits and services and support their successful
integration on college and university campuses.
We are continuing our efforts to enhance support to Veterans on
campus across a wide range of benefits and services. At each school
site, VSOC counselors are working with their university partners to
establish a student mentoring program. The goal of the mentoring
program is to assist students with the challenges and/or stressors of
entering or returning to an academic environment. VSOC counselors also
collaborate with VA Medical Centers and campus counseling centers to
ensure that students are aware of available mental health services and
receive referrals as necessary to support their needs.
In addition, the Corporation for National and Community Service has
entered into an interagency agreement with VA to enhance supportive
services for Veterans on campus. The VetSuccess AmeriCorps members are
now supporting the VSOC counselor in conducting outreach events and
coordinating on-campus activities and services based on student needs.
VR&E Service is developing a strategy to determine the way ahead to
best align resources for the optimal VSOC coverage at school sites with
significant Veteran populations. This initiative is considering current
VSOC sites, schools with interest in hosting future VSOC counselors,
the number of Veterans attending schools under VA education programs,
and schools' proximity to both VA health care facilities and military
installations.

Carrying Out P.L. 112-249

P.L. 112-249, enacted on January 10, 2013 which enhances and
complements the provisions of Executive Order 13607, requires VA to
develop a comprehensive policy to improve outreach and transparency to
Veterans and Servicemembers through the provision of information on
IHLs, and to deploy online tools to implement the policy. The law also
requires VA to develop a centralized mechanism for tracking and
publishing feedback from students and State Approving Agencies (SAA)
regarding the quality of instruction at IHLs, their recruiting
practices, and post-graduation employment placement. The law prohibits
VA from approving any course offered by an educational institution that
provides any commission, bonus, or other incentive payment based
directly or indirectly on success in securing enrollments or financial
aid. Finally, it requires VA to perform two market surveys related to
academic readiness and commercially available, off-the-shelf, online
comparison tools.
VA partnered with the Department of Education (ED), Department of
Defense, Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), Department of Justice (DOJ), and the National Association of
State Approving Agencies to implement P.L. 112-249. As required by this
law, VA submitted a report to Congress in April of 2013 that included a
description of the comprehensive policy, VA's plan to implement the
policy, and the results of the market surveys conducted to determine
the availability of commercial off-the-shelf online tools.
As a result of the required market surveys, VA began piloting an
online assessment tool called CareerScope that gives prospective
students career recommendations based on interests and aptitudes, and
also provides information on related courses and training programs.
Since August 2013, nearly 10,000 individuals have started or completed
the free assessment. VA conducted another market survey for an online
tool that provides prospective students with a list of providers of
postsecondary education and training opportunities based on specific
criteria selected by the individual. We discovered that many online
tools provide much of the required information; however, none of the
Web sites provide all of the data required by law. As a result, VA
built an online tool that aggregates information from existing Web
sites to provide all of the required data.
The GI Bill Comparison Tool, which launched on February 4, 2014
pursuant to the Executive Order and Public Law, helps Veterans become
informed postsecondary education consumers. It displays median
borrowing amounts, graduation rates, and loan-default rates by school,
and it also indicates whether or not the school participates in the
Yellow Ribbon Program or has agreed to adhere to the Principles of
Excellence prescribed by Executive Order 13607. The tool allows
beneficiaries to estimate the amount of funding they may receive under
the Post-9/11 GI Bill. The tool was recently featured by Dr. Jill
Biden on NBC's Today Show while celebrating the three-year anniversary
of the First Lady's and Dr. Biden's Joining Forces Initiative. As of
April 11, 2014, there have been 133,970 unique visitors who have used
the tool.
VA will continue exploring the development and refinement of the GI
Bill Comparison Tool. Some of the new features and functionalities we
are considering include improving the school/employer search
capability, incorporating the ability to compare multiple schools side-
by-side, providing school-specific GI Bill benefit calculations,
displaying feedback and/or complaints about a particular school, and
displaying Veteran-specific outcome information, among many other
features. These further enhancements would allow Veterans to compare
schools across more dimensions and at a finer level of detail.
Pursuant to Executive Order 13607, VA developed and launched the GI
Bill Feedback System, a centralized online reporting system that
allows Veterans, Servicemembers, Reservists, and eligible dependents to
report negative experiences with educational institutions. Depending
upon the nature of the complaint, VA may serve as an intermediary
between the student and school to assist in the resolution of the
complaint, or VA may launch a targeted risk-based review of the school.
Complaints may also be reviewed by state and Federal law enforcement
agencies, including DOJ. VA began accepting complaints through the GI
Bill Feedback System when it was launched on January 30, 2014. As of
April 13, 2014, there have been 16,701 individuals who have viewed the
Feedback System's information Web page, 3,671 individuals who logged
into the system, and 1,269 submitted complaints. In March 2014, VA
began transmitting the complaints to the centralized FTC Consumer
Sentinel database, where they are accessible by law enforcement
agencies.
VA has successfully completed several other activities needed to
meet the requirements of Executive Order 13607 and P.L. 112-249 since
January 2013. Specifically, VA updated the School Certifying Official
handbook; published student outcome measure definitions on ED's College
Navigator; registered the GI Bill Trademark; and began enforcing legal
terms of use of the trademark.

Million Records Initiative

VA established an agreement with SVA to create a new education
completion database for Post-9/11 GI Bill and Montgomery GI Bill
beneficiaries in order to study the outcomes of these VA education
programs. VA also established an agreement with NSC to match VA's
records and provide graduation and program completion information. The
resulting data set contains information on Veteran beneficiaries
enrolled in education programs from 2002 through 2013. NSC was an
available source for tracking student completion rates at the
individual level. After NSC matched the VA records, the de-identified
results were released to SVA for analysis.
On March 24, 2014, SVA released the ``Million Records Project''
report, a study which provides a baseline on Veteran student success.
Overall, SVA found that Veterans have an education completion rate of
52 percent, which is much higher than non-Veteran, non-traditional
students who have a completion rate of 23 to 30 percent based on
previous studies. Non-traditional students are defined as individuals
who do not go into postsecondary education directly from high school;
are financially independent; have dependents; are enrolled part-time;
and are working full-time while attending school, among other criteria.
These characteristics are shared by the majority of our Veteran
students. SVA also highlighted the fact that approximately 9 out of 10
Veterans initially earn degrees at the associate level or higher, with
many Veterans going on to achieve higher levels of education. The
results also indicated that a high percentage of Veterans are pursuing
degrees in business, public service, health, science, and engineering.
The results of the study show that continued research on Veteran
graduation rates is imperative. Prior to the ``Million Records
Project,'' accurate data on Veterans' academic outcomes has been nearly
impossible to find, and the lack of data has caused confusion about
Veteran success in the postsecondary education environment.
The current study provides one of the most widely scaled
perspectives on Veterans' academic achievement and provides an
important baseline. The success of the public-private partnership
between VA, SVA, and NSC provides a clear path forward for future data-
sharing and analysis. VA will continue working with them to expand and
refine the research on Veterans' academic outcomes. Some of the future
collaboration efforts being discussed include reviewing retention,
persistence, and transfer rates, as well as adding data for subsequent
academic years.

Conclusion

VA has worked with key stakeholders to ensure that Veterans are
utilizing their education benefits efficiently and successfully.
Through ongoing interagency cooperation and student outreach, VA will
continue its efforts to ensure Veterans are informed consumers and
schools meet their obligations in providing education and training to
this Nation's ``next greatest generation.''
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions that you or the other Members of the Subcommittee
may have.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statement for the Record

From Northern Arizona University

Northern Arizona University (NAU) is dedicated to providing a
quality educational experience to the young men and women who have
served our nation so honorably in the armed forces. Our veteran
services are led by the NAU Office of Military and Veteran Affairs
(OMVA), whose motto is, ``Serving the Heroes Studying Among Us!''
NAU has received state and national recognition as a leader in
higher education service and support to our student veterans and we
appreciate the opportunity to share our experiences with the committee.
NAU bases its service and support to our student veterans on national
best practices. We are proud to be signatory to both the Principles of
Excellence for Education, established in Executive Order 13607, and to
the Department of Defense Voluntary Education Partnership Memorandum of
Understanding. The Arizona Legislature established a separate process
to incentivize attention to serving student veterans through the
development of a process for postsecondary education institutions to be
designated as Arizona Veterans Supportive Campuses, and we have proudly
met that standard.
Research and experience has revealed that the first year experience
is the most critical in the successful transition of any new student.
Such is true for new student veterans from the military, compounded by
the need to adjust to the academic rigor and other demands of a
university setting. This fall NAU will introduce Veteran Educational
Transition Success (VETS), a third generation transition program
comprised of the following seven initiatives:
Orientation for New Student Veterans: All new student veterans and
their loved ones are strongly encouraged to attend a new student
veteran in-processing session just prior to fall classes. The session
addresses VA benefits, on- and off-campus resources, academic
resources, and the Student Veterans of America (SVA) club activities.
In addition, volunteer professors will offer tutorials on college
writing and communication, library navigation, and how to establish a
personal finance plan.
Transition Checklist: As soon an incoming student veteran is
identified, OMVA, through its one-stop Veteran Student Center (VSC),
reaches out to the student with a welcome letter and the transition
checklist that provides a detailed step-by-step guide that serves as
the veteran's road map to a successful transition to NAU.
Math Prep: It may have been awhile since a new student veteran has
taken a math class. NAU offers a free, online, six week Summer Bridge
program, with or without coaching support, designed to help ease new
student veterans back into math, reduce math anxiety, and/or to improve
math placement scores.
Veteran's First-year Cohort Transition Seminar: All student
veterans new to campus are strongly encouraged to enroll in the
academically accredited and VA accepted 3-credit hour first year cohort
transition seminar. The average student veteran at NAU is 28 years old,
has 15-30 credit hours from military training and technically qualifies
as a transfer student. Student veterans arrive with limited to no
exposure to a college or university classroom or environment.
Therefore, a transition course is offered to veterans taught by
veterans, introducing the new students to the skills and resources
required to succeed within a rigorous academic environment. The course
is presented in a traditional classroom with an online component that
allows students to explore potential career opportunities following
graduation. The course's focus on degree determination and future
career paths increases the individual commitment toward student
success, retention and graduation.
College-Based (non-residency) Learning Community (CBLC): All
students enrolled in the transition seminar also participate in the
student veteran cohort CBLC. New student veterans arrive on campus with
much anxiety about fitting into the campus culture. The CBLC is
sponsored by the NAU chapter of the Student Veterans of America and
supports the new student veteran in transition to NAU through social,
informational and recreational activities alongside other student
veterans on campus. Providing a community of fellow veterans they can
relate to, trust, and connect with is key to a positive, engaging and
successful experience.
Student Success Coaching Program (SSCP): The Student Success
Coaching Program (SSCP) is designed to empower our new student veterans
through a voluntary coaching relationship with an NAU employee or
retiree who also is a veteran. Coaches are professionally trained
volunteers who meet with new student veterans once a week to offer
life-coaching tools and resources.
Veteran Peer Mentorship: In collaboration with the Transfer and
Commuter Connections Center, we extend to new veterans the opportunity
to work with a trained peer mentor who also is a student veteran.
Experience and best practices have validated the personal contact of a
peer mentor in aiding student veteran transition. The mentor and
student often discuss topics that may arise up in a group session. This
program serves as an important early alert system to ensure all
veterans receive personal, medical, academic, career and financial
advice before challenges become overwhelming.
These initiatives are a culmination of research and experience over
the last four years during which we have incorporated national best
practices, veteran feedback and collaboration with a myriad of on- and
off-campus resources to develop a comprehensive student veteran
transition program. Challenges remain to successfully serve our veteran
population and we continuously strive to improve both our services and
data collection in this area. One area in which federal assistance
would be appreciated is the timely processing of financial aid for
veteran students. Approximately one-half of our veteran students at NAU
are married and have children. Supporting a family takes an additional
toll on students struggling to meet financial obligations and the
current process for awarding veterans federal financial aid averages 6-
8 weeks.
Thank you for the opportunity to present information on this
important student population. I hope I have demonstrated Northern
Arizona University's dedication to providing comprehensive services
necessary to help our veterans succeed as they move into their next
career. We will continue our work to increase the number of veterans
seeking and achieving a postsecondary education degree. If we can offer
any additional information or clarification please feel free to contact
LTC (ret) Andrew Griffin, Ed.D., Director of the Office of Military and
Veteran Affairs at (928) 523-8555 or
[emailprotected]
.
