- BUILDING AN OPPORTUNITY ECONOMY: STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING AN OPPORTUNITY ECONOMY: THE STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS AND
ENTREPRENEURSHIP

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 4, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-004
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-730 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
TOM RICE, South Carolina
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Stephen Dennis, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velaazquez............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Jon Clifton, Partner, Managing Director, Government Division,
Gallup, Inc., Washington, DC...................................     4
Ms. Cynthia Kay, Owner and President, Cynthia Kay and Company,
Grand Rapids, MI, testifying on behalf of the National Small
Business Association...........................................     6
Mr. David Burton, Senior Fellow in Economic Policy, The Heritage
Foundation, Washington, DC.....................................     7
Ms. Elana Fine, Managing Director, Dingman Center for
Entrepreneurship, University of Maryland, Robert H. Smith
School of Business, College Park, MD...........................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Jon Clifton, Partner, Managing Director, Government
Division, Gallup, Inc., Washington, DC.....................    28
Ms. Cynthia Kay, Owner and President, Cynthia Kay and
Company, Grand Rapids, MI, testifying on behalf of the
National Small Business Association........................    35
Mr. David Burton, Senior Fellow in Economic Policy, The
Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC........................    46
Ms. Elana Fine, Managing Director, Dingman Center for
Entrepreneurship, University of Maryland, Robert H. Smith
School of Business, College Park, MD.......................    72
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

BUILDING AN OPPORTUNITY ECONOMY: STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS AND
ENTREPRENEURSHIP

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Hanna, Rice, Gibson,
Curbelo, Hardy, Radewagen, Velaazquez, Hahn, and Clarke.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. This hearing will come to
order. I want to thank everyone for being here, especially our
witnesses and our members.
Today, we are here to examine the state of small business.
For the Members here, it is not the first or last time we will
have this conversation. We have it every time we talk to our
constituents. They are the ones, after all, who tell us the
most about small business.
But in those conversations, we do not have C-SPAN cameras,
we do not have stenographers, and it does not make it into the
Congressional record. So we are having this hearing today for
our constituents, as well as for the small businesses all
across the country, to have a conversation for the record that
we have already had many times back home, so that we, as
Members of the Small Business Committee of the U.S. House of
Representatives, can start the legislative work of getting
government off the backs of the American people and off the
backs of small businesses all across the country.
One out of every two employed Americans works at a small
business. Seven out of every 10 new job opportunities are
created by small businesses. When the federal government issues
new rules, or raises taxes, or threatens to raise taxes, or
increases health care costs, or prolongs a sense of
uncertainty, this does not just impact the name on a store
front; it impacts real people. It impacts every American worker
that puts a roof over their head or food on the table by
working at that small business.
We have heard some say that our economy has recovered. And
it has somewhat. But when you look at the number of unemployed
Americans and the number of those who may be ``employed'' but
cannot find full-time work--in other words, they are working
only part-time--it is clear that we are not where we should be.
As testimony today will reinforce, it is not another
sweeping government program that will make life better for
Americans who depend on small businesses. The answer is hidden
in the thousands of pages of regulations and tax policies that
are crushing the small business community. We must alter the
mindset of the federal government so that it is always thinking
about how its actions will impact our small businesses. That is
what the Small Business Regulatory Flexibility Improvements Act
was all about--requiring that all federal agencies consider the
impact, both direct and indirect, that new rules or regulations
will have on small businesses before they become final. And in
another area, the labor force participation rate is at its
lowest point in our history. The percentage of long-term
unemployed is still much higher than before the recession. And
maybe the most disturbing trend: every year of the Obama
administration we have seen more businesses close than open,
and that is something I think we really need to focus our time
on. More businesses closing, dying, than opening or being born.
In plain language, it means we have a problem.
Small businesses are the foundation of our economy. As a
Committee, we are here to make life better for small businesses
and the working families that rely on them. Today, we begin
that important work.
I want to thank each of our witnesses for taking the time
to be with us today, and I look forward to hearing your
testimonies and asking some questions. And I would now yield to
our ranking member, Ms. Velaazquez, for her making an opening
statement.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this important hearing.
Creating two out of three net new jobs, small businesses
are vital to our overall economic health. Recent job data
affirms this point, with small firms creating 78,000 jobs
between December and January, significantly outpacing larger
companies. In January, businesses with fewer than 500 employees
added 81 percent of new private sector jobs. Over the last four
months, smaller companies have been responsible for 83 percent
of newly created positions. When compared to the 38 percent of
new jobs small firms created in 2010, it is clear that the
small business sector is finally firing on all cylinders and
providing the fuel to power our economy forward.
For small businesses to grow, a number of ingredients must
be in place. Access to affordable capital is one element.
Whether it is a bank loan or a well-timed infusion of venture
capital, small companies require capital to expand their
operations, break into new markets, or launch new products.
Thankfully, since the end of the Great Recession, the lending
environment for small businesses has improved considerably. The
majority of small firms that apply for credit in 2014 receive
it, according to data from the Federal Reserve banks. Indexes
that measure credit conditions for small companies reached
record levels in the last quarter of 2014.
Despite this positive news, room for improvement remains.
Smaller loans are still well below pre-recession levels. Those
small businesses or startups who are just getting off the
ground, continue encountering difficulties in securing credit.
It is my hope the committee will focus on this issue in the
coming weeks.
Beyond access to capital, in order to succeed, small firms
need customers willing to purchase their products. There has
been significant progress in this area as well. Consumer
confidence has been climbing since June, peaking at an 11-year
high in January. With fuel prices remaining low, it is
anticipated that consumer spending will remain strong,
providing demand for small firm goods and services. All of
these factors suggest that our nation's entrepreneurs have made
significant progress in recent months. As small businesses
continue growing, expanding and adding workers to the payrolls,
they will help strengthen our overall economy.
It will remain the function of this committee to support
policies that foster this growth. In that regard, I look
forward to working with the chairman, and all my colleagues, to
continue our bipartisan work to strengthen the small business
sector.
I just want to take this opportunity to thank all the
witnesses for your valuable insight, and I yield back the
balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
The Committee members can submit opening statements for the
record if they would like to do that.
And I would like to go ahead and introduce our panel at
this time, as well as introduce our five-minute rule, which is
basically you get five minutes to speak to us. We hold
ourselves to five minutes as well. We even have a lighting
system for that purpose. The green light will be on for four
minutes. The yellow light comes on and lets you know you have a
minute to wrap up, and then the red light will come on. We
would ask you to tie it up at that point, if not earlier. We
will give you a little leeway but not too much. And we will
introduce the panel and then we will hear from the panel.
We will begin with Jon Clifton, who is a partner at Gallup,
Inc. In this role, he manages Gallup's global government work
and the Gallup World Poll, an ongoing study conducted in more
than 160 countries, representing 98 percent of the world's
adult population. He received his Bachelor's degree in
Political Science and History from University of Michigan, and
a Juris Doctorate from the University of Nebraska. We welcome
you this morning.
Our second witness will be Ms. Cynthia Kay, who is owner
and president of Cynthia Kay and Company in Grand Rapids,
Michigan. Her company produces high quality media productions
and communications elements that are used here in the United
States and abroad. Ms. Kay serves on the board of MiQuest
Foundation, whose mission is to promote a culture of
entrepreneurship in Michigan. She serves on the executive board
of the National Small Business Association, whom she is
representing today. A graduate of Michigan State University--we
have got a lot of Michigan folks here. Ms. Kay also holds a
Master's degree in Communications from Western Michigan
University.
And our third witness will be Mr. David Burton, who is a
senior fellow in Economic Policy at the Thomas A. Roe Institute
for Economic Policy at The Heritage Foundation. In this role,
he focuses on tax matters, security law, entitlements,
regulatory, and administrative law. He received a juris
doctorate degree from University of Maryland School of Law and
he holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics from University
of Chicago.
So we welcome all three, and I will now yield to the
ranking member to introduce our fourth witness.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. It is my pleasure to welcome Ms. Elana
Fine. She is managing director of the Dingman Center for
Entrepreneurship at the University of Maryland's Robert Smith
School of Business. Ms. Fine's primary focus is leading the
center in its mission to broaden entrepreneurship. Her
responsibilities include oversight of a venture incubator, an
angel investor network, business competitions, and integration
with Smith School entrepreneurship curriculum and research
activities. She is also an adjunct faculty member and has an
MBA from the University of Chicago. She was recently named a
tech titan by Washingtonian Magazine. Welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mr. Clifton, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF JON CLIFTON, PARTNER, MANAGING DIRECTOR,
GOVERNMENT DIVISION, GALLUP; CYNTHIA KAY, OWNER AND PRESIDENT,
CYNTHIA KAY AND COMPANY; DAVID BURTON, SENIOR FELLOW IN
ECONOMIC POLICY, THOMAS A. ROE INSTITUTE FOR ECONOMIC POLICY,
THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION; ELANA FINE, MANAGING DIRECTOR, DINGMAN
CENTER FOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP, ROBERT H. SMITH SCHOOL OF BUSINESS

STATEMENT OF JON CLIFTON

Mr. CLIFTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and members of the
Committee. It is a pleasure to be here to discuss Gallup's
analytics on the state of the U.S. economy, the attitudes of
small business owners, and the current barriers to job growth
and startups.
Gallup completed its first national representative survey
of the world in 2006. Our biggest finding from this study is
what the whole world wants is a good job. That finding
compelled us to more thoroughly study the jobs situation around
the world. Gallup now quantities the prevalence in quality of
jobs in more than 140 countries each year, and Gallup also
tracks employment daily in the United States, surveying roughly
30,000 adults per month and more than 350,000 people per year.
There are a number of signs from Gallup's data that the
U.S. economy has been improving since the recession--economic
confidence is improving, self-reported discretionary spending
is steadily increasing, and people are reporting that hiring is
outpacing firing in their workplaces. Despite this encouraging
news, job creation remains a problem.
While official unemployment has fallen from roughly 10
percent in 2010 to roughly 6 percent today, using this metric
to represent the total jobs picture would be misleading.
Traditional unemployment includes only people who are looking
for work, who are available for work, and who have not worked a
single hour in the past week. This means that if a person is
giving up looking for work or if a person has worked only a
single hour in the past week, that person is not considered
unemployed.
A different metric offered by Gallup quantifies the number
of people employed full time for an employer--or what others
might call a ``good job''--as a percent of the total adult
population. Known as Payroll to Population, this metric stands
at 44.3 percent today and has not meaningfully increased since
2010 when we started quantifying this metric.
One of the main reasons that the job situation has yet to
recover is that according to the U.S. Census, the number of
business deaths now exceeds the number of business births among
employer firms for the first time since 1977 when this
measurement began.
This leads us to the importance of small businesses and
startups in this country. They contribute roughly 70 percent of
all new jobs created in a single year. Considering their
importance, Gallup works with Wells Fargo to track the opinions
and behaviors of small business owners on a quarterly basis.
The good news is that the attitudes of small business
owners are steadily improving. The Wells Fargo Gallup Small
Business Index stands at +71 today, which is the highest index
score since the onset of the recession. Now, 64 percent of
small business owners report that their company's current
financial situation is good, and 71 percent expect their
company's financial situation to be good 12 months from now.
However, despite this positive trajectory, small business
owners face clear challenges. When asked to name their most
important challenge, the number one issue they report is
finding new customers. That is 15 percent of the small
businesses that we talked to. This is followed by mentions of
the economy in general, which represents 12 percent, and in
third is government regulations, which represents 10 percent.
However, if we add those who cite healthcare and Obamacare at 8
percent, or just the government in general, which is at 6
percent, fully 24 percent of small business owners say the
government is in some way their biggest challenge. Also worth
noting, while many small business owners believe available
credit is a major issue, only 3 percent say it is their most
important challenge.
In addition to the barriers faced by small business owners,
there are also barriers facing would-be entrepreneurs. One in
four Americans have thought about starting a business but have
abandoned the idea. For an economy with a negative net number
of startups each year since 2008, this represents a missed
opportunity to engage would-be entrepreneurs that could result
in business startups. Three major barriers are keeping these
would-be entrepreneurs from taking the plunge: 1) They prefer
the security of a stable income, 2) they do not have enough
money to start a business, and 3) they lack the knowledge on
how to start a business. Because the majority of business
owners fund their early stage businesses through personal
savings, a steadily declining personal savings rate in the
United States has negatively affected prospective
entrepreneurs' ability to finance new businesses. Moreover, if
they lack insight on where or how to begin, starting a business
is even more difficult, and these prospective entrepreneurs are
more likely to be more risk averse.
Creating good jobs and subsequently rebuilding America's
middle class hinges on the success and failures of small
businesses and startups. Existing small businesses are
experiencing headwinds, caused primarily by challenging
business realities, the overall economy, and a concern about
government regulations. Would-be entrepreneurs face barriers
such as not having enough money to start a business and lacking
knowledge about starting a business.
It would be wise for Congress and American leadership to
consider all options to unlocking this invaluable economic
institution. The American public would be behind them. Other
than the U.S. military, there is no other institution in the
United States that the public has more confidence in than small
business. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Kay, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF CYNTHIA KAY

Ms. KAY. Thank you. Good morning. My thanks to Chairman
Chabot, Ranking Member Velaazquez, and the members of the Small
Business Committee, for asking me to testify today.
As you heard, I am the president of a communications
company, but I think it is also important to note that I come
from a family of small business owners. My dad co-owned a small
dry-cleaning business. My sister and her husband own a boutique
rental company in Raleigh, and my brother is an attorney. I am
also proud to be representing the National Small Business
Association.
As a small business owner for 27 years, I have experienced
numerous economic downturns. Probably the last one was the most
difficult. However, I am glad to tell you that business is
booming for my company, and I am not alone. And SBA recently
released its year-end economic survey, and it shows that the
economic outlook is really better than it has been in quite
some time. But, the majority of small firms expect a flat or
recessionary economy in the coming year.
And SBA also held its Small Business Congress, where we
identified our top 10 priorities for Congress. And the top
priority is ensure corporate-only tax reform, include some kind
of workable solution for the millions of pass-through small
businesses.
In the interest of transparency, I need to tell you, my
company is a C corp; however, 83 percent of all small firms are
pass-throughs. They pay taxes for their business at a personal
income level, so it is no surprise that taxes are consistently
ranked as the most burdensome administratively, and payroll
taxes the most burdensome financially.
Broad reform of the entire tax code is necessary, and
frankly, I firmly believe that addressing just one piece of
this is only going to lead to greater complexity and be at the
expense of small business.
Even in the best of times, access to capital is a huge
hurdle. When I started my business, I did what a lot of
business owners do--I went to get a loan and I had to sign a
personal guarantee against the equity of my house. And I have
done that on a number of occasions. Years later, when my sister
and her husband tried to get a loan, they encountered the same
difficulties. In fact, my business and my family financed their
startup, and this is not an unusual story. In fact, it is very
typical. It is difficult to get credit in good times; it is
even harder to get credit during trouble economic periods. In
fact, in the last seven years, one in three small firms on
average cannot get access to adequate financing. Capital is the
lifeblood of small business, and without it, the heart of
America's economy is millions of small businesses stand poised
to fail.
In recent years, Congress enacted important tax provisions
for small business on a temporary basis. They have now expired,
and Congress continues to delay these extensions. So in the
absence of comprehensive tax reform, extending and making
permanent tax important provisions has been NSBA's priority for
quite some time.
Tax extenders are very significant to my business. You have
all heard the saying, ``Lights, camera, action.'' Well, that
costs a lot of money, and we are constantly updating our
equipment. In the past, we used section 179 expensing and it is
really important that we are able to deduct the cost of an
asset in the year that we buy it. Why? Because our equipment
gets outdated much quicker than the five to seven years that it
costs to depreciate it. And it does not just affect my company;
it affects more than one in three NSBA members.
So on behalf of NSBA, I do want to thank you, Chairman
Chabot, for all of your work in advancing the Small Business
Regulatory Flexibility Improvements Act earlier this year. It
is a very important piece of legislation, and NSBA is pleased
to have supported it.
But there is still a lot to be done. That is why NSBA
played a critical role in developing the role of a national
regulatory budget to bring much-needed reform. Small businesses
simply need the environment to grow and to create jobs, and
frankly, we need lawmakers who are willing to tackle major
issues that are facing our country, and do it together.
I began today by saying that the economy has improved, and
it has. There is pent-up demand for goods and services, and
potential small business owners are constantly calling me and
asking about owning a small business. And while I tell them
that it is great to own a small business, I also tell them
about the significant challenges. It is no wonder that many
people, when they look at the obstacles, walk way.
At NSBA, we stand ready to work with you to help ease the
burdens of using proactive solutions. Again, I want to thank
you for the opportunity to speak, and I am happy to answer any
questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Burton, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID BURTON

Mr. BURTON. My name is David Burton. I am senior fellow in
Economic Policy at The Heritage Foundation. I would like to
express my thanks to you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Velaazquez, for the opportunity to be here this morning. The
views I express are my own and not necessarily those of The
Heritage Foundation.
After complying with the multitude of state and federal
regulations that business owners have to comply with, they
should have some time left over to actually run their
businesses. Entrepreneurs should not have to be lawyers to run
their businesses. Unfortunately, that is about where we find
ourselves these days, and if we want to return to sustained
prosperity in the United States, we need to change that.
Entrepreneurship matters. It fosters discovery, innovation,
and job creation. It leads to more productive production
processes that improve productivity and lead to increases in
real wages. Entrepreneurs develop new and better and less
products and improve consumer well-being. They make markets
more efficient. New firms account for most of the net job
creation in the United States, and the vast majority of the
economic gains from innovation and entrepreneurship accrue to
the general public, rather than entrepreneurs.
But entrepreneurship is in decline. Business exits, as we
heard, now exceed business formations. But there are many other
indicia of entrepreneurial health that also indicate that we
place an unprecedented burden on small startup businesses.
Accordingly, job creation, productivity improvements, and
welfare-enhancing innovation have slowed, and the decline is an
important reason for our anemic economic performance.
The reasons for this decline are many fold. One policy
change or a few are not going to solve the problem, because the
problem is caused by the accumulated and combined weight of
hundreds of regulatory and statutory requirements imposed on
small startup businesses.
The problems fall into eight basic categories.
1. Poor tax policies that raise the cost of capital impose
high taxes on risk-taking and impede economic growth. Moreover,
the tax system is monstrously complex, which has a
disproportionate impact on small and startup firms.
2. Access to capital. Securities law and banking
regulations and practices that limit the ability of small firms
to get the capital that you need to launch or grow. After all,
if you cannot get the capital to launch, all the other
impediments to entrepreneurship are generally academic or mute.
3. The healthcare system is the most costly in the world.
More costly than any other OECD country. And the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare,
imposes high costs on firms with 50 or more employees.
4. Environmental and energy regulations raise the cost of
energy, including electricity and limited development of energy
resources.
5. The cost of complying with a broad range of increasingly
burdensome and complex regulations. These rules have a
disproportionate and adverse effect on small firms who can ill-
afford to use scarce resources to comply with state or federal
regulatory requirements instead of growing their business. They
also tend to be the people who are least experienced in
regulatory compliance.
6. We have increasingly complex and increasingly opaque
labor and employment laws that raise the cost and risk of
employing people, and they reduce wages and cost jobs.
7. The U.S. immigration system is broken, and it is
difficult for firms to gain access to talented foreign workers
and for immigrant entrepreneurs to launch businesses in the
United States.
8. And lastly, the U.S. legal system is the most costly in
the world, imposing high and potentially ruinous costs on small
firms and creating a whole series of regulatory risks.
If we want to return to a prosperous American with
opportunity for all and rising real wages, then Congress needs
to systematically address these issues with alacrity. The key
to reducing the decline in entrepreneurship is to
systematically reduce the legal impediments to
entrepreneurship. Since the decline is caused by the combined
weight of many poor public policies, the solution requires
systematically improving public policy in a wide variety of
areas.
My written testimony sets forth 97 specific proposals that
I believe if adopted will transform the American economy, lead
to resurgence in entrepreneurial activity, strong economic
growth, real wage increases, and renewed prosperity. I will be
glad to discuss any of those specific recommendations in
greater detail if time allows. Thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Fine, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELANA FINE

Ms. FINE. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velaazquez, and
members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to testify
before you today.
I am Elana Fine, managing director of the Dingman Center
for Entrepreneurship at University of Maryland's Robert H.
Smith School of Business.
Throughout my career in technology consulting and
investment banking, I have worked with hundreds of startups and
venture-backed companies, and am therefore well versed in their
challenges and opportunities.
To provide a little context, the Dingman Center is one of
the nation's preeminent institutions where the research,
education and practice of entrepreneurship are pursued
vigorously. We develop and execute curricular and
extracurricular programs to inspire and equip the next
generation of entrepreneurs. Our programs are focused on
guiding student entrepreneurs from idea to launch.
My role at the Dingman Center includes oversight of our
student venture incubator, the Dingman Center Angels Investment
Network, business competitions, and relationships with the
broader startup community. I also serve as an adjunct faculty
member at the Smith School.
I have been asked to give an overview of entrepreneurial
activity from a university perspective. I recognize that the
macro level of activity can be hard to quantify and to really
assess whether we are headed in the right direction. Based on
the pop culture success of television shows, like Shark Tank,
the proliferation of technology incubators and downtown
innovation hubs, it might seem like everyone is working on a
startup. Then we look at the statistics, like the Kauffman
Index, and entrepreneurial activity, which shows a decline from
2011 to 2013, and we wonder if we are doing enough.
From this perspective, a decline in entrepreneurial
activity might also be seen as an indicator of an improving
economy as employers have better job prospects. As we would say
in startup terms, we just do not know the metrics that matter.
So I am here today to give you a more grassroots perspective on
what I see as some leading indicators of the future of
entrepreneurship.
We informally think about our student ventures in three
categories. The first category is dorm room high group
startups, like Facebook, which although an outlier, raised the
visibility of student entrepreneurship and has inspired a
generation.
The next category we think about are the students starting
businesses while in school that they do not often continue
beyond graduation. Every year we see a panoply of new apparel
companies, mobile applications, tutoring services, dating
sites, and food concepts. We have seen university support
increase to match student interest and demand in these
activities. The data from the Dingman Center shows interest in
our ventures-creation activities grew from 161 students in
2012-2013, to almost 400 students in this academic year.
Students run these businesses for two to three years until
graduation. The company might not be a success in standard
terms, but as educators, we have provided a skillset we expect
will be used for a startup now or even 10 years from now.
Our best example in this category is University of Maryland
alumnus Kevin Plank, who ran a campus flower delivery service
called Cupid's Valentine. After graduation, instead of solving
the problem of expensive flowers, Plank decided to solve the
problem of soggy cotton t-shirts and turned his savings from
Cupid's Valentine into the seed money for Under Armour, which
is now a multi-billion dollar company employing thousands.
The last category of students feed the entrepreneurial
labor pool. These students are not working on their own idea
but won internships at local startup companies. The challenge
is that startups can rarely pay market rates, so they often
have to forego these opportunities to take higher paying
internships.
All of the students represent future entrepreneurs, but I
caution focusing too much on the first category. Instead, there
are a number of initiatives that can increase exposure and odds
of success. For example, the National Science Foundation's I-
Corps program is a model of a federally-funded program that
could increase the odds of success among early-stage university
spinouts.
On campuses, we need similar programs that can build on our
current momentum. These programs might provide scholarships for
students or loan forgiveness so students can choose to work at
startup firms.
We also need more funding opportunities that others have
mentioned. Without an initial ten to a hundred thousand
dollars, it is nearly impossible for a young entrepreneur, who
is burdened with student loans with no savings or credit, to
build a product and test acquisition strategies. Banks, angel
investors, and even granting institutions do not have vehicles
to fund these businesses.
As you embark on your Committee's activities, I encourage
you to consider the following: Seed programs that expose more
students to entrepreneurial activities and equip them with the
tools to vet ideas early; recognize that failure rates will
always be high and that success in entrepreneurship can also be
viewed by total births and deaths, because it means there are
more companies in the field; consider programs that provide
nondiluted funding to a broader spectrum of businesses, and
think creatively about apprentice-like programs and high-growth
startups that might increase the entrepreneurial labor pool.
Thank you for your time and opportunity to discuss student
entrepreneurship. I am happy to answer any questions you might
have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And I will recognize
myself now for five minutes.
I will start with you, Ms. Kay. My understanding is you
have--and this is according to your written testimony--you have
eight employees, yet you have had to hire five outside experts
from an accountant to a corporate lawyer to an HR lawyer and on
and on. Is that not kind of out of whack? Where are we going
wrong, the need for a business to expend so much of their
capital and resources just complying with the law, rather than
the substance of what makes them profitable and able to be
successful and hire as many people as you possibly can? So I
will leave that up to you.
Ms. KAY. Well, one of the things I always say is that as a
small business owner, you wear lots of hats. You are doing
everything. You are the HR department. You are the sales
department. You are doing the work. And we certainly cannot be
expert in all of these things. So unlike large companies that
have a staff of people to do things in house, I do have an
accounting firm. I actually checked the numbers this past year,
and it was a good year. We did not have a lot of issues. The
cost of it was $16,000 for a small company. Corporate lawyer
and HR lawyer, there are so many things that are happening on
the HR front that it is almost impossible for us to stay up
with all of the regulations.
And I think it is important that you know that small
business owners want to be in compliance. We want to comply
with the law. We simply do not have the expertise. Mr. Burton
here talked about needing lawyers to do the things. Simply
reading all of the documents and going through the forms is
extremely complex. So while smart business people can be
creative and entrepreneurial, we are not regulation
specialists, and we need people to help us.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Burton, I will turn to you next. You had mentioned that
you had 97 proposals, and I commend you for that. If you could
limit that to what you consider to be the three most
significant, that if we could actually accomplish, that would
do the most to benefit small businesses in this country, what
three--I mean, if you need four, that is okay. If you can only
come up with two, that is okay. But I am thinking three because
that is usually what we do.
Mr. BURTON. I will do it. But part of the problem is it is
not any one or two rules. I mean, you have hundreds, literally,
of rules that small businesses had to comply with, all of
which, when you look at them together--I mean, by itself--may
be reasonable. But the combined weight of hundreds of rules is
killing people, like Cynthia. And if you just get rid of four
of the hundreds, you have done something useful but not solved
the problem.
The written testimony I wrote sort of divides things into
intermediate, so there is smaller chunks, and then big picture
stuff. So, for example, fundamental tax reform would be in a
category of something that could be transformational, but there
is a whole series of small things. For example, making 179
expensive, liberalizing the S corporation rules, fixing the
independent contractor employee distinction, fixing the
characterization of capital versus labor income for self-
employment purposes. In the securities law area, there is a
whole host of things that would enable businesses to raise
money. For example, preempting Blue Sky laws on Reg A, fixing
Title 3 of the Jobs Act, and protecting Regulation D so that
people can raise money in private placements. There is a move
afoot to severely restrict the ability of firms to raise
private placements.
And then there is just not piling on massive paperwork
requirements in the employee-employer relationship, and there
is a whole host of things going on there--the Protected
Concerted Activity Initiative by NLRB, the criminal background
screening rules which--you know, there is a reason why. Maybe
there is a problem there, but a 157-footnote document is not
guidance; it is just obfuscation, and we need to fix it and not
make things totally here. But the list is almost endless. And
you need to address a lot of things, not any one or two.
Chairman CHABOT. Let me turn to you, Mr. Clifton. I am
almost out of time. I have got about 30 seconds.
You had mentioned that, I think, the largest real category
that small businesses--the challenge they face is basically
dealing with the federal government regulations and that sort
of thing. They would like to get new customers, but that is the
highest single thing, but if you add the other things
together--Obamacare, et cetera--has that been pretty consistent
over the years, do you know? I mean, this exasperation with
dealing with government in general and the regulations? Is that
pretty consistent over time? Is it getting better or worse, or
do you know?
Mr. BURTON. No, it has been very consistent. In fact, just
this study, the data that I shared today, is actually the
aggregate of what has happened over the past five quarters. So
it is a very stable number.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Very good. Thank you.
My time has expired. I now yield to the gentlelady from New
York.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Fine, many economists have long discussed that
employer-based health insurance can lead to job lock where
employees stay in their job solely for the benefits. The ACA
effectively eliminates job lock, and some have projected that
it will increase entrepreneurial activity. What impact do you
believe the ACA will have on entrepreneurs' decisions to start
a new business?
Ms. FINE. I would expect that it would increase the
interest in starting new ventures because of the reduction of
job lock. In general though, I would say for most
entrepreneurs, particularly high-growth entrepreneurs, if they
have an idea that they are passionate about and they see a
window of opportunity for and they think that--most likely they
think they are going to be the next Mark Zuckerberg, whether or
not they have health care probably will not stop them, but it
does reduce one of the barriers as some of the fellow panelists
mentioned about training and other things. It might be one
thing that they do not have to worry about anymore.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you.
In this committee room, Ms. Fine, we often hear that taxes
and regulations are the biggest challenges for small firms. As
an actual practitioner in entrepreneurship, I wanted to ask
your views on this: What are the greatest challenges facing
your students as they try to get their companies off the
ground?
Ms. FINE. Yeah, I will say that is not top--those two
things are not top of mind. What is top of mind is funding, and
I will echo Cynthia's comments about finding customers and just
where do I find them, how do I access my network, who is really
going to trust me as a small business with not much of a
balance sheet. The old kind of adage that you never get fired
for buying IBM. To me, those are the biggest hurdles for our
entrepreneurs.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Ms. Kay, if Congress were only to reform corporate taxes,
how would that impact small businesses?
Ms. KAY. Well, I think you need to look at what it is for
small businesses. I think I mentioned 83 percent are pass-
through.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Pass-through. Mm-hmm.
Ms. KAY. And so for them, you know, only reforming
corporate tax is really not going to impact small business. And
what we end up seeing, and I will be the first to tell you I am
not a technical expert; that is why I have accountants. But I
see so many of the tax burdens. If we do not take care of this
large segment of small businesses--and as I mentioned, I am a C
corp, so it does not affect me--but so many of my supplier and
customers are, that I see that as a huge issue.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. So closing so-called loopholes, many of
which are used by small companies, such as bonus depreciation
179 expensing, closing those loopholes are favored by many. How
would this impact small businesses?
Ms. KAY. I think the biggest issue we have is uncertainty.
If we do not know that we are going to be able to use, for
example, 179 expensing, we are left in a position where we are
unable to make reasonable decisions--buying decisions,
financial decisions about our company. So what is most
important to us, frankly, we would love to see those become
permanent, but is certainty. That would be the biggest thing
that would help us to move our businesses forward.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. But if we do not take up comprehensive tax
reform, it means that we might have winners and losers. So for
the 83 percent of pass-throughs, if we eliminate tax loopholes,
such as 179 and bonus depreciation, there will be losers. How
can we support having that equation where we are going to
provide tax reform for some but at the expense of others?
Ms. KAY. Well, as I said, I think we are most interested in
comprehensive tax reform.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Okay. Very good.
Ms. KAY. But in the absence of that, we are looking for
many of these other things, like tax extenders.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Okay, so it is over. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. The lady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Florida, who is the chairman of the
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy, and Trade, Mr. Curbelo is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. CURBELO. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
scheduling this important hearing. And I thank the witnesses
for their insightful testimony.
I am passionate about small business, because I believe
that small businesses afford opportunities to those who need
them the most, oftentimes through casual encounters. Think
about that young person who might have dropped out of college.
Their neighbor might be a small business owner and they might
get a job that way. Think of a recently-arrived immigrant who
is looking for a way to get ahead. Small businesses tend to
hire those types of individuals.
So I want to ask a question on the EB5 Regional Center
pilot program that Congress established in 1992. I want to ask
Mr. Burton specifically. For those who are not fully familiar
with the program, under the EB5 program, investors are required
to put up at least one million dollars or $500,000 in high
unemployment areas, and these are foreign investors. In return,
they receive a two-year green card for themselves and their
immediate family. If the project succeeds and at least 10 U.S.
jobs are created, the investors gain permanent residency. If
the project fails, they lose their green cards and absorb the
losses of that failure.
This program is expected to sunset at the end of this year.
Mr. Burton, do you have any thoughts on whether this program
should be extended, or are there other programs like this that
Heritage may support for entrepreneurial immigrants?
Mr. BURTON. I personally think something along the lines of
the EB5 program where you are basically allowing people who
invest capital in the United States and create jobs in the
United States to enter the United States lawfully makes a great
deal of sense. I am confident The Heritage Foundation will
probably reach that conclusion, but right now the institution
is undergoing a review of immigration law and trying to develop
a fairly comprehensive approach to it. But personally, I think
that the EB5-type approach, although there are little problems
with it and I am not an EB5 guru, it definitely makes sense,
and I am sure that we would be happy to work with you to
develop an approach.
Mr. CURBELO. Thank you, Mr. Burton.
Does anyone else on the panel have any thoughts or insights
onto this EB5 program? If you do not, that is okay.
I had another question, Mr. Burton. I also reviewed and
listened to your testimony. I think one obstacle or barrier to
small businesses is missing, and that is transportation
infrastructure. We all know how fundamental it is to have a
robust and modern transportation infrastructure in our country
is for our economy according to a recent report by INRIX. In
2013, traffic congestion robbed the U.S. economy of $124
billion according to this group. Without significant action to
alleviate congestion, this cost is expected to increase 50
percent, to $186 billion, by 2030.
Do you have any thoughts on our nation's transportation
infrastructure system, its effects on small business, and what
we should do here in Congress to improve it, if anything at
all?
Mr. BURTON. Having an adequate freight and passenger
transportation system is important to all businesses, large and
small. We tend to take those things for granted until they are
not working right. The Heritage Foundation certainly supports
having a robust transportation network, but in general, we
would like to shift the responsibility for that towards the
states which are more familiar with their local traffic and
transportation needs than the federal government.
Mr. CURBELO. Thank you.
Yes, please, Mr. Clifton.
Mr. CLIFTON. On your commentary about the regulation that
was done in 1992, one of the things that Gallup has been
working on for some time now is studying what entrepreneurs
look like. So when it comes to passing regulation that might
force people who are not inherently entrepreneurs to therefore
become entrepreneurs might set them up for failure. And so we
have been studying thousands of individuals, and actually
calling individuals, like Ms. Kay herself, and we have found
that they are very different than the general public. And so
what we need to do is be much more intentional about who we are
seeking out in terms of being entrepreneurs, because these rare
individuals, as I mentioned from our data, from our research,
look very different. So any regulation that might draw someone
to be an entrepreneur who should not be one would not be wise.
Mr. CURBELO. Thank you very much. And my time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired. I am sure that Mr. Clifton did not mean to insult
anybody here.
But in any event, the gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke,
is recognized for five minutes.
Ms. CLARKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
ranking member, as well as our witnesses, for their testimony
today.
Today's hearing is a very important one. Entrepreneurship
is the spirit from which small businesses are born. And so we
in Congress must continue to do our part to keep the spirit of
entrepreneurship alive and thriving in this country.
I would like to thank the witnesses again for their
assessments on today's state of the economy and small
businesses. We have made great progress in the scope of
macroeconomic growth since 2008, with a 5 percent GDP growth in
the third quarter of 2014, and an unemployment rate that fell
to 5.6 percent in December of last year. However, it is clear
that there is still a lot of room for continued economic
improvement, particularly concerning hourly wages, as well as
the volume of smaller loans to startups and small businesses.
So my first question to the panel is household medium
income adjusted for inflation is hovering around $52,000, which
is well above the $56,800 number--excuse me, hovering around
$52,000, which is well below the $56,800 number from the year
2000. Hourly wages for private sector employees rose 1.7
percent in December 2014 from a year earlier. What can we do to
increase the household medium income? And furthermore, what can
we do to see a more significant rise in the hourly wages for
all private sector employees across the board?
Mr. BURTON. I have some thoughts on that.
Ms. CLARKE. Thank you, Mr. Burton.
Mr. BURTON. There is sort of two key points to getting
ordinary people's incomes back up. One is making the economy
more productive, and there are a couple keys to that.
Entrepreneurship, new technologies is one. A second piece of it
getting more capital in the hands of ordinary people so they
are more productive. A farmer with a big combine is more
productive than a guy with a hoe. But that is true throughout
the economy.
So there are policies that we can take, particularly tax
and securities regulation, banking policies, that will help
people get the capital they need. But we also need to
eliminate--from an employer's point of view you have costs, and
from an individual's point of view you have wages. But in
between there, there are a lot of costs that employers now have
to bear that are not going into the wages of their employees,
and we need to try to shrink those costs that are not ending up
in people's pockets, and there are a lot of ways to do that.
Ms. FINE. I can comment briefly on this just from a
perspective of the technology industry. I think we know that
higher tech jobs pay more, and so thinking about additional
training so that we can increase the technical competence of
our workers so that they will be better skilled for higher-
paying jobs would be one perspective from my experience working
with a lot of startup companies who want to build technology
but cannot necessarily find the trained workers.
Ms. CLARKE. Okay. Let me go on to my next question then.
While the volume of loans larger than one million dollars
has recovered since the Great Recession, the volume of loans
below one million dollars has barely recovered. Small
businesses and startups often seek out lines of credit that are
less than $100,000. How can we work to make sure that smaller
businesses that need smaller loans can actually access this
capital that is critical in a startup or even transitioning
phase for a business?
Mr. BURTON. I have two quick specific things. One is we can
enable small businesses to use peer-to-peer lending, like
prosper and lending club. The SEC basically shut that down for
small businesses. And there are a couple of different ways to
go about that. I discussed some in this, but I can go into
greater detail. And I think that is an area where we may be
able to achieve bipartisan cooperation in the Congress under
strong interest in financial services, I think.
The second is I think you all could ask a GAO study on
banking practices that disproportionately affect small
businesses. The community bankers in particular constantly say
the regulators when they audit them are doing various things,
but then when you call them up and ask them for specifics, they
are not forthcoming. I have not been able to figure out what
the truth is. And maybe GAO can. And I think, again, that is an
area where we can have genuine bipartisan cooperation trying to
figure out what are the true impediments to small business
borrowing. And I would be glad to work with the Committee on
that.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady----
Ms. CLARKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time is
expired.
The gentlelady from American Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, who is
the chair of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is for Mr. Clifton. Ms. Kay and Mr. Burton both
put a little more emphasis on access to capital as being a
significant problem facing small businesses. Do you think that
your research shows that other problems, such as taxation or
overregulation has become a bigger impediment? Or does your
data suggest a genuinely improving capital access market?
Mr. CLIFTON. Thank you for the question.
Our data would suggest there is an overemphasis on credit
and its availability. Most small businesses and would-be
entrepreneurs start their businesses with their own money or
from money that they have borrowed from a family member.
The other thing is there are studies that suggest--one from
Harvard--is that making too much available credit again can
draw in people who should not be entrepreneurs. Would-be
entrepreneurs are very clear about what their challenges are,
and one of them is they do not know where to start. I think one
thing that you could extrapolate from that is the fact that
there is too much regulation for them to shift through, and any
way to take that down or to help them with programs like at the
University of Maryland where there are educational
opportunities to help them navigate the complex ways to start a
business would be very helpful, and the emphasis should be on
those things.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
I have another question for Ms. Kay. You mentioned both you
and your sister have started businesses, and I am wondering,
did either of you use any of the products or services offered
by SBA? Why or why not?
Ms. KAY. Actually, we did not. And I will be honest with
you. I looked at SBA loans and quite frankly, the length of
time that it would have taken and the complexity of going
through the process was significant. So for us, it was easier
to sign a personal guarantee and take a loan against a home and
be in business and do what I really love doing, which is the
work of doing business. For my sister, both she and her
husband, highly educated, great work history, banks simply
would not lend to them. And I do not think this is an unusual
situation. And SBA has also found that what people are using is
savings and credit cards. And we know that neither one of those
is really a good long-term solution for starting a business.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. Who is next?
If you are ready, we can go to you now, or if you would
like to wait until the next one, that would be okay, too.
Because you would be next.
Okay. We will go on this side. We will come back. Thank
you.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Hardy, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a small business owner myself for the past 20 years, I
understand some of the issues that are out there. My question
is I am a firm believer that business creates business. Not in
all cases, but in most cases. We rely on each other to support
our businesses. So to through that process, what can Congress
do to maybe get out of the way? Or I do not think Congress has
anything to do with job creation personally, but I think what
can we do to get out of the way of small businesses so they
feel like they are free to invest in that entrepreneurship or
expand that business that needs to be expanded or create that
new one? Any ideas on that?
Ms. KAY. Well, one of the things that I think is really
critical is simplicity. When you run a small business, it
really is all about time and money, and we only have so much of
both of those things. And anything where there is huge
complexity that is involved means we are taking time away from
doing business to deal with regulations or HR issues. So
reducing the complexity of doing business for me is huge. And I
know for a lot of other business owners as well. And it is
interesting that you use the terminology ``get out of the
way,'' because when I spoke to fellow business owners in
Michigan and told them that I was coming, several of them said
those exact words--could you tell them to move out of the way
so that we can actually get work done?
So anything that could be done to improve simplicity and
give us certainty about where we are going so we are not
revisiting issues time and time again I think would be
important.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you.
In many instances in your written testimony, you have
discussed over burdensome regulations. Being on that regulation
oversight Committee, I have a great desire to move some
deregulation out of this place. Can you give me some specifics
that have actual documentation where we can help somewhere
along the line? Anybody?
Mr. BURTON. Absolutely. I mean, there is probably 80 in my
written testimony, and I would be glad to go through them with
you or your staff. But in the tax area, there is a lot of
statutory changes that need to be made, but some of them are
regulatory, particularly governing who is an employee versus an
independent contractor. Whether income in an S corp or
partnerships are subject to self-employment tax or not. In the
securities regulation area, it is almost all regulatory, and
there is a lot of things. There are also some things that need
to be stopped. The SEC is proposing rules, for example, Reg D,
which is how most small businesses raising capital from
investors raise capital these days, a trillion dollars a year,
basically requiring about three forms instead of one, and then
a whole host of obligations that never existed before. Sort of
undo the Jobs Act Regulation. There is that. There is, with
crowdfunding, a four-page statute on the House side became a
30-page statute. In the Senate it became a 600-page rule in the
SEC. And that is meant for the smallest companies in America. I
mean, it is just ridiculous. There is a long, long list.
Mr. HARDY. My staff will be in contact with you and make
sure that we cover those.
Mr. BURTON. I would be glad to do it. Yeah.
Mr. HARDY. One of the other things, Mr. Burton, in your
testimony, we talk about the 97 issues out there that are
restricting, one of those being about the states' lands being
devolved from the Bureau of Land Management and turned back to
the states. As you know, in the State of Nevada, where I come
from, almost 86 percent of our state is held by the federal
government, which keeps us from having that equal footing that
all other states have to be able to be independent. Can you
give me some ideas of what we need to emphasize and how we can
make that work and happen?
Mr. BURTON. Yes and no. Everything in my testimony, except
the energy and environmental stuff, I have personal experience
on and can go on way beyond you guys' time limits. On that, I
basically borrowed it from my colleague at The Heritage
Foundation, a gentleman named Nick Loris. And if you want to go
very deep into the weeds on land management, he can help you. I
know that there is a strong interest in terms of trying to
reduce impediments, primarily in the West, to using federal
lands by small businesses, and they have some pretty good ideas
about how to do it.
Mr. HARDY. I have one other question I want to hit. This is
probably for Mr. Clifton.
How can we can have a very strong economy without job
growth? We look at these reports and we continue to hear that
unemployment is going down, but on the other hand, where are
the jobs? Where is this coming from? Is there something
different in the way we are doing reporting today than we were
that is causing this effect? Because there are still hundreds
or tens of millions of people out of jobs out there.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time has expired, but you
can answer the question, whoever it was directed to. Mr.
Clifton.
Mr. CLIFTON. Thank you for the question.
We are not calculating the unemployment figure any
differently than we have since we have been doing that in terms
of the U.S. government. The challenge is the people that are
working part-time who want full time or who are minimally
employed or who are no longer in the workforce because they
have given up, are not included. So that figure that we look at
today at about 5.6 percent as unemployment does not reflect the
20 million people out there that would like to have a good job.
So that is the data around that.
And can you have a good economy without more people that
are fully employed? The answer to that is no. What would be
great is if the U.S. economy looked more like states like
Nebraska and North Dakota. When we look at their Payroll to
Population, Nebraska's hovers at around 50 percent and North
Dakota's hovers around 54 percent. America's is at 44.3
percent. That is too low. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, ranking
member, for holding this important meeting.
Creating jobs and growing our economy is one of my top
priorities, and small businesses certainly are a significant
part of that equation.
I have a few questions for Ms. Fine. I have been an
advocate for a long time for women-owned businesses, and
according to the State of Women-Owned Businesses Report, my
state, North Carolina, was among the top three with the fastest
growing growth in the number of women-owned firms. We have
estimated about 267,000 women-owned businesses generating about
$35 billion in yearly income. Based on your experience, how can
we keep this momentum going to further increase the number of
women-owned businesses, and more specifically, African-American
women?
Ms. FINE. Yes, thank you for the question.
I would say this is obviously something that we see, and we
are trying to tackle this challenge as well, because we just do
not see enough women. I think a couple of things is, one, just
more exposure. There are not as many role models of successful,
well-known entrepreneurs, so I think finding and celebrating
those successes is very important. Second, I think is just
starting earlier to address that you really can teach
entrepreneurship. You can at least expose somebody to
entrepreneurship the same way that you do to anything, like
Math, Science, et cetera, so I think there are a lot of great
programs of like what the Network for Teaching for
Entrepreneurship is doing and getting programs into middle
school and high schools. I think that taking some of those
programs and even finding them even more for young women would
be very important. And just having I think in general inspiring
women to think bigger about what they can do as entrepreneurs
because they actually have a lot of the great talent and
skillset that is very important to being successful.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you. I was going to follow up with a
question about students. I worked with young women for 40 years
at Bennett College in Greensboro, but you have kind of touched
on that, so I will not ask that question. But, you know, with
Facebook and Twitter and all of the access that they have that
are integral to entrepreneurship, I am sure they are using that
as well.
One of the biggest challenges, and you have mentioned
access, but oftentimes, small businesses are really not aware
of the federal resources available to them, or any resources
for that matter. So how should the federal government in your
thinking, or other entities, work better to educate and connect
small businesses to those resources that can help them succeed?
Ms. FINE. Obviously, I do put the onus of that a little bit
on the entrepreneurs. Sometimes I am a little bit surprised
that entrepreneurs do not take the step to look for all the
resources available. I think there is this perception that
anything related to a government loan, SBA, et cetera, a
patent, for example, takes a really long time and is a
complicated process. So I think being more transparent about
the processes and trying to make them faster and more efficient
so that entrepreneurs do not feel that they are missing a
window of opportunity would be a start.
Ms. ADAMS. Well, and I agree with you. I am thinking
though, the federal government is a complicated kind of process
and it can be a little, I guess, intimidating in terms of
applications and that kind of thing. So perhaps if we could do
more. Not just letting them know what is available but how to
apply and the kinds of things and the steps that need to be
taken. But thank you very much for your comments.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Hanna, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you, Chairman.
You know, it is easy to demagogue regulations. And to speak
to 179, which I am in favor of, one man's loophole is another
man's following the law. Right? So what is the complaint? And
you find in government that in the effort--that every level to
control every outcome will wind up with something that started
out reasonably fluid that turns into something that is one
barrier after another, but we have no way to measure the
marginal change in one's ability, or a company or an
entrepreneur's ability to deal with it. But we know that
structurally everything is a burden.
Mr. Clifton talked about entrepreneurs and some people are
suited, some are not. I would suggest to you that the best way
to figure that out is to try, and we made it very hard for
people to try.
But Mr. Burton, there is a thing called the Raines Act,
which I imagine you are familiar with. How do states and local
municipalities--everybody has a hand in this and everybody is
making marginally some kind of problem for the guy who wants to
go in business, or lady. And I am just curious, because it is
easy to sit back and complain about government, and I am happy
to do that, but in a practical world, how do you accept the
notion that some things have to go wrong in order--if you agree
with me--in order for other things to go overwhelmingly right?
In other words, how do you measure opportunity versus control?
Mr. BURTON. Well, three quick things. First, sort of on the
business level, you are absolutely right. You have to let
people fail. You have to let people have the opportunity to not
succeed in their business or you will not get the positive
aspects of entrepreneurship. And sometimes the SEC forgets
that. State regulators can be among the worst. For example,
Massachusetts prohibited people in Massachusetts from buying
the original Apple IPO because investing in the Apple computer
company was too risky and they wanted to protect their people.
So some of the goofiest regulations imaginable are at the state
and local level, not at the federal level.
Mr. HANNA. It was the breakup of Microsoft, too, which made
no sense.
Mr. BURTON. But I agree with you. It is easy to complain,
and we need to craft constructive solutions, which is why I
tried to do that in my written testimony. Specifics. What
regulation? What problem? And it is one of my frustrations with
the bankers who constantly say it is the regulators, but they
never have any solutions. And there are two possible reasons
for that on the bank credit side. One is they are using it as
an excuse. It is not really the regulators; it is them. And it
could be for legitimate business reasons. Or the second reason
is there is something going on there that we have not found out
about.
One other thing I thought I might mention. We talked about
bank credit, but some of the most dynamic companies that are
leading to huge employment gains and other social gains are the
people looking for outside investors, not just banks. Because
banks do not invest in startups, generally. They might lend to
you personally, but they are not going to invest in startups.
So people who are looking for outside investors and therefore,
running into the securities laws are the source of much of the
social gain from innovation and entrepreneurship, and we need
to try to knock down some of those barriers.
Mr. HANNA. What do you think, Mr. Clifton?
Mr. CLIFTON. What is the question specifically?
Mr. HANNA. Well, I mean, you talk about entrepreneurs. It
is my opinion that we do not give people enough opportunity to
succeed or fail; that the barriers to entry to business today
are so prohibitive, and that at some point it becomes personal
and other things become easier to do. People drop out of the
system because they lose energy. They frankly become victims of
the bureaucracy. But it is hard to measure that and understand
it.
And I am familiar with a number of banks and have been in
business for a long time, and they would tell you that it is
easier to loan big money than little money; that it is easier
to avoid small entrepreneurs than it is to engage them because
they can move on and make marginally less with a hell of a lot
less aggravation. So have you seen that?
Mr. CLIFTON. Well, so I think what you are asking is how do
we quantify sort of this phenomenon about government
regulations and its impact with small businesses. And that
ultimately, I believe, is why I am here. Because the way that
we have attempted to quantify it is by simply asking small
businesses, ``What is the biggest problem you face today?'' And
I think when we quantify that we see that 25 percent of them,
in an open-ended fashion, say back to us, it is government
regulation, the government in general, or it is something to do
with Obamacare or healthcare.
Mr. HANNA. And for Ms. Kay, it would be certainty.
Mr. CLIFTON. And I would further say that if that is not
the reality, it is at least the perception, and perception is a
reality. And so that is something that maybe from a
communications standpoint we would need to address.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you. My time is expired.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Rice, who is chair
of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and Capital Access
is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. RICE. Thank you. What a pleasure to listen to you
today. It is, unfortunately, the same things I hear from small
businesses back in my district. I was a tax lawyer and CPA for
25 years before I came here. I formed or advised 1,000 small
businesses. I know what they have to deal with, and these are
the same problems I have heard all along.
Mr. Clifton, you said the biggest problem people referenced
was finding customers, and actually, if you look at what has
happened since 2008 when the president came into office, median
household income has declined 8.7 percent. Interestingly, in
that same period of time, the pay of the average government
worker has gone up 12 percent. But at the same time we have had
energy costs, because we have put up roadblocks through EPA and
warm and cold and all these things. Energy costs have gone up
about 10 to 20 percent. Food costs, because they rely on energy
costs, have gone up 15 percent. Healthcare cost, with
Obamacare, some because of Obamacare, some otherwise, have gone
up 15 to 20 percent. And so you have got this squeeze on the
middle class where their incomes are down almost 10 percent,
all their costs are going up 15-20 percent, and is it really
any wonder that there is a lack of customers? Because people
have less money to spend. And when you see the economy going
up--I mean, excuse me, the stock market going up and people
say, ``Oh, look, the economy is going great,'' but the average
middle class family is not feeling that. In fact, they are
feeling quite the opposite. And they are really the customer
base. I mean, two-thirds of the United States economy is based
on consumer spending.
Am I analyzing that correctly, Mr. Clifton?
Mr. CLIFTON. I think that is accurate. I mean, if you look
at kind of the root of what is happening here, is the fact that
real household incomes have not increased. And when we look at
the data, the data very clearly suggests that most would-be
entrepreneurs or small businesses do start their businesses
with their own money or capital from friends and family.
Mr. RICE. I am not even talking about business owners; I am
talking about their customers. Their customers are broke.
Mr. CLIFTON. I do not disagree with that analysis.
Mr. RICE. All right, now, Ms. Kay, you talked about
uncertainty. It pains me when you look at some of the things we
do here in Congress, for example, with the tax extenders, the
179 deduction. That is designed to be an incentive for small
businesses to invest, to grow the economy, to spend money to
grow the economy, to make their business more productive to
grow the economy. How can it act as an incentive when we pass
it two weeks before the end of the year? People do not know it
even is there, so how is that an effective incentive? That is
not a very good job by Congress, is it, Ms. Kay?
Ms. KAY. Well, it certainly is not helpful. And I think
when I talk about certainty, I am not talking about next week
or next month or two months down the road. I am talking about
long-term certainty. I am talking about the ability for us to
plan a year out. And you are absolutely correct. When you wait
until the last two weeks of a year, there are a number of
people who are astute enough that they are going to take
advantage of it, but for many small business owners, it is too
late. And I think that what we are really looking for--and you
talk about winners and losers. We understand that there are
going to be some winners and some losers. I think what we are
looking for is we are looking for some fairness, and we are
looking for some long-term certainty so we know what the rules
are so we can make some plans. And then I think you will find
that people will invest in their companies. When I talked
about----
Mr. RICE. I only have 40 seconds, so I just want to----
Ms. KAY. Okay.
Mr. RICE. You know, tax extenders. We talk about tax
extenders when we should be talking about tax reform.
Ms. KAY. We should be.
Mr. RICE. We talk about repealing Obamacare when we should
be talking about how we are going to replace it. We talk
about--and then we have things like the Highway Trust Fund that
is running out of money, and we do not know how we are going to
build our infrastructure and we put Band-Aids on it every nine
months. We talk about the Social Security Trust Fund and the
Medicare Trust Fund. All these things create uncertainty to the
economy, and how does that affect consumer spending, Mr.
Clifton? It hurts it, does it not?
Mr. CLIFTON. Absolutely.
Mr. RICE. It hurts business investment, does it not?
So I am glad that we here in Congress are not doctors or
lawyers because I think we would be sued for malpractice before
it was over with.
Finally, Ms. Fine, you said that----
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired but the
chair will extend an additional minute if there is no
objection.
Mr. RICE. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
You said that we needed to do more to help entrepreneurs.
And if you mean more government programs and more government
regulation, I think you can see the effect of this on the
economy already. I think the best thing we can do to help new
entrepreneurs is in fact do less. Thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Gibson, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. GIBSON. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
panelists. I think this has been a very informative hearing. I
appreciate a lot of what has been discussed here this morning.
I would tell you that a lot of it, as Mr. Rice mentioned,
jives with what I hear back home. Concerns with taxes, levels
of taxes, complexity of the code, concern with certainty, in
particular the expensing piece of it. I have heard this morning
also concerns about the regulatory state and expression of
desire of reform and relief. I have heard access to credit
mentioned, all these things. Every time I visit a small
business and listen to the owners and their employees--lower
healthcare costs and energy costs, particularly for the
Northeast, the energy costs are a concern. All of this if we
are competing. Even our small businesses may be competing
nationally or possibly even internationally. And so all this
bearing on the problem. I appreciate being added to this
Committee to allow a voice for my people.
And so I do have an initial question here, and I just want
to again reiterate, I appreciate what has been said already.
Why I say that is I think you have given us more data points of
where the Committee is already thinking about going in terms of
legislation, and so we appreciate your time, and I think it is
meaningful.
Mr. Burton, you mentioned 97 points. I have this one
situation in our district where I have got a small business,
about 200 actually, so more in the upper end of the small
business. But sterling credit. And they have a tremendous
relationship with a community bank. Sterling record. And they
had a very exciting project to expand, and they could not make
it happen because of Dodd-Frank. And so among your 97 points,
do any of them address explicitly that situation and other
magnification on issues of access to credit?
Mr. BURTON. Absolutely. There is a number of things. Some
of it is credit, but also, they could seek equity investment.
There are lot of things in my testimony about equity
investment. There are things about eliminating the artificial
limitation of credit unions' ability, which would give them
another financial institution they could go to. I do not go a
lot into it because I did not think it was sufficiently small
business oriented, more financial services, but there is a lot
of interest on the part of the House Financial Services
Committee on a bipartisan basis in terms of trying to reduce
the restrictions on community banks which might help. Peer-to-
peer lending is another opportunity, and there are two
different ways to do that. Either fix Title 3 of the
Crowdfunding Act with respect to debt securities, or create a
new regulatory regime so organizations like Prosper and Lending
Club can lend to small businesses without having to use banks
as intermediaries, and in fact, go around the banks. So there
are a lot of things that could be done.
Mr. GIBSON. Well, thank you. And we are listening. And I
think some of these things we are already looking to move on,
but that is helpful.
Last question here, and it is really one I am curious of
your feedback. Last Congress, we worked together and enacted a
bipartisan piece of legislation that helped with job training,
and explicitly, I am now thinking about my small business
owners who are especially manufacturers that were very
frustrated with their new recruits and their lack of
preparation for some of the work that they want them to do. So
the intention of the new bill was to try to address that; bring
closer this activity that often leads to either a degree or
certification in individuals who are going to start working.
Because we know there is going to be activity to get a degree
or certification. We want it to actually be meaningful. So more
internships. Is there any feedback for us yet on this new law
or is it too early?
Mr. BURTON. I am not sure, personally.
Mr. CLIFTON. I mean, from our data, that would suggest that
that is the right direction because you have such a large
percentage of would-be entrepreneurs that are asking for help
in terms of how to get started.
But I think it is also the signal of another thing. And so
when we look at what is crossed in terms of business deaths and
business births, another thing that might be happening is sort
of this decline in the spirit of free enterprise. And there are
a number of conversations in terms of leadership within the
government that are looking to young people, such as forgiving
their school debts, their loans, if they come to work for the
government. And so there is nothing wrong by that because what
we are doing is celebrating the heroes and the sheroes that
want to get into the government. But what it fails to do is we
are not sending the strong enough signals that there are those
heroes and sheroes that will start the big next businesses that
will create the jobs that will restart this economy.
Mr. GIBSON. That is a good point. And my time is expired.
And so I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. RICE. Thank you to the gentleman.
Now, I yield to the ranking member, Ms. Velaazquez. She has
a couple of additional questions.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Just two more questions.
Mr. Clifton, I would like to ask, what percentage of survey
respondents are would-be entrepreneurs? What percentage are
startups in businesses less than three years, and what
percentage are existing businesses older than three years?
Mr. CLIFTON. Those data are available from the Small
Business Administration, but I think I might be able to provide
a data point that is more helpful.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. For the survey, the Gallup Survey.
Mr. CLIFTON. We interview 600 small businesses per quarter
with Wells Fargo. We pull the list from Dunn and Bradstreet and
the waiting scheme that we do is based on their revenue and
their location.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. So you do not have a breakdown in terms of
would-be entrepreneurs, which percentage are startups in
business less than three years and which percentage are those
older than three years?
Mr. CLIFTON. Correct. We do not collect those data. They
are available from the SBA. But I think a data point that is
even more helpful is our analytics suggest that the percentage
of people that have the rare talent to be that sort of
incredible Wayne Huizenga-type that can start three global
Fortune 500 companies, we believe it is somewhere three in
1,000 people that have that inherent talent.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. So none of the businesses--in your survey,
none of the 600 are would-be entrepreneurs?
Mr. CLIFTON. Correct. That is a separate survey that we do.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Okay.
Mr. CLIFTON. So 25 percent of Americans said that they have
seriously considered----
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. I am confused, because the focus of the
hearing is on would-be entrepreneurs and what hinders business
creation. So I do not know if my next question has any basis,
but in your opinion, is the Gallup Poll a good measure of the
top challenges for startups, or more challenges facing existing
businesses?
Mr. CLIFTON. In my opening remarks, I addressed both. And
they----
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. But yet, in your sample, you do not have
any would-be entrepreneurs.
Mr. CLIFTON. No, that is not--so in my opening statement, I
addressed that we interviewed 25 percent of Americans that said
they were would-be entrepreneurs. And they faced three
significant barriers in order to start a business. So yes, I
addressed both separately.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. So, Ms. Fine, in your work with
entrepreneurs, how much do you hear that regulations like those
from EPA, OSHA, factor into the decision of whether an
entrepreneur starts a new business?
Ms. FINE. Like I mentioned before, I mean, we work with
startups, entrepreneurs, at such an early stage of their
business. Like we would tell anyone, these are all regulatory
forces that they have to investigate, and I think it is more of
understanding if the business models works, given those
regulations. So they have to go look at those and understand
it. And that is a part of the discovery they need to do. And I
would count that as part of them starting as entrepreneurs. It
does not keep them from starting that process necessarily, but
it might keep them, based on what they find, from figuring out
if they have a viable business model.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. RICE. Thank you, Ms. Velaazquez.
Mr. Burton, I want to ask you--maybe you are not the right
person on the panel to ask this question, but do you think that
the Dodd-Frank banking law prevents a community bank from
making loans to small businesses that they would otherwise
make?
Mr. BURTON. I think aspects of the Dodd-Frank Act clearly
reduce community bank lending to small businesses. But I am not
sure that is the central problem.
Mr. RICE. Okay. Ms. Kay, same question to you.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. Will you yield just for a second? It is on
the community banks and Dodd-Frank.
Mr. RICE. Sure.
Ms. VELAAZQUEZ. I serve on the Financial Services
Committee, and I was there when we were working on the
legislation. Do you know that community banks who have assets
of $10 billion or less are exempted?
Mr. BURTON. Yes. And that is one of the reasons why I said
it was not necessarily the central problem. There are other
aspects of Dodd-Frank that are problematic, but again, in terms
of small business capital formation, I am not sure Dodd-Frank
is the biggest problem we have on access to capital.
Mr. RICE. Ms. Kay, do you think Dodd-Frank prevents
community banks from making loans to small businesses that they
would otherwise make that they deem an acceptable risk but they
would not make it with the Dodd-Frank banking regulation?
Ms. KAY. I would love to answer that question, but I am
really not qualified to do that.
Mr. RICE. Okay. Same question to you, Mr. Clifton.
Mr. CLIFTON. We do not have data on that specifically.
Mr. RICE. Okay. All right. Thank you very much.
Look, this has been a wonderful hearing. You all have done
a great job of educating me. Thank you so much for taking your
time to come here to Washington to explain your perspective on
the challenges facing small businesses today. I really cannot
thank you enough.
And with that, I ask unanimous consent that members have
five legislative days to submit statements and supporting
materials for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

GALLUP

Testimony of

Jon Clifton, J.D.

Partner, Managing Director

Gallup Government

Before the

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Small Business

Hearing on

Building an Opportunity Economy: State of Small Business and
Entrepreneurship

March 4, 2015

Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. It
is a pleasure to be here to discuss Gallup's analytics on the
state of the U.S. economy, the attitudes of small-business
owners and the current barriers to job growth and startups.

The Importance of Jobs and Gallup's Tracking of the Job
Situation

Gallup completed its first nationally representative survey
of the world in 2006. Our biggest finding from this study was
that what the whole world wants is a good job. This finding
compelled us to more thoroughly study the global jobs
situation. Gallup now quantifies the prevalence and quality of
jobs in more than 140 countries each year. Gallup also tracks
employment daily in the United States, surveying roughly 30,000
adults per month and more than 350,000 people per year.

The State of the U.S. Economy

There are a number of signs from Gallup's data that the
U.S. economy has been improving since the recession: Americans'
attitudes toward the economy are improving, self-reported
discretionary spending is steadily increasing and people are
reporting that hiring is outpacing firing in their workplaces.
Despite this encouraging news, job creation remains a problem.

While official unemployment has fallen from roughly 10% in
2010 to roughly 6% today, using this metric to represent the
total jobs picture could be misleading. Traditional
unemployment includes only people who are looking for work, who
are available for work and who have not worked a single hour in
the past week. This means that if a person has given up looking
for work or if a person has worked only a single hour in the
past week, that person is not considered unemployed. A
different metric offered by Gallup quantifies the number of
people employed full time for an employer--often referred to as
a ``good job--as a percentage of the total adult population.
Known as Payroll to Population (P2P), this metric stands at
44.3% today and has not meaningfully increased since early
2010, when Gallup started tracking this daily.

Barriers to Job Growth

One of the main reasons that the jobs situation has yet to
recover is that, according to the U.S. Census, the number of
business deaths now exceeds the number of business births among
employer firms for the first time since 1977, when this
measurement began.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Current State of the Small Business Economy

This leads us to the importance of small businesses and
startups in this country. They contribute roughly 70% of all
new jobs created in a single year. Considering their
importance, Gallup works with Wells Fargo to track the opinions
and behaviors of small-business owners quarterly.

The good news is that the attitudes of small-business
owners are steadily improving. The Wells Fargo/Gallup Small
Business Index stands at +71, which is the highest index score
since the onset of the recession. Sixty-four percent of small-
business owners report that their company's current financial
situation is good and 71% expect their company's financial
situation to be good 12 months from now.

However, despite this positive trajectory, small-business
owners face clear challenges. When asked to name their most
important challenge, the No. 1 issue they report is finding or
attracting new customers (15%). This is followed by mentions of
the economy in general (12%) and government regulations (10%).
However, if we add those who cite healthcare/Obamacare (8%),
our just government in general (6%), fully 24% of small-
business owners say the government is in some way their biggest
challenge. Also worth noting, while many small-business owners
believe available credit is a major issue, only 3% say it is
their most important challenge.

Barriers to Startups

In addition to the barriers faced by current small-business
owners, there are also barriers facing would-be entrepreneurs.
One in four Americans have thought about starting a business,
but have abandoned the idea. For an economy with a negative net
number of startups each year since 2008, this represents a
missed opportunity to engage would-be entrepreneurs that could
result in business startups. Three major barriers are keeping
these would-be entrepreneurs from taking the plunge: 1) they
prefer the security of a stable income, 2) they do not have
enough money to start a business and 3) they lack the knowledge
on how to start a business. Because the majority of business
owners fund their early-stage businesses through personal
savings, a steadily declining personal savings rate in the
United States has negatively affected prospective
entrepreneurs' ability to finance new businesses. Moreover, if
they lack insight on where and how to begin, starting a
business is even more difficult, and these prospective
entrepreneurs are more likely to be more risk averse.

Conclusions

Creating good jobs and subsequently rebuilding America's
middle class hinges on the success and failure of small
businesses and startups. Existing small businesses are
experiencing headwinds caused primarily by challenging business
realities, the overall economy and a concern about government
regulations. Would-be entrepreneurs face barriers such as not
having enough money to start a business and lacking knowledge
about starting a business. It would be wise for Congress and
American leadership to consider all options to unlocking this
invaluable economic institution. The American public would be
behind them. Other than the military, there is no other
institution in the United States that the public has more
confidence in than small businesses.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Testimony of Elana Fine, Managing Director, Dingman Center
for Entrepreneurship, University of Maryland's Robert H. Smith
School of Business Before the U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Small Business

March 4, 2015

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez and members of
the committee,

Thank you for inviting me to testify before you today. I'm
Elana Fine, managing director of the Dingman Center for
Entrepreneurship at University of Maryland's Robert H. Smith
School of Business. I have a bachelor's degree in finance from
the University of Maryland and an MBA from University of
Chicago's Booth School of Business. Throughout my career in
technology consulting and investment banking, I've worked with
hundreds of startups and venture-backed companies and am
therefore well versed in understanding the challenges and
opportunities facing startup companies.

To provide a little context, the Dingman Center is one of
the nation's preeminent institutions where the research,
education and practice of entrepreneurship are pursued
vigorously. We develop and execute curricular and extra
curricular programs to inspire and equip the next generation of
entrepreneurs. Twenty-eight years ago, before entrepreneurship
was as en vogue as it is now, a visionary dean named Rudy
Lamone, partnered with Michael Dingman, founder of Signal
Corporation to establish the Dingman Center. As one of the
first university-based entrepreneurship centers in the country,
the Dingman Center has consistently been the gold standard for
teaching entrepreneurship. This past fall, the Global
Consortium for Entrepreneurship, a member organization of more
than 200 entrepreneurship centers worldwide, awarded the
Dingman Center its 2014 NASDAQ award for Entrepreneurial
Excellence, for our unique breadth of campus, regional,
national and international programs.

My role at the Dingman Center includes oversight of our
student venture incubator, the Dingman Center Angels investor
network, business competitions and integration with the Smith
School entrepreneurship curriculum. I'm responsible for
developing relationships with the broader community of
entrepreneurs, alumni and corporate partners to build a bridge
between our campus and the local startup ecosystem. I also
serve as an adjunct faculty member of the Smith School.

Our programs are focused on guiding student entrepreneurs
through the venture creation process. We listen to their
initial ideas, match them with experienced advisors and
mentors, provide a toolset to conduct customer research and
develop new business models, suggest ways to prove their
concept in small ways and provide access to seed capital. In
our 28-year history, thousands of students have walked through
our doors to start a business or just to be exposed to
entrepreneurship in a small way.

I've been asked to give an overview of entrepreneurial
activity from a university perspective. I recognize that the
macro level of activity can be hard to quantify and assess
whether we are headed in right direction. Based on the pop
culture success of television shows like ``Shark Tank'' and
``Silicon Valley,'' the proliferation of technology incubators,
co-working spaces, and downtown innovation hubs, and the
newsworthy valuations of companies such as Uber, SnapChat and
WhatsApp, we might believe that everyone is working on a
startup. Then we look at statistics like the Kauffman Index on
Entrepreneurial Activity, which showed a decline from 2011 to
2013 and wonder if we are doing enough. Or we look at 2013
statistics from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor and see
that Sub-Saharan Africa has more than double the early stage
entrepreneurial activity of North America. However, this
activity is more ne4cessity driven than innovation driven due
to lack of other job prospects. From this perspective, a
decline in entrepreneurial activity might also be seen as an
indicator of an improving economy as employees have better job
prospects and don't have to spend their life savings to hang
their own shingle. The data is hard to analyze because we don't
know the right level of entrepreneurial activity. As we would
say in startup terms, we still don't know the metric that
matters. So, I'm here today to give you a more grassroots
perspective on what I see as leading indictors for the future
of entrepreneurship.

At the Dingman Center, we separate our students into three
categories and focus on creating programs that will make the
most significant impact on these various groups. The first
category is the one that has created the ``Social Network''
misconception--the belief that there are thousands of Mark
Zuckerbergs in dorm rooms across campus who will launch the
next Facebook. Students, venture capitalists, entrepreneurship
centers and policy makers must recognize that Facebook is an
outlier. We would never be successful if we were trying to pick
the next Facebook, so we spend more of our time on the other
groups.

The next category we think about are the students starting
businesses while in school. Every year we see panoply of new
apparel companies, mobile applications, tutoring services,
dating platforms, and food concepts. We have seen university
support increase to match student interest and demand in these
venture creation activities. Although a small sample, the data
from the Dingman Center shows interest in our venture creation
programs grew from 161 students in 2012/2013 to almost 400
students in 2014/2015. Students run these businesses for two to
three years until graduation where they often decide that this
isn't the right business to pursue after graduation. The
company might not be a success in standard terms, but as
educators we have provided a skill set that we expect will be
used for a startup now or 10 years from now.

Our best example of this category is University of Maryland
alumnus Kevin Plank, who ran a campus flower delivery service
called Cupid's Valentine. After graduation, instead of solving
the problem of expensive flowers, Plank decided to solve the
problem of soggy cotton t-shirts and turned his savings from
Cupid's Valentine into the seed money for Under Armour. In the
many times I have heard Plank tell his story, he has cited the
lessons he learned from his first student business and the
courage that business gave him to start Under Armour when he
had the idea for a stretchy performance t-shirt. Although we
hope to have many Kevin Planks walk through the doors of the
Dingman Center, we would also like to see more of them stick
with their student businesses, which I'll address later.

The last category of student entrepreneurs feed the
entrepreneurial labor pool. These students might work on their
own businesses or hold internships at local startup companies.
The challenge for these students in that startups can rarely
pay market rates, so they often have to forego opportunities to
take higher paying internships or even summer jobs at pizza
shops. We've created several programs to subsidize these
students to work at startups to try to replicate the Silicon
Valley culture where employees often spin out their own
startups. We believe it is the cycle and culture of
entrepreneurship that creates innovation hubs, rather than any
one specific program.

All of these buckets of students represent the future
entrepreneurs, but I caution focusing too much on the first
category. Instead, there are a number of initiatives than can
increase exposure and odds for success of the last two
categories. For example, the National Science Foundation's
ICorps program is a perfect example of federally funded
programs that can increase the odds of success among early
stage university spinouts. ICorps is designed to help federally
funded academic researchers with ground-breaking innovations
determine the commercial viability of their innovations. This
same approach, based on Silicon Valley-tested startup best
practices, is now being implemented across many agencies. While
it started at NSF, NIH, DOE and other agencies are embracing
the process. This program has the potential to fundamentally
change the way we transfer technology from our world-class
universities and federal labs. Furthermore, the same program
has potential to greatly improve the highly regarded SBIR/STTR
programs that were created to support small business
innovation.

However, programs like ICorps focus on innovation that
leads to entrepreneurship. On campuses, we need similar
programs that increase the entrepreneurship that leads to
innovation--those the encourage students to test the waters on
identifying a problem in the market and designing and testing a
solution. We know there are more than enough problems to solve.
Sample programs might provide scholarships to students pursuing
entrepreneurial activities or loan forgiveness so students can
choose to work at startup firms. As we seed more entrepreneurs,
we will also need more funding mechanisms to substitute for
what we often call a friends-and-family round of financing.
Without an initial $10,000 to $100,000 it is nearly impossible
for a young entrepreneur, who is burdened by student loans and
has no savings or credit, to build a product and test customer
acquisition. Banks, angel investors and even granting
institutions do not have vehicles to fund the typical student
businesses. Corporations, like Capital One recognize this need
and are leading the way for local entrepreneurs by providing
$500 to $2,500 seed grants for our student entrepreneurs.

In addition to exposing young people to the entrepreneurial
process, matching them with experienced mentors and increasing
their access to funding, we also need to be creative about how
to limit downside risk. The success and wealth of Bill Gates,
Steve Jobs and Mark Zuckerbergs of the world certainly attracts
entrepreneurs, but the downside risk keeps many capable
operators on the sidelines. We characterize and celebrate
entrepreneurs for their ability to take risks, but there could
be innovations that never get to market because the perceived
risk to someone's family might be seen as too high. I'd
encourage the committee to consider policies that limit
downside risk along with those that encourage the upside risk.

Therefore, as you embark on your committee's activities,
I'd encourage you to consider the following thoughts and
recommendations:

Few of us are stock pickers. Instead of
picking winners and hoping for short-term rewards, we
need to seed programs that expose more students to
entrepreneurial activities and equip them with the
tools to vet ideas early and increase the odds of
success.

Recognize that failure rates will always be
high and that success in entrepreneurship can also be
viewed by total births and deaths because it means
there are more companies in the field.

Consider programs that provide non-dilutive
funding substitutes to friends-and-family funding and
angel funding for a broader spectrum of businesses.
Keep in mind that entrepreneurs are like marathon
runners and come in all shapes and sizes.

Think creatively about ``apprentice''-like
programs in high growth startups that might increase
the entrepreneurial labor pool.

Consider how to limit downside risk that
might keep capable entrepreneurs on the sidelines.

In a Washington Post article, I wrote that teaching
entrepreneurship is like teaching a child to drive. You give
them a little taste off the side in a shallower waters and if
it takes, they feel comfortable to take the risk off the higher
diving board. This is how we teach entrepreneurship - we expose
our students to a non-linear way of thinking and problem
solving. Our challenge, as outlined above, is no transition
these students from the safe risk-taking environment of an
academic institution, to the business world. I look forward to
working with you to create policies to build on the momentum we
are seeing on campuses nationwide.

[all]
