- SBA'S OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE: GOOD FOR BUSINESS?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SBA'S OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE: GOOD FOR BUSINESS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ENERGY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JANUARY 11, 2016

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-036
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-246 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Emily Murphy, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Carlos Curbelo..............................................     1
Hon. Grace Meng..................................................     2

WITNESS

Ms. Eileen Sanchez, Associate Administrator, Office of
International Trade, United States Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement:
Ms. Eileen Sanchez, Associate Administrator, Office of
International Trade, United States Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.............................    13
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

SBA'S OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE: GOOD FOR BUSINESS?

----------

MONDAY, JANUARY 11, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy and Trade,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:02 p.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Carlos Curbelo
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Curbelo, Luetkemeyer, Brat, and
Meng.
Chairman CURBELO. Good afternoon. I call this hearing to
order.
Thank you all for joining us today for this hearing on the
Small Business Administration's Office of International Trade,
OIT. I hope through this hearing this Committee can identify
some potential methods to strengthen our work with the SBA to
better support small businesses seeking export opportunities.
This Subcommittee has stressed time and time again the
small business benefits of foreign markets. Ninety-five percent
of all consumers live outside the borders of the United States,
and yet, only 1 percent of the United States small businesses
actually export.
Despite that low percentage, trade is still a vital way for
small businesses to find new markets. In my home State of
Florida, 96 percent of our exports were from small firms. Those
same small firms generated roughly two-thirds of our State's
export value. However, while this is a tremendous start, many
small businesses still find exporting a costly, complicated,
and confusing process.
In 2010, this administration put forth the national export
initiative, a strategy that prioritized small business exports.
That same year, Congress directed the SBA to expand its role in
export promotion. Specifically, the SBA was tasked with
increasing coordination efforts between Federal agencies
engaged in export promotion offering greater counseling and
training to small businesses interested in expanding into
foreign markets and broadening its export financing efforts. I
understand the SBA has worked to strengthen these efforts
through the colocation of staff at a network of U.S. export
assistance centers, USEACs. And I am also aware that SBA
operates through nonFederal partners like the Small Business
Development Centers, SBDCs, resources that devote substantial
time to the promotion of exports.
Frankly, it sounds like these resources could be invaluable
to small businesses engaging in international trade. However,
the OIT has only dedicated 19 trade specialists to the various
USEACs around the country, 11 short of the 30 required by the
Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 and although the SBA has
appointed district international trade officers to assist
businesses seeking advice on exporting, the Government
Accountability Office recently reported that those staff only
spend about 15 percent of their time on export promotion.
So here we are, 6 years after the Small Business Jobs Act,
goals and objectives that have been pushed by the
administration and statutorily mandated by the United States
Congress are still incomplete. And I am concerned that the OIT
may actually be serving a redundant purpose. If there are
massive deficiencies in SBA's efforts to better coordinate
Federal trade promotion resources, if the OIT is offering trade
counseling and training that is also being provided by SBDCs,
the Department of Commerce, and other State, Federal, and
private entities, if OIT is failing to follow through on the
very legislative mandates established to hire more staff for
the purpose of heightening the presence and functioning of OIT,
then maybe it is time we in Congress give serious
reconsideration to the long-term validity of the office of
international trade altogether.
Today, we will hear from OIT's associate administrator,
Eileen Sanchez, on how SBA plans to implement GAO's
recommendations as well as how they plan to assist more small
businesses yearning to join the global marketplace.
Thank you, again, for joining us, and I now yield to my
distinguished colleague from New York, the ranking member, for
her opening remarks.
Ms. MENG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Expanding trade opportunities is a big deal for companies
of all sizes, but especially for small business. More than
300,000 U.S. companies are exporters. Of this total, 97 percent
are small and mid-sized companies. These smaller businesses
exported more than $470 billion in 2013, over one-third of all
U.S. exports. Those exports help support more than 11 million
jobs across the country.
In 2012, my home State of New York, ranked third in the
value of exports by small businesses, with more than $79
billion, or 5 percent, of all exports.
With foreign trade on the rise and small business expansion
into the global market increasing, the opportunities for small
firms to grow and succeed are also increasing. Small firms that
engage in global trade are 20 percent more productive, and
produce 20 percent greater job growth when compared to
nonexporting counterparts. They are also more resilient. Yet,
for many of these companies, their success depends in part on
their ability to access these international markets.
Despite such impressive numbers, less than 4 percent of all
American small businesses export. Small businesses face many
challenges. It takes time to identify foreign markets, target
new customers, and learn the nuances of the exporting process.
In fact, nearly half of small exporters spend a few months a
year and close to 10 percent of their annual operating budget
preparing to export.
Due to a lack of resources to develop a trade strategy, the
majority of small exporters only enter one foreign market while
more than half of large companies export to at least five
foreign markets.
In order to help bridge this divide, there are several
tools and resources available to small exporters. The primary
tool for small firms is the Small Business Administration's
U.S. export assistance centers, which fill a void by providing
access to technical trade specialists all over the country. By
delivering foreign industry and market expertise as well as
compliance assistance, small businesses are better able to
navigate the complex terrain of the international marketplace.
To address financing challenges for small exporters, the
SBA and Export-Import Bank provide small business specific
export financing products. In 2014, this program enlisted 513
lenders to provide $1.3 billion in export financing to almost
1,400 small exporters. However, there is still not enough
financing, which is why I introduced the bill last year to
increase Ex-Im Bank's small business financing goals, and I
hope to hear how else financing can be improved.
International trade is inherently complex due to economic
trends, country-specific policies, and customs and intellectual
property laws. But with the resources available through SBA
initiatives, small firms wishing to reach more global customers
and those already exporting can better prepare themselves for
navigating the international market.
It is critical that small businesses are able to
participate in this marketplace. Doing so gives them access to
more customers, which in turn fuels their growth and employment
and that of the U.S. economy overall.
I would like to thank our witness for making herself
available to testify today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman CURBELO. I thank the ranking member for her
opening statement. If Committee members have an opening
statement prepared, I ask if they be submitted for the record.
I would like to take a quick moment to explain the timing
lights. You will have 5 minutes to deliver your testimony. The
light will start out as green. When you have one minute
remaining, the light turn yellow. Finally, at the end of your 5
minutes, it will turn red. I ask that you try to adhere to that
time limit, but to the extent you need a little extra time, we
will be happy to indulge you here.
Our witness today is Ms. Eileen Sanchez, associate
administrator for international trade at the Small Business
Administration. I look forward to your testimony.
You may begin.

STATEMENT OF EILEEN SANCHEZ, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF
INTERNATIONAL TRADE, UNITED STATES SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you, Chairman Curbelo, Ranking Member
Meng, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about the U.S.
Small Business Administration's international trade programs
and initiatives.
Sounds like we are saying a lot of the same things. Small
businesses are increasing, looking abroad for their next
customer. International sales contribute to a strong middle
class by fueling economic opportunity and creating jobs in
communities across the United States. At the same time, foreign
consumers that buy made-in-America products, gain access to
some of the world's highest quality products and services.
Today, 96 percent of all consumers and over two-thirds of the
world's purchasing power resides outside of the United States.
Small businesses that can tap into this market have the
potential for vast expansion and growth.
In SBA's Office of International Trade, we remain focused
on our core mission of increasing the ability of small
businesses to compete in international markets through our
finance programs and through export development opportunities.
I would like to share with you some of the important
achievements we have made thus far.
On my personal visits to small business exporters, they
routinely express to me their need for access to finance. I am
proud to say that in fiscal year 2015, in spite of an overall
dip in total U.S. exports, we remain focused and participated
with 514 lenders to guarantee a record $1.45 billion in SBA
loans to 1,513 small business exporters.
We have also ramped up our approach to targeting new export
lenders so that they can more efficiently and effectively
support small business exporters in their communities, and so
that more liquidity can flow to the market.
In fiscal year 2015, we also trained more than 4,300
bankers. We hosted several lender roundtables throughout the
country; we provided webinars, and we carried out other
outreach and training events. For example, we provided a
webinar for members of the National Credit Union
Administration. In fiscal year 2016, we intend to amplify these
types of outreach. On the export development side, SBA
collaborated with partners across the country to improve access
and delivery of programs to small business exporters, and we
will continue to ramp this up in 2016.
One of the programs that we continue to be very excited
about is the State Trade and Export Promotion program, also
known as the STEP program. As you know, STEP awards Federal
dollars to our States and territories to fund their eligible
small business market development activities. These activities
can include trade missions, foreign market sales trips,
international marketing, and training.
In our fiscal year 2015, we upgraded processes and
implemented efficiencies as part of our STEP program
improvement initiative. So far, the program has supported small
business export development in 85 foreign markets as well as
export activities attended by 32,000 small businesses
channeling over 1.1 billion in export sales for a return on
taxpayer investment of over 19 to 1. In fiscal year 2015, SBA
awarded $17.4 million in STEP grants to 40 States.
Today, based on funding provided for STEP in the recent
2016 Consolidated Appropriations Act, SBA will announce a
competitive process for additional STEP awards totaling $18
million this year.
On the trade negotiations front, another key barrier that
we hear, as you said, Ms. Meng, is market access. And many
untapped opportunities exist outside the United States but
small businesses just don't have the resources and the
personnel to leverage them. This is why, likely unknowingly,
small businesses must rely heavily on negotiated free trade
agreements to truly access new markets and grow. And that is
why trade agreements have the potential to significantly
benefit small businesses,
So in addition to the office's core functions, for the
first time ever, our office is engaged in creating market
access opportunities for small businesses in key markets
through trade negotiations. Last year, the SBA, along with USGR
and other members of the Federal agencies, represented small
business interests in ongoing U.S.-EU transatlantic trade
investment partnership negotiation and in intercessional
meetings, and we will continue to do this in 2016.
With regards to the recently concluded Trans-Pacific
Partnership agreement, the TPP, the SBA is excited that the
agreement includes the first ever small-medium enterprise
chapter, as we believe many other provisions in the agreement
will help small business exporters. We also believe TPP and its
commitments will help to improve the environment for doing
business overseas and help more small business exports make
their made-in-America goods and services to Asia Pacific Rim
customers.
From the internal management perspective, we have
prioritized program changes into more practical frameworks. We
have also hired new enthusiastic, high-caliber, and innovative
expertise in the field and at headquarters. We are now at 21.
In conclusion, it is clear that in the 21st century, SBA's
Office of International Trade must be as global, innovative,
and entrepreneurial as the small businesses we serve. We are
more engaged on the international front than ever before by
supporting expert development efforts through the STEP program,
through guaranteed expert lending, as well as our active
involvement in trade negotiations. Together, these efforts
increase the ability of small business exporters to compete in
international markets and help create expert supported jobs in
the United States.
Again, I want to thank all of you for your bipartisan
commitment to small businesses.
Mr. Chairman, happy to take your questions.
Chairman CURBELO. Thank you very much for your testimony,
Ms. Sanchez. I now would like to recognize myself for 5
minutes.
And here is my first question: The Small Business Jobs Act
of 2010 directed SBA to increase its OIT export finance staff
from 18 to 30 by the end of September 2012; however, the GAO
reported in January 2013 that SBA only filled two positions
pointing to funding and recruiting challenges as an
explanation. GAO recommended that SBA update its plan to hire
additional OIT staff and include funding sources and
timeframes. So it is now January 2016, and I am curious what is
the current number of OIT field staff today?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you very much, and thank you for the
question. We are eager to raise our staff numbers as well. We
are currently at 21. We have added staff, additional staff, in
Florida, in Texas, in St. Louis, and in Seattle. And we are
reshifting and realigning our staff to meet the gaps. We have
conducted a gap analysis, and we have also added a new
position, also part of the Small Business Jobs Act, a regional
export development officer to fill a gap in markets on the West
Coast.
Chairman CURBELO. So is there an updated plan for meeting
the requirements of the SBA? You have mentioned the number 21.
That seems to me it is only an increase of three from a few
years ago. Do you have an updated plan? And if you don't, why
don't you have an updated plan?
Ms. SANCHEZ. We do have an updated plan, and it includes a
gap analysis so that we understand where the gaps lie within
our talent. If there is some of them that--if the market
requires extra, for example, outreach help versus finance help,
then we want to make sure that we make a judicious and good use
of taxpayer dollars an ensure that we are putting people in the
right places. And that is where we are right now.
Chairman CURBELO. You do understand that since you haven't
reached the 30 that you are required to reach, that raises many
questions. And some people may say, well, perhaps there is not
enough work for this agency to do. Perhaps this agency may not
be necessary; it is redundant. Maybe this work is being done by
other agencies.
So it is my view, Ms. Sanchez, that we need a more
convincing and a more definitive answer as to why it has taken
so long, I mean, this is years, to increase the positions from
18 to 30. It has been years, and it has been very difficult to
achieve that. So I don't know if there is anything else you
would like to add or if there is anything you can commitment to
sharing with us with regards to your plans so that we can
better understand why it is that this has been so challenging
to the agency?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes. Well, first, I have been with the agency
for 14 months, and I can tell you that Administrator Contreras-
Sweet is committed to ensuring that we right size as soon as
possible, and she continuously repeats that. And she wants to
make sure that we are staffing up and supporting the market the
way it needs to be supported.
Chairman CURBELO. So do you think that the plan is
something you would be able to share with this Committee----
Ms. SANCHEZ. Sure, definitely.
Chairman CURBELO.--so we can better understand what it is
you are experiencing, and perhaps if you need additional
resources or if there is anything we can do to be helpful?
Ms. SANCHEZ. That would be great. Thank you.
Chairman CURBELO. Okay. Another question. I have about a
minute and a half left. How does the U.S. global business
services effort enhance SBA coordination with commerce and Ex-
Im, if you can give me some concrete examples?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes. Thank you very much. It is really
important to take a business--and this is what SBA does very
well, is take a business from its entire lifecycle and how it
looks as it approaches finance and ensuring that we are
structuring and looking at a business. And we counsel small
businesses and want to make sure that they are getting the
right services from other entities and agencies within the
government as well, and that is what the U.S. global solution
program does very well, and we market it everywhere we go.
Chairman CURBELO. Okay. Thank you. I have some additional
questions, but now I would like to recognize the ranking member
for her questions.
Ms. MENG. Ms. Sanchez, collaboration between government
agencies, as you know, is the best way to assist small
businesses nationwide. In 2013, the GAO found collaboration
between the SBA and other agencies to be lacking particularly
in efforts to expand exporting. What steps has your office
taken to enhance cooperation with other agencies in meeting
client demands for trade assistance?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you very much.
Well, we are continuously meeting with other agencies
ensuring that we are working with the Trade Promotion
Coordinating Committee, seeing what exists out there. Again,
one of the biggest barriers that small businesses tell us they
face is information, trying to understand who does what and
where, who can they call? How can they get started? And so we
are ensuring that we proactively addressing that, whether it is
from providing lead behinds, cheat sheets, or whatever, however
we need to tackle the market in addition to our field that is
constantly out there aligning all of this.
Ms. MENG. Another question on minority-owned businesses who
are more likely to export compared to nonminority-owned firms
of all sizes. They are also five times more likely to conduct
business in a language other than English. Foreign language
capability, diaspora, and family ties are big advantages, for
example, for Asian and minority-owned U.S. firms seeking to
sell their products and services overseas. How is the SBA
assisting these minority-owned businesses, and can Congress be
more helpful?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you very much. Yes, we are currently
targeting various people on the field as well that have a
background. For example, we have colleagues in Los Angeles that
work tremendously with the Asian-American market and through
financial institutions, ensuring that various community lenders
that focus to certain minorities have the resources that they
need to provide the right financial instruction and development
for small businesses.
Ms. MENG. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CURBELO. Thank you, Ms. Meng.
I now would like to recognize the distinguished vice
chairman of the Small Business Committee, Mr. Luetkemeyer.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Sanchez, how are you this afternoon?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you very much. How are you?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Well. I didn't get a bio of you in my
paperwork here. Can you just roughly tell me what your
background is?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Sure, no problem.
Well, I began my career doing foreign exchange trading,
actually, photocopying FX deals, and then I was promoted to
stapling, eventually. I then now worked my way up into a
trading room where I did FX for intellectual property law firms
filing patents and trademarks throughout the United States.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. You are an attorney, then?
Ms. SANCHEZ. I am not an attorney.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Not an attorney. Okay.
Ms. SANCHEZ. And then I moved to another area of a bank
where I helped build their front office operations, realigned
their entire structures, opened foreign deposit books for
clients. Eventually I built an export finance area for areas of
the bank, and the bank asked me to do similar things for about
nine other areas of the finance--of the banking institution.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Very good. Question for you. The chairman
alluded to this a minute ago. We have this Trade Promotion
Coordinating Committee. I never heard of this group before. Can
you tell me a little about that?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes. The Trade Promotion Coordinating
Committee is several agencies within the Federal Government
that are in charge of trade promotion.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. You try and coordinate all the activities?
Ms. SANCHEZ. They do, and there is----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Is Ex-Im Bank part of that trade
promotion?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes, sir.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Is it? I know that Ex-Im last year did
3,400 direct loans to small businesses. Do you coordinate with
them at all? Do you guys work together on financing part; they
finance part? What goes on?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes, sir. We are colocated with Ex-Im Bank and
commercial service and several of our U.S. export assistance
centers. So on a daily basis our team on the field works
together to ensure that the small business is getting the
structure that they need.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. When you say ``structure,'' you are saying
the----
Ms. SANCHEZ. Financial structure that they need.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Right. I am a banker. I know what you are
talking about. What you are saying is that SBA will take,
perhaps, the less risky part and Ex-Im takes the more risky
part? Is that what you are doing?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes, in essence. So a credit deal--a credit
guarantee underwrites the risk of a small business not paying
the bank. There is also credit insurance which underwrites the
risk of a foreign buyer not paying the small business. And so
we work hand in hand with Ex-Im's credit insurance on that to
ensure that small businesses are being paid.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Roughly, how many deals did you do last
year with Ex-Im?
Ms. SANCHEZ. I will get back to you on that. Thank you.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. Just out of curiosity, you said your
portfolio was, what, $1.2, $1.3 billion?
Ms. SANCHEZ. $1.45 billion.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. That you did last year?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes, sir.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. What is your past due on the
balance? What is your total portfolio size?
Ms. SANCHEZ. $1.45 billion, past due is at----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. And that is your total portfolio, or is
that the number of loans you made last year?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Total volume of loans.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. So that is not the number of loans
you made last year?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Not number of loans, no.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. All right. So your total portfolio is
$1.45?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes, sir.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. What is your past due?
Ms. SANCHEZ. There are no past due in--the bank is the one
that monitors the past due, so we don't have any deficiencies.
The program is run at a zero subsidy.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. You don't go to the bank and get reports
from them to tell you what the past due ratio is of the loans
that you are sitting there guaranteeing?
Ms. SANCHEZ. I would have to get that information back to
you, sir.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. One of the concerns that we have is
the GAO report. You know, the Chairman talked a while ago about
the number of people who were supposed to be doing this work of
helping small businesses. You are authorized for 30, you had
19, now you are up to 21. And the GAO report said that
sometimes it is as little as 15 percent of their time was
actually dedicated to working with small businesses on trade.
So it begs the question, number one, are these people
necessary? And if they are, are they doing their job? And who
came up with the number of 30 to begin with? Was that you? Was
that Congress?
Ms. SANCHEZ. It was Congress.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. So Congress pulled a number out of the
air, then, right?
Ms. SANCHEZ. I defer to you on that, sir.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. I have no idea. I am asking you. You are
the administrator. You should know the history of your agency,
the history of this program. You don't know the history of your
program?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Sir, I believe that Congress was the one that
came up with the number.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. You didn't work in conjunction with
Congress to come up with the number, and say, we think 30
people would be able to help us be able to do our job of
helping small businesses access trade agreements----
Ms. SANCHEZ. Well, sir, to answer your first question, you
said district international trade officers only do--that--our
districts only have--they have a representative that is called
district international trade officers. They are the ones that
do--15 percent of their time is allocated to trade efforts. We
have U.S. expert assistance center people that actually
dedicate their time 100 percent to trade.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Which one is the 19?
Ms. SANCHEZ. The 19 is the U.S. export assistance center
people.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. Because GAO was concerned that there
was a disproportionate amount of time spent by these people on
other activities other than what they were supposed to.
So I see my time is up. I will yield back to the Chairman.
Thank you.
Chairman CURBELO. I thank the gentleman for yielding back.
And now I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Brat.
Mr. BRAT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just kind of have some general questions. I am kind of
following the logic of what has just proceeded.
I taught economics for the last 20 years at a small school
down in Virginia. In general, I am a free trader. Small
business, how can you not be, you know, empathetic toward
helping the small guy. But since I have been up here, seeing
how the politics works, I get skeptical about the size of the
small business and the typical small business that we are
helping.
So the big folks up here, all that special interests and
lobbyists, and they do well for themselves, Export-Import Bank
is kind of our example. It depends on which side you are on. I
am opposed. But when it comes to just trade in general, what is
the best case you can make for me? So in economics, the price
system is--the free market system or the price system, prices
make the decisions for us, right? So we all want to buy cheap
products, and the price system works. And any country that does
not follow the price system with long run is no longer a
nation. Right? So every nation in the history of nations is
gone.
We have followed the price system, and have done fairly
well, but lately the government's growing and growing and
growing. So give me the best case you can as to why we need the
Small Business Administration to make loans and help these
small guys make loans, give them credit, and to facilitate
trade? Because I do want to level the playing field toward the
small guy. But on the other hand, I am getting equally
skeptical that the government is just picking winners at all
levels. So give me the best case you can for why the Small
Business Administration should be helping out the small guy so
I can go back home and tell them what we are doing for them.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you very much. That is interesting.
You know, the core mission of the U.S. Small Business
Administration is to help small businesses succeed and
especially the Office of International Trade in the
international marketplace and be able to compete effectively.
And, you know, we have identified--we know that the three
biggest issues that they have is information, access to
capital, and market access.
Without somebody representing them and being the voice for
them on trade negotiations and all trade matters, and knowing
that 96 percent of all of their potential future sales and
current sales, you know, need somebody to support them. That is
a pretty hefty case there of the tremendous need that they have
for somebody to voice for them and represent them in anything
related to----
Mr. BRAT. That is good. That is what I wanted to hear. Now,
if I unpack it and dig down into the details, will I find out
that the small businesses that are being helped are actually
not the smallest ones, but they are the biggest ones in the
small business category?
Ms. SANCHEZ. You know, I would love to dig deeper with you,
because we also do know that exports--that the opportunities
are with new entrants in exports.
Mr. BRAT. Yep.
Ms. SANCHEZ. And I firmly believe that is where the
opportunity exists as well.
Mr. BRAT. That is good. And, then, I am just playing
devil's advocate. But I am just interested, in free markets,
the nice thing about a free market, it is neutral. Right?
Everyone is absolutely equal when the price system is in charge
and you don't have access, special access, to some trillions of
dollars up here.
So if I dig into the small business firms as well, would
there be any particular concentration in just certain
industries that are get overwhelming support and subsidies and
counsel? Because everyone knows it is good, right? I mean, you
are getting free services, and someone helping you to do your
services and subsidizing capital and making your loans easier,
that is a good thing. No one's against that.
But if I dug down to get--would it be--is it just certain
industries, or is it fair in terms of across the board?
Ms. SANCHEZ. I would be actually very curious and
interested to engage on a study like that as well with you.
Mr. BRAT. Good.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you very much for----
Chairman CURBELO. I thank the gentleman.
I have a couple additional questions, Ms. Sanchez. SBDCs
and the commercial service both provide export counseling to
small businesses; however SBA and Commerce have yet to clearly
designate the responsibilities of field staff in this regard.
What effort has been made to improve collaboration and
cooperation between SBC and commercial service export
counselors, and what is being done to simplify the process when
a small business should be referred to a different agency based
on their export readiness?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you. With all honestly, I think there is
a lot of work left to be done there still. And there is a lot
that we can be doing to require more of SBDCs, potentially,
hopefully, with your help and ensure that SBDCs are
incorporating into all of the curriculum and what they do,
international training.
Even though some of them are certified, there is a lot of
work left to be done to ensure that SBDCs are actively
communicating in international trade and everything they do.
Chairman CURBELO. So you recognize there is a lot of room
for improvement in this area?
Ms. SANCHEZ. Absolutely.
Chairman CURBELO. Then let me ask you, because I think this
is what it all boils down for me. It appears that much of what
OIT does is actually duplicative of a number of other agencies.
How does the administration--I want to give you the opportunity
to make your case for OIT. Why it is unique? Why it is
different? Why it justifies an investment from the American
people?
Because based on a lot of what we have learned here today
thus far, I think it is pretty clear that there is a lot of
overlap with different agencies, and there are at least
questions with regards to OIT's mission and whether or not that
mission is being fulfilled.
I want to give you the opportunity to make the case for why
OIT is necessary, despite the fact that other agencies are also
operating in this area.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Yes. Thank you.
Once again, we know that the issues that small businesses
are facing are related to information, to financing, and to
market access. And one entity that ensures that on all
horizontal levels across the Federal agency, what every Federal
agency is doing is ensuring that they are including small
business in the everyday of what they do.
That is what the Office of International Trade has been
actively ensuring and doing, at least since my arrival, is
ensuring that every Federal agency, including this, and that is
critical for small businesses. They need that voice for small
business, and for somebody who is fighting for them on
international markets and to ensure that they have the right
market access.
Chairman CURBELO. Well, I thank you. And I would just like
you to take the message back, I think, obviously, everyone on
this Committee wants the SBA to work, to be functional, to help
small businesses. We really believe that we can do a lot to
give small business owners access to new markets. Small
businesses are very important for all of our communities,
because they are the ones that employ the people that don't
have access to the big firms, maybe the kid that dropped out of
college or the new immigrant family that just arrived. These
are the jobs that these types of individuals have access to.
So we want to promote small business, but there are
legitimate questions, I think many of them have been asked here
today, with regards to OIT, with regards to whether or not it
is absolutely necessary. And we are living at a time, of
course, of limited resources for the government. You know that;
we certainly know that.
I think it is very important, it is critical, for SBA to
demonstrate that this agency is necessary and that it is
operating to assist our small businesses export products. That
is your mission. So we need proof, essentially, that your
mission is being fulfilled.
Does anyone else seek recognition?
Okay. I want to thank you, Ms. Sanchez, for your time, for
coming to answer our questions and to share your testimony.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman CURBELO. This hearing is now adjourned.
Ms. SANCHEZ. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 4:39 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Curbelo, Ranking Member Meng, and distinguished
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify about SBA's international trade programs and
initiatives.

Small businesses are increasingly looking abroad for their
next customer. Export sales contribute to a strong middle class
by fueling economic opportunity and creating export-supported
jobs in communities across the United States, while the foreign
consumers that buy Made in America products gain access to some
of the world's highest quality products and services. Today,
95% of all consumers and over two-thirds of the world's
purchasing power reside outside the United States. Small
businesses that can tap into this global market have the
potential for vast expansion and growth, with small and mid-
sized businesses now comprising 34% of total export sales. In
SBA's Office of International Trade, we remain focused on our
core mission of increasing the ability of small businesses to
compete in international markets through access to finance and
export development opportunities.

I want to share the important achievements SBA's Office of
International Trade has made to increase the number of small
business exports.

I am proud to say that in FY 2015 we guaranteed a record
$1.45 billion in SBA loans to small business exporters--5.2% of
all SBA guaranteed lending went to small business exporters.
The Agency participated with 514 lenders to provide financing
to 1,513 small business exporters, exceeding the goal we set of
financing 1,480 small businesses. On my personal visits to
small business exporters, their owners routinely express to me
the importance of having access to financing.

We continue to target new lenders to support small business
exporters in their communities so that more liquidity can flow
to the market. Last year we trained more than 4,300 lenders,
hosted the eighth Annual SBA Export Lenders Roundtable in
Washington, D.C. and the second Annual West Coast SBA Export
Lenders Roundtable in Los Angeles. We also provided a webinar
for members of the National Credit Union Administration, as
well other outreach and training events.

Recognizing that U.S. small business exporters are key to
the nation's economic future, SBA's Office of International
Trade will continue to collaborate with partners across the
country to improve access and delivery of programs to small
business exporters. One of the programs we continue to be
excited about is the State Trade and Export Promotion, or STEP
program. The STEP program helps small businesses tap global
markets through cooperative agreement awards with state
governments. STEP awards federal dollars to states and
territories to fund eligible small business market development
activities, including participation in trade missions and
foreign market sales trips, trade shows, international
marketing efforts, and training. Since the establishment of the
program, we have supported international market development
efforts across the states, and they have reported, great
success from the first two rounds of awards.

In FY 2015, SBA awarded $17.4 million in STEP grants to 40
states. Using the funding provided for STEP in the 2016
Consolidated Appropriations Act, SBA will announce a
competitive process for additional STEP awards totaling $18
million this year. SBA is dedicated to running a competitive
grant process ensuring these funds will support those projects
with the greatest returns, while not duplicating the efforts of
any other federal trade promotion activities.

Many untapped opportunities exist outside the United
States, but small firms often do not have the resources and
personnel to leverage them, and rely heavily on negotiated free
trade agreements to reduce tariff and non-tariff barriers for
their products or services. That is why free trade agreements
have the potential to significantly benefit small businesses.
In addition to the office's core functions, we are also
increasingly engaged in creating market access opportunities
for small businesses is key markets through trade negotiations.

Last year the SBA, along with USTR, represented small
business interests in ongoing U.S.-EU Transatlantic Trade and
Investment Partnership (T-TIP) negotiations and intercessional
meetings, and will continue to do so in 2016. With regards to
the recently concluded Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)
Agreement, the SBA is excited that the agreement includes the
first-ever small-medium enterprise chapter, as well as many
other provisions that will help small business exporters. We
believe TPP and its strong commitments will help to improve the
environment for doing business overseas, and help more small
businesses export Made In America goods and services to Asia
Pacific customers, thereby fostering greater economic
opportunity for U.S. companies and entrepreneurs.

In the 21st century, SBA's Office of International Trade
must be as global, innovative and entrepreneurial as the small
businesses we serve. We are more engaged on the international
front than ever before by supporting export development efforts
through the STEP program and guaranteed export lending, as well
as through our active involvement in trade negotiations.
Together these efforts increase the ability of small business
exporters to compete in international markets and help create
export-supported jobs in the United States.

Again, I want to thank all of you for your bipartisan
commitment to small businesses.

Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to take your questions.
