- SMALL BUSINESS, BIG THREAT: PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESSES FROM CYBER ATTACKS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SMALL BUSINESS, BIG THREAT: PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESSES FROM CYBER
ATTACKS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

UNITED STATES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 22, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-009
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-346 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
TOM RICE, South Carolina
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Stephen Dennis, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Steve Grobman, Intel Security Group, Intel Corporation, Santa
Clara, CA......................................................     4
Mr. Todd McCracken, President, National Small Business
Association, Washington, DC....................................     5
Mr. B. Dan Berger, President and Chief Executive Officer,
National Association of Federal Credit Unions, Arlington, VA...     7
Mr. Dane LeClair, National Cybersecurity Institute, Excelsior,
Washington, DC.................................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Steve Grobman, Intel Security Group, Intel Corporation,
Santa Clara, CA............................................    22
Mr. Todd McCracken, President, National Small Business
Association, Washington, DC................................    38
Mr. B. Dan Berger, President and Chief Executive Officer,
National Association of Federal Credit Unions, Arlington,
VA.........................................................    43
Dr. Jane LeClair, National Cybersecurity Institute,
Excelsior, Washington, DC..................................    60
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

SMALL BUSINESS, BIG THREAT: PROTECTING SMALL BUSINESSES FROM CYBER

ATTACKS

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 22, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Hanna, Rice, Gibson, Brat,
Hardy, Velazquez, Clarke, Meng, Lawrence, Adams, and Moulton.
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order.
I want to thank everyone for being here today. A special
thanks to our witnesses for coming to share their insights and
expertise with this Committee on the very timely and very
important subject matter that we will be discussing here this
morning.
Cyber security is one of the most pressing but least
understood challenges of our time. The American government,
American businesses, and Americans themselves are attacked over
the Internet on a daily basis. Sometimes they know; sometime
they do not. These attacks come from criminal syndicates,
activists, and foreign nations. They are after intellectual
property, bank accounts, social security numbers, and anything
else that they can use for financial gain or for a competitive
edge.
The increasing number of attacks come as more people are
using the Internet than ever before. In the past five years,
global Internet traffic has increased more than fivefold, and
in the next five years this number will triple. This is not the
Internet of 1995 when most Americans simply got online to check
their email. Today, we are using the Internet in increasingly
innovative and practical ways. Some pay for coffee with their
phones, request ride-sharing service to an exact location,
stream live video, and even bank online.
Just two years ago, the average amount stolen from small
business bank accounts was around $7,000, and in just two
years--last year--that nearly tripled to $20,000.
This technology, and our use of it, is the underpinning of
our modern economy and the foundation of our future. That is
why we must address cyber security now, so that as a country
and as the leader in the global marketplace we can operate
without fear of attack. We need the peace of mind that we have
adequately prepared, we are protected, and we are constantly
learning and adapting and strengthening those systems to
protect against cyber attacks.
When hackers affect large corporations, it is a breaking
news alert on television and probably on our smartphones. But
the majority of cyber attacks happen at small businesses. In
fact, 71 percent of cyber attacks occur at businesses with
fewer than 100 employees. These are our family businesses and
small manufacturers with fewer resources to combat security
threats which make them even bigger targets. A cyber attack on
a big box store will be reported by the media and probably dent
their bottom line; an unreported attack on a small firm may put
them out of business, and those Americans who work at that
small business lose their jobs.
So today, we are here to examine these issues through the
lens of an everyday American. How do we protect ourselves and
our businesses? Is it as simple as using a more complicated
password, or does it require much more than that? And what is
the appropriate level of the federal government's involvement
in all of this? Not long ago, an enemy would attack us with
bombs, or guns, or ammunition; today they use malware and
Trojan horses.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses here this
morning, and I now would like to yield to Nydia Velazquez, the
ranking member.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Over the past 15 years, the Internet and associated
technologies have changed the way business is conducted. From
the mobile banking apps on our phones, to the shopping
experience offered by companies like Amazon, activities that
once took place in corner stores now take place online. The
Internet also affords America's 23 million small businesses a
unique opportunity to sell their products not only across the
country but around the world. Today, Internet shopping is a
$319 billion marketplace, and the Census Bureau estimates 58
percent of all U.S. shoppers will make an online purchase in
the next year.
As more consumers and businesses participate in ecommerce,
protecting our financial information from cyber attacks is
critical. Unfortunately, recent data breaches at Target, T.J.
Maxx, and Home Depot compromise financial data of millions of
consumers and cost each company tens of millions of dollars in
damages and lost sales. It also exposes the weaknesses of the
current cyber security landscape.
While these examples highlight some of the largest
breaches, the small business community is not immune to the
risks of a cyber attack. Over 40 percent of attacks are
companies with less than 400 employees and nearly three-
quarters of small businesses report being targeted in the past
year. Yet, 53 percent of small business owners claim that the
high cost in both time and money to secure the business from
cyber attacks was not justified by the threat. Unfortunately,
the consequences of forgoing investment in proactive cyber
security are high. The small business that loses customer
information is punished twofold by the direct monetary toll of
the breach and by the marketplace when customers leave. A data
breach costs upwards of $200,000 per incident and surveys show
20 percent of customers will immediately terminate their
relationship with a compromised business. As a result one study
found a 60 percent of small businesses closed permanently
within six months of a cyber attack.
Clearly, cyber security should be a priority to protect our
national security and economy. As we move forward,
comprehensive reforms must balance a number of priorities,
including being able to adapt to evolving technologies,
preventing undue costs and regulations on small businesses, and
protecting our sensitive information.
During today's hearing, we will explore the critical issues
facing small businesses that operate online. For millions of
small firms, the Internet is critical to their success, yet
fewer than 15 percent have plans in place to respond to a cyber
attack. I look forward to hearing your recommendations to
better educate and inform the small business community on cyber
issues and how the federal government can facilitate a more
robust and efficient cyber security environment.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the
witnesses for being here today. With that, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
If Committee members have opening statements prepared, I
would ask that they submit them for the record.
I would now like to inform our panel of the five-minute
rule, which basically means you get five minutes to testify,
and we will all have five minutes to ask questions. There is a
lighting system. The green light will stay on for four minutes.
The yellow light will come on to let you know you have a minute
to wrap up. When the red light comes on, we ask that you finish
up as close to that time as possible. We will give you a little
bit of leeway but not a whole lot.
And now we will introduce the panel. Our first witness will
be Steve Grobman, who is the chief technology officer with
Intel Security Group at Intel Corporation. In this role, Mr.
Grobman sets the technical strategy and direction for the
company's security business across hardware and software
platforms. Mr. Grobman holds 20 U.S. and international patents
in the field of cyber security, software, and computer
architecture. He earned his bachelor's degree in Computer
Science from North Carolina State University. We welcome you
here this morning.
Our second witness will be Todd McCracken, who serves as
President of the National Small Business Association (NSBA).
NSBA is the nation's oldest small business organization, having
been founded all the way back in 1937. Mr. McCracken is a
graduate of Trinity University with a B.A. in Economics. We
welcome you.
And our third witness will be B. Dan Berger, who is
President and CEO of the National Association of Federal Credit
Unions. Mr. Berger earned a Master's degree in Public
Administration from Harvard University and a Bachelor of
Science degree in Economics from Florida State University, and
we welcome you here as well, Mr. Berger.
I now yield to our ranking member to introduce our fourth
witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Jane LeClair is the chief operating officer for the
National Cyber Security Institute at Excelsior College here in
Washington, D.C., where she focuses on cyber security training,
social engineering, and women in cyber. Previously, she served
as dean of the School of Business and Technology at Excelsior
College, and worked in the nuclear energy sector for over 20
years. She is a vocal advocate for attracting and retaining
more women in the technology fields and established the Dr.
Jane LeClair Scholarship Fund for Women in Technology at
Excelsior College in 2012. Dr. LeClair holds a number of
degrees, notably an EdD from Syracuse University and a MBA from
City University. Welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Now we will hear from our very distinguished panel here
this morning. Mr. Grobman, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF STEVE GROBMAN, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, INTEL
SECURITY GROUP, INTEL CORPORATION; TODD MCCRACKEN, PRESIDENT,
NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS ASSOCIATION; DAN BERGER, PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FEDERAL CREDIT
UNIONS; JANE LECLAIR, NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY INSTITUTE

STATEMENT OF STEVE GROBMAN

Mr. GROBMAN. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and other members of the Committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. I am Steve Grobman, Intel
fellow and chief technology officer for Intel Security Group at
Intel Corporation.
Intel is a world leader in computing innovation. The
company designs and builds the essential technologies that
serve as the foundation for the world's computing devices.
Security, along with power-efficient performance and
connectivity are key elements of our innovation efforts. As
chief technology officer for Intel Security Group, I set the
technical strategy and direction for the company's security
business across hardware and security platforms.
Intel and I appreciate the Committee's interest in the
importance of protecting small business from cyber security
threats. My testimony will focus on three main areas--the
threat landscape and its implication for small business; how
best practices and education can help small business; and how
industry can deliver innovative security solutions to help
small business.
The threat landscape and specific implications for small
business are very unique. Small businesses need to comprehend a
wide-range of threats, including attacks from criminals,
hacktivists, state actors, and bulk malware that we see
targeting consumers. But they also have some very unique
challenges. They typically have insufficient cyber defenses,
thus becoming an attractive prospective for criminal actors,
but yet make up a major portion of the GDP. The other element
with small business is small business can act as a conduit or
element of a larger breach focused on large enterprise or
government.
The latter example is not a hypothetical. Elements of a
2014 major breach compromised a small business as one of the
key elements to land on the network of a large enterprise and
thus became a key factor in that enterprise's overall loss.
Understanding how small business impacts supply chain and other
elements of large business and government is something that we
must comprehend when looking at small business.
Attacks are not only technological; they take advantage of
both social engineering and a wide range of attacks on varying
platforms from PCs, mobile devices, new cloud architectures,
embedded devices, and even hardware.
The challenge with cyber security defense is that the
attack has an inherent advantage. It is an asymmetric
environment where a target attack against a small business
gives the advantage to the attacker. The attacker understands
what tools and defensive measures are deployed generally at
small business. They also understand that the pragmatic cost
complaints of a small business will be such that they cannot
afford the same degree of a cyber-operation staff that you
would see in some large enterprises or governments. But the
most profound reason that we see the asymmetry in the attack
advantage being to the attacker is the attacker only needs to
be right once, whereas, to defend against cyber attacks, you
need to be right always. And this is extremely challenging,
especially in a small business environment.
To counteract the cyber security risks of small business, a
few key actions need to be taken. Small business, along with
all enterprise, need to be thinking about how security evolves.
The concept of protection against all cyber threats is not
possible today, and we need to shift our thinking to more of a
thought process that cyber attacks will occur and be able to
not only defend against them but detect them when they occur
and correct back to a known good state. This concept of not
only comprehending protection but detection and correction is
key to the way the industry should develop our next generation
of architectures.
It is also important that we understand education for all
organizations, regardless of whether you are a small business
or a large enterprise. A key educational tool is the cyber
security framework, which Intel has been a proponent of and has
been a strong advocate in integrating into its own systems.
The final point that I would like to make is new
technologies are at the cusp of enabling small businesses to be
successful in the emerging threat landscape. Things such as
software as a servicing cloud and we will see small businesses
shifting to these types of technologies as we move forward.
Thank you again for the opportunity to address the
Committee. I will be happy to answer any questions as well.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. McCracken, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATMEENT OF TODD MCCRACKEN

Mr. MCCRACKEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is good to be
here this morning. Thanks for inviting me. Thank you, Chairman
Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and the rest of the members
of the Committee, to be here to testify on the impact of cyber
security and credit card fraud issues on the health and growth
potential of millions of small businesses.
I want to focus today a little bit on the overall threat of
cyber security on small companies, but then also focus a little
bit more specifically on the credit card issue since there is a
lot of talk about small companies and the conversion to EMV and
the liability shift this year that probably is worthy of a
little bit of attention.
In the last few years, cyber security has emerged as a
significant problem and concern for the small business
community. By the end of 2014, according to our Year-End
Economic Report, fully half of small companies reported having
been the victim of a cyber attack (up from 44 percent in 2013).
And of those, 61 percent say an attack has occurred within the
last year.
While a 14 percent increase in the number of small
businesses becoming victims is significant, we believe the real
story is the increasing impact those attacks are having on
small businesses in terms of the interruption of normal
business operations and the direct financial cost of the
attacks
In 2013, only 12 percent of companies reported that the
resolution of the cyber attack required more than one week; by
late 2014, more than one in five such attacks were still
unresolved in one week, with 13 percent of them requiring more
than two weeks. Three in five companies experienced a service
interruption, and a third had their websites go down for some
period.
A significant problem for small companies, as Mr. Grobman
just talked about, is many small companies are not in a
position to have a dedicated IT department, and many either
outsource IT functions or assign such duties to an employee who
has other responsibilities, often the owner him/herself. You
can read the results for yourself. We found in our surveys,
significant numbers of companies, between 25 and 40 percent in
the last four years, report that the owner him/herself is the
primary technical support person. They do it themselves, in
addition to being the chief marketing officer and chief product
development officer and everything else. And so this is an
enormous constraint on how they can respond.
And in the case of another significant share of companies,
they outsource the IT function to some other company. Of
course, the difficulty there is these small businesses, in the
event of a crisis, those smaller clients typically are not the
first priority for those IT firms. They have other clients, and
some of the bigger clients pay them more money will get a
quicker response. So those are unique challenges for small
companies.
The big eye opener in our last survey is the increasing
cost of these cyber attacks. We look specifically at what money
had been stolen from them from bank accounts, and we found in
two years the amount that was stolen went from about $7,000 to
about $20,000 on average, a 188 percent increase in that amount
of time, which is staggering. We think that is largely the
result of not only the increase, the total increase in the
amount of fishing scams out there, and malware, but also the
increasing effectiveness of those. They have become much more
real to people. They believe them in a way that they did not
two or three years ago for a variety of reasons.
So this is clearly a national problem, and these attacks
are coming from outside the country. We have got to find a way
to limit those attacks, while increasing the education of small
companies on how to avoid them.
The next issue I want to talk about briefly is credit cards
and small companies. Various forms of credit card fraud have
become more prevalent. We see in the desire to shift to EMV or
the chip-based cards. This October 1st we are going to see a
shift in liability for credit card fraud, whichever company has
the least advanced technology essentially. So if you do not
have an EMV reader, then the company could be liable.
So those companies really think about what kind of charges
they have actually have, what kind of company they run, what
kind of products they well, who their customers are, do they
know their customers, to decide if they need to invest now in
those more up-to-date readers or whether they will not see a
significant increase in fraud if they stay where they are now.
But we clearly think that shifting to a more secure credit card
environment ultimately has got to be the solution for overall
credit card fraud because we do not think to rely on magnetic
stripe technology is like to be our future; we have to make the
shift and make it fairly quickly because there are too many
incentives to shift that data there.
So again, with those highlights, you can read the rest of
my statement as it is written, but I appreciate the time to be
here today. I stand ready to answer your questions when it is
time. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Berger, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN BERGER

Mr. BERGER. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, Members of the Committee. My name is Dan Berger, and
I am testifying today on behalf of the NAFCU, where I serve as
president and CEO.
NAFCU and our member credit unions, small businesses
themselves, appreciate the opportunity to testify before the
Committee today on cyber and data security. Cyber and data
security needs to be everyone's responsibility. More can and
must be done to protect small businesses and consumers on this
very important issue.
NAFCU has long supported comprehensive and cyber security
measures to protect consumers' sensitive data. Credit unions
and other financial institutions already protect data
consistent with the provisions of the 1999 Gramm-Leach-Bliley
Act. Unfortunately, there is no similar regulatory structure
for other entities that may handle sensitive personal and
financial data.
Gramm-Leach-Bliley, in its implementing regulations, has
successfully limited data breaches among financial
institutions. This standard has a proven track record and
should be recognized in any future requirements. Gramm-Leach-
Bliley requires financial institutions to address the risks
presented by the complexity and scope of their business. This
allows flexibility, ensures the regulatory framework is
workable for the largest and smallest financial institutions.
Gramm-Leach-Bliley is an example of how scalability is
achievable for varying sized businesses.
A data security breach can have a huge impact on consumers,
from waiting for new cards to be issued, to updating all
existing accounts connected with a compromised card. Breaches
can also result in fraud losses, damaged credit ratings, and
even identity theft. Over 23 percent of Americans had their
financial identities compromised by a data breach in 2014.
A recent survey of NAFCU-member credit unions found that
the respondents were alerted to potential breaches an average
of 164 times in 2014, a huge increase from 2013. It is
important to remember when credit unions are alerted to
breaches, they take action to respond to their members and to
protect their members. Our survey also found that in 2014, the
average credit union spent $136,000 on new data security
measures, in addition to spending $226,000 in costs associated
with merchant data breaches. The three main elements of these
costs were card reissuance, fraud losses, and account
monitoring. Ultimately, this takes away from providing other
services and products to their members.
Smaller credit unions, such as Diebold Federal Credit Union
in North Canton, Ohio, are especially feeling the impact. Since
the beginning of 2014, Diebold has had over $32,000 in losses
from data breaches from retailers. While that might not seem
like much, for a small business like them, it is a huge burden
on that institution.
Unfortunately, credit unions rarely see any reimbursement
for these costs. Even when there are recoupment opportunities,
such as the recent Target settlement with MasterCard, it is
usually only pennies on the dollar in terms of real costs and
losses incurred.
Recognizing that a legislate solution is a very complex
issue, NAFCU has established a set of guiding principles we
would like to see in data security legislation including
reimbursement of all costs by the breach entity, national
standards for safekeeping of consumer information, breach
notification to financial institutions, disclosure of the
breached entity to consumers, and of course, enforcement of
data retention prohibitions.
Enforcement of the prohibition on data retention cannot be
overstated. It is a common sense way to cut down on emerging
threats. If there is no financial data to steal, it is not
worth the effort of the cyber criminals. In essence, if there
is no treasure, there is no private.
NAFCU believes that a possible solution on this issue is a
bipartisan legislation introduced by Senators Blunt and Carper.
Their bill, the Data Security Act of 2015, sets a strong
national data security standard based on Gramm-Leach-Bliley
that would be extended to all entities who handle consumer
data. We urge the House to take a similar approach.
We would also like to recognize and thank the House
leadership, as well as this Committee, for the ongoing focus on
cyber and data security issues, including the cyber bills you
have on the floor this week. A safer system ultimately benefits
all participants, including consumers, financial institutions,
and of course, small businesses.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today on
behalf of NAFCU. I welcome any questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Berger follows:]
Dr. LeClair, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JANE LECLAIR

Ms. LECLAIR. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, on
behalf of the National Cyber Security Institute at Excelsior
College, I appreciate the opportunity to address you and
provide a statement for today's hearing. The National Cyber
Security Institute is dedicated to increasing knowledge in the
cyber security discipline and assists small businesses to
better understand and meet the challenges in today's digital
world. My name is Dr. Jane LeClair, and I am the chief
operating officer of the National Cyber Security Institute
located in Washington, D.C.
Small businesses are challenged both by the ability and the
desire to secure themselves against cyber threats, which makes
them uniquely vulnerable to cyber attacks. Fifty percent of
small businesses have been the victims of cyber attack and over
60 percent of those receiving a significant attack go out of
business. Often, small businesses do not even know they have
been breached until it is too late. Small businesses are under
attack from many avenues, including social engineering, the
Internet of things, insider threat, weak passwords, and cyber
theft through weak payment systems. Mobile devices and the lack
of formal cyber plans and policies spell trouble. Infections
brought in through browsers pose a threat, and finally,
outdated technology and poor maintenance top the list of
problems.
Small businesses are characterized by central management
focused around the owner, with lack of a specialized IT or
cyber staff, inadequate control systems, and day-to-day, rather
than long-term planning for asset protection. Almost 70 percent
of small businesses manage their own websites, use the Internet
for sales, social media, marketing, and a host of other needs.
Small businesses have resource constraints and often ignore
cyber security in favor of day-to-day operations or other
financial needs.
Yet, small businesses remain a gateway to gain access to
clients, business partners, donors, and contractors working
with the small business, a backdoor into many large
organizations. These organizations frequently lack the
knowledge to develop and implement a cyber-policy or the
expertise to develop a response strategy. Surprisingly, 96
percent of the attacks on small businesses were fundamentally
basic attacks. Small businesses need employees trained in
networking, operating systems, and multiple layers of security.
Otherwise, who is watching for the signs of an attack and
making sure the operating systems are properly patched? Who is
responsible for regular backups and reviewing system logs?
There are several ways that the National Cyber Security
Institute is offering assistance to the small businesses. An
affordable package that provides a targeted cyber security
plan, basic training for owners, IT staff and employees, and
ensures that the basics of antivirus software and firewall
protection are in place is under development. Our media
campaign raises awareness through quarterly webinars and weekly
blogs. The National Cyber Security Institute is publishing two
short books on Cyber security for small business and cyber
insurance, and is partnering to offer a small business workshop
in medium-sized cities around the country that is affordable
and aimed at small business owners and their IT staff.
Cyber security is without a doubt one of the prime concerns
of the small business community in America today. The efforts
of this Committee in seeking ways to help alleviate those
concerns cannot be understated.
Mr. Chairman and members of this Committee, thank you for
your interest in this important area, and I thank you for the
opportunity to address you today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. We want to thank all
the witnesses for their very excellent testimony here, and I
will recognize myself for five minutes now to begin the
questioning.
I will begin with you, Mr. Grobman, if I can. I appreciated
your comment particularly about the attackers only have to be
right once and we, the business community, has to be right
every time or you are going to undergo some serious damage. You
heard that a lot after September 11th, too, in dealing with
overall terrorism. We have to be very secure all the time and
it only takes a terrorist one time to really wreak havoc and I
think that is certainly the case here because this is really a
form of terrorism in many ways.
Could you kind of walk us through the various stages of a
modern cyber attack on, say, a small business, for example?
Mr. GROBMAN. Sure. What would typically happen is if it is
a targeted attack, they would focus first on what we call
reconnaissance. So understanding what capabilities the small
business is actually running so that they can craft an attack
that would be able to be successful in that environment. Once
they have that information, they can customize a capability
that would be able to work through standardized defenses if the
small business has them in order to get into the environment
and then they focus on perpetrating whatever their actual
objective is, typically the theft of information or in the case
of either hacktivism or nation state, it might be more of a
destructive nature. So it is really a well-formed set of steps
that is well understood by the attack community on how to
perpetrate such an attack. The thing that is unique here is it
can be customized for the target, which makes it very difficult
to protect with standard technology.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Berger, let me turn to you. On behalf of the credit
unions, you know, as far as the banking community, are the
attacks that you see on the credit unions similar to what you
see in say the community banks? Are there similarities? Are
there differences? What would you say?
Mr. BERGER. The attacks that we are seeing are very similar
across the board. It does not matter what size the entity is.
It is the old phrase, `` they attack where the money is.'' But
because we have Gramm-Leach-Bliley, we have some serious
protocols in place that we have to deal with as a financial
institution to make sure that the consumer's information is
protected. But the attacks are the same, no matter what size
the entity is.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mr. McCracken and Dr. LeClair, I will address the next
question to the two of you. What steps are being taken to level
the playing field to more effectively defend against cyber
attacks, and how important is information sharing to those
efforts? Either one of you.
Ms. LECLAIR. I would say information sharing is key today.
We cannot silo ourselves, and we need to work both jointly with
government and private industry to ensure the information is
shared and that we are able to protect as we need to.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mr. McCracken?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Yeah. I agree with that. It is very
important to get the information out there so that companies
can understand what the real threats are and how they can
protect themselves. And then share it up within the supply
chain. We think there is a significant role that various
members of the supply chain need to play in helping each other
deal with these attacks because all those companies are
interlinked is very clear.
Chairman CHABOT. There are various things that we, as
members of Congress, and our staff deal with in trying to keep
attacks--cyber attacks on the government. Such things as
changing our passwords, and they have improved the passwords so
it is a little harder to get them in and you have to remember
them with a little more difficulty. It cannot just be your
cat's name or your dog's name and that sort of thing. You have
got to put question marks after the cat's name now or whatever.
So it is a bit more complicated.
And they are also changed periodically, and I do not
necessarily want to give out government secrets here as to how
often we have to change them, but it was a certain number of
months, and now that has been shortened to a fewer number of
months. What is the private sector doing along those lines, and
what would you recommend to small businesses in that area?
Mr. Grobman?
Mr. GROBMAN. Chairman, I think one of the things that Intel
Security is investing in is solving or helping to provide key
assets for this problem by making biometrics available to a
much broader audience, including small business and consumers.
So when you prove that you really are you to another entity,
you are doing it not just with a password, which can be
transferred to somebody else, but you actually need to use
something like facial recognition in order to do that. And I
think as these technologies become more consumable, they will
be a key part of the strategy to solve the problem you
articulate.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Just for the record, we do not have a cat. We have a turtle
and I am not going to tell you what his name is.
I will now yield to the ranking member for five minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. LeClair, as we heard today, financial data security is
becoming a priority for small businesses, given the fact that
more small businesses are offering online mobile buying
options. Many of the firms, as Mr. McCracken stated, cannot
hire an IT staff. Can you elaborate on the cyber security
package that NCI is working on or developing to offer small
businesses that opportunity?
Ms. LECLAIR. One of the things that we have under
development is a package that would work for small businesses
because of the financial constraints they have. That package
would allow them to get the basic training for the organization
owner, as well as their employees. But special training if they
have their own IT person, or if they have another person in the
organization who they have selected to do their IT work, to
give them the basic training they need to be able to know about
to secure their systems. Ensuring that they have basic anti-
virus firewall protection as well, and that they are able to
develop a policy with us. We have a template, basically a
starter template for them that we would work with them to
develop their policy, as well as a risk assessment plan for
them. So kind of an all-in-one package for them to be able to
work with.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
How important do you think it is to create national
notification standards to replace the existing 49 separate
state laws governing breach notification?
Ms. LECLAIR. We feel that is very important. We have spoken
about that a couple of places because right now there are 47
states that have different rules and policies. The ability to
clarify for organizations the overall requirements would not
only simplify but it would allow people to better be able to
know what they have to do in that timeframe. In some people's
case they feel it will be difficult to meet, but I think
overall in a short time people will adjust and it will help us
in the long term.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Grobman, there has been much emphasis recently on cloud
computing, and this new model is gaining great traction within
the business community and the government. How does cloud
computing impact cyber security , particularly for small
businesses?
Mr. GROBMAN. So cloud computing is a major asset to helping
small business, both as providing the means to execute
functions that they are ill-equipped to do as a traditional IT
organization would, especially in the area of cyber security
defense, cloud computing, and specifically what we call
Software as a Service allows a service-based capability to
provide security solutions to a small business.
In our submitted testimony, we gave an example where the
City of Kenosha with an IT staff of three is able to use a
cloud-based solution to provide email protection for all of its
government workers, and I think that is a good example of how
cloud technology can be a key asset to small business.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Berger, many small businesses have been quite critical
of the high interchange fees charged by credit card issuers. We
have seen or we have been told that these fees were needed to
cover not only the cost of processing transactions but also to
cover the cost of fraud, theft, and data breaches. With the
U.S. scheduled to move to the more secure chip and pin
technology in October, do you expect interchange fees to come
down?
Mr. BERGER. Interchange fees were created before it was
capped, to create the rails, to invest in the rails and the
technology, as well as for fraud recoupment. Now that there is
a cap on interchange fees, that is not the case for fraud
prevention. And so I do not think the interchange fees will go
down because there is no recoupment for financial institutions
any longer with the cap.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. McCracken, it is often hard to persuade small firms to
spend money without seeing an immediate return. So what do you
think we need to do in order to get more small businesses to
understand the importance of investing in cyber security ?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Well, there are a number of different
fronts. One is on the credit card front, I think when they
start seeing more chip-based cards, many more of them will
begin investing in readers to use them rather than the other
way around, which is unfortunately the way it seems to have
been pursued so far. And on larger cyber security, I think
education is everything. And I think that larger companies who
do business with smaller companies have a significant role to
play in helping and educating them figure out how to implement
some of these services. And also, education on the
implications, because it is true that one mistake from a small
company can be devastating for them.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time is
expired.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Hanna, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Subcontracting and Workforce is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you all for being here. And thank you,
chairman.
I want to ask about not just responsibility to protect
one's system but liability as to moves across what the staff
calls like a chain. The Internet is comprised of technology
links that are dependent upon each other. Is it incumbent upon
a bigger organization to help a smaller organization? And what
do you see for the future of that? Because clearly, the
perception of risk vis-a-vis liability varies across
industries, and willingness to provide support to protect
oneself varies on the individual and their means. So, so much
of this is subjective, yet because of its interconnectedness,
it is all critical.
So Mr. Grobman, you talked about the cloud and how that
offers. If everybody would like to speak to that, if that is a
fair question.
Mr. GROBMAN. Sure. I think it is key for large enterprise
to understand the implications that a breach to a small
business supply chain or supplier would have, and there are key
steps large business can take to help small businesses in this
manner. One key example is advocacy and linkage to things like
the cyber security framework as a part of supplier guidelines.
Mr. HANNA. You say advocacy. What about demand? I mean,
there must be a point at which somebody says if you do not do
this, we cannot do business with you.
Mr. GROBMAN. Sure. I think understanding the risk profile
of a supplier is a reasonable thing for a large business to do,
and having a common language to understand and describe risk is
something that the cyber security framework can help
facilitate. So I think it is those sorts of communication
interactions can help large business assess the risk of using
various suppliers.
Mr. HANNA. How do you feel about that, Mr. McCracken, being
a representative of small businesses, being demanded to do
that?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Well, on the one hand I think that is a way
forward because that, as I discussed before, the supply chain
issues are real and we have to have ways of both educating and
also helping those smaller companies by giving them incentives
beyond--maybe something might happen later, which we are facing
now.
Mr. HANNA. Yeah, punitive stuff.
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I think the danger to keep in mind is that
what you do when you do that is you begin to restrict some of
those possibilities for companies that are trying to grow,
because if you do not--if what we are already seeing is larger
companies saying, look, if you do not have X capabilities, do
not even send us--do not even apply to do business with us. I
think that is a mistake, because what you are going to see is
larger and larger companies all working together. What I would
like to see is for those companies to put in standards that
once you are a vendor of ours, here is how we are going to work
together to get you to this point. That, I think, would be much
more productive and really help smaller companies grow to the
point they need to be.
Mr. HANNA. Mr. Berger?
Mr. BERGER. As part of Gramm-Leach-Bliley's implementation
rules, we are required to ensure that third-party vendors are
up to speed and the NCOA examines for that.
Mr. HANNA. Ms. LeClair?
Ms. LECLAIR. I do not disagree with anything that the other
folks have said. What I do see as very difficult for small
businesses and any organization to know what to use and coming
from a commercial nuclear power background, it was not until
the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations came into being that
there was an organization that fully structured what was
happening in that industry. So in some ways, yes, I agree, and
in others I see that you need some definitive, as you said,
organization to make that happen.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you.
Mr. Grobman, I have a minute and a few seconds here. I want
to ask about mobile devices.
Mr. GROBMAN. Sure.
Mr. HANNA. Given the ubiquitous nature of that, how do you
deal with that?
Mr. GROBMAN. I think mobile devices are both a key benefit
in cyber security. They have been developed more recently and
have had the opportunity to redesign the underlying software
architecture to put individual applications into sandboxes. So
I think that is a very positive aspect.
The flip side of it though is mobile devices are also
generally more closed where the security industry has
challenges in looking at the information of what is going on on
a mobile device. So when we look at a modern way to do
detection of an advanced attack, it is really about
understanding the data that is coming out of your environment
as far as different events, and the mobile devices do not lend
themselves very well to that. So mobile is still a fairly new
area relative to other capabilities and is something we are
looking at very closely.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you very much.
My time is expired.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
expired.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Velazquez. And thank you to the speakers for your
insightful remarks.
And, of course, this is a critical issue and I think about
collaboration as I think about this. And my question, Dr.
LeClair, to you, are credit unions and community banks working
hand-in-hand with the small business industry to develop the
financial resources that help protect the assets of small
businesses as well as the investments of financial firms from
the effects of a cyber attack?
Ms. LECLAIR. Are they working, was that your question?
Ms. ADAMS. Yes. Yes. I mean, is there a collaboration in
terms of the banks and the businesses?
Ms. LECLAIR. Yes. The collaboration that is out there is
what we need to have and continue to have in order to be able
to not only be prepared but to recover.
Ms. ADAMS. Is it working, in your opinion?
Ms. LECLAIR. I think that we have a ways to go still.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. All right
Protecting the businesses, of course, is crucial, but it is
also costly, especially when we talk about small businesses.
And most of the insurance that small businesses have does not
actually cover cyber attacks. What can we do to encourage that?
Ms. LECLAIR. Again, from the standpoint of if you are
talking cyber insurance----
Ms. ADAMS. Right. And investing in it.
Ms. LECLAIR. And investing, yes, I do not think that small
businesses really have any clear understanding of cyber
insurance and what the capabilities are for them. I think it is
a new area that is being developed. One of the reasons we are
writing a book is to be able to give that to small businesses
so they can understand what the options are out there for them
and what they can expect from it.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you.
Mr. McCracken, can you comment on it?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Well, I do think it is worth noting that
many very small companies are run by people who, you know, they
are at the nexus of the individual and the business world. They
see--these are very small companies I am talking about now--as
extensions of themselves. And they are often very surprised to
find out that their business bank accounts do not have the same
kinds of protections that a consumer or personal account might
have. And so when they are the victim of some sort of fishing
scheme and their money is just gone, they initially often
expect, well, I will go to the bank and we will get this fixed,
like I know my neighbor did. And in fact, if it is a business
account, that is simply not the case in many cases because they
operate under different standards and they have different
levels of protection. So I think that is something that we may
need to address. And it is certainly something that we need to
educate more small companies about in the first place because
they do not understand it.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. I was going to follow up with a question
about the technological sophistication that was necessary, and
I think you have probably answered that.
But Mr. Grobman, would you like to comment?
Mr. GROBMAN. Sure. I think one of the important things on
the education side for small business is we can simplify some
of the critical questions to something every small business can
understand whether they are running security operations for
themselves or relying on others. Even simply asking the
questions of how would I be able to detect if a breach has
occurred and what would my plan be to get back to a known good
state after a breach, those are things that I think,
unfortunately, many small businesses do not think about. They
understand the threat of cyber security is real but they are
maniacally focused on protecting without thinking about the
other elements. And I think just the simple education things
are key things that we need to do as a partnership.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Mr. Berger would you comment, please?
Mr. BERGER. Yes, ma'am. We completely agree. I think
education is a very important component because some of the
cyber experts, when they are looking at it from a forensic
standpoint, they say 80 percent of credit card fraud and data
breaches could be prevented by some simple things that the
chairman actually talked about--updating the patches, doing the
downloads that are necessary, and changing your passwords on a
regular basis. Something like 80 percent of those breaches
could be stopped. So it is an education component for that as
well.
Ms. ADAMS. Proactive?
Mr. BERGER. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back. And I
apologize for having to leave. I had to change my password.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Hardy, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Investigations Oversight and Regulations
is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Grobman, you mentioned that small and medium businesses
are just as vulnerable to the same as the sophisticated cyber
security threats as large corporations. Although small
businesses are vulnerable as large corporations, do you think
that the susceptible threats to emphasize or do you believe
that the cyber criminals are only targeting small business
because they know that they do not have cyber security ? Or
would these cyber security criminals only focus on the large
corporations due to their financial benefit?
Mr. GROBMAN. I think what we see is adversaries go after
targets that will most effectively meet their objectives. If
their objective is to generate money, they will look at is it
more valuable to breach a large company and steal a mega
database or target many small businesses and breach many of
them? And I think we see both happening per the data that we
cite. So it is not `` one size fits all'' and that is one of
the reasons why it is critical that all organizations think
about cyber security because it is really about the objectives
of the adversary.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you.
Mr. McCracken, with that being said, you mentioned that the
EMV will be costly to small businesses for replacing that
equipment and training for the employees on how to use that. I
understand your concern for that small business owner, these
costs, but do you not believe that the cost is insignificant in
comparison to the loss to the consumer and the potential that
it may impact that small business in maybe losing business
competition by not implementing those standards?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Well, what is going to go into place October
1st is a shift in liability. So if they do not have a chip card
reader and that kind of card comes in and it is fraudulent,
they are on the hook rather than the issuing bank. Our point
was there are many small companies that simply do not have the
kind of customer base where they are subject to that kind of
fraud. If you are a deli and all you are selling are sandwiches
and sodas on credit cards, the odds that someone is going to
take a stolen credit card number and come in to your shop and
buy a whole bunch of sandwiches is probably pretty remote.
Also, if you know all your customers personally, then you are
probably not at very much risk for that fraud. But if you sell
high-dollar electronics or jewelry and you do not know who your
customers are, you had better switch to the EMV system as soon
as possible because you are going to be on the hook for those.
That is really our point. But we want to get to the point
really where mag stripe cards do not exist at all anymore. We
think that really is the ultimate solution because right now we
have these kinds of cards that are very easy to put fraudulent
data on and go out and use, and so long as those exist, we
think cyber criminals are going to find ways to get that day,
if not this way, then that way. And we can patch this and it
will pop up over here. We have got to get to a point where we
have only chip-based cards.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you.
Mr. Berger, I appreciate your statement when you just
stated that cyber security is everybody's responsibility. I
believe that is the truth. Also, you state that the United
States Government is identifying malicious actions in their
networks and preparing to monitor program that strengthen their
areas. I guess the question is, the private sector, you see the
expansion and the growth of things like Life Lock and other
businesses growing out of this challenge that we are having to
help the small businesses, or will that be a benefit at all to
them?
Mr. BERGER. I think any improvement in technology that
prevents cyber fraud is fantastic and it is welcomed. But when
you have the entire payment ecosystem, if you have the
financial institutions, the payment processors, the payment
networks all doing a pretty darn good job in protecting
people's personal and financial data, the cyber criminals
attack the weakest component of that ecosystem. And so from our
standpoint, we still think there needs to be a national
standard at a minimum, not on an equal basis but on a flexible
basis because I am not talking about the small mom and pops
where you get your Yoo-Hoos and your Slim Jims from, but some
of the larger retails, it is flexible and it should be
scalable, but there needs to be some set standard to hold
people accountable for that kind of stuff.
But back to your original question, we do like technology
and we welcome any technology that prevents the bad guys from
winning.
Mr. HARDY. And I guess my last question maybe to one or all
of you is just what are we doing together as a collaborative
group here, along with the federal government, to assure this
can happen in a quick, safe manner, because expediency is of
real importance.
Ms. LECLAIR. I think from going back to the original
question, we keep going to the 10 percent. If you think of the
90/10 rule where 90 percent of the issues revolve around
people, we focus a lot of our time on the 10 percent, which is
the technology. So I think we have to continue to think of the
90 percent and how we are going to educate people because they
are in every piece and part of what we talk about.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
Did any other witnesses want to answer that?
Mr. Berger?
Mr. BERGER. Yeah. Just real quickly.
This being Washington, D.C., there are probably 35
coalitions working on this issue right now here, so. There is a
collaborative effort amongst merchants, financial institutions,
as well as the payment networks.
Chairman CHABOT. That is great to hear. Thank you. Thank
you very much.
The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Meng, is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. MENG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
witnesses for being here and helping us learn more about this
newer and important topic.
My question is in relation to the SBA and many of the
resource centers and locations that they have throughout the
U.S., and particularly in my home county and borough of Queens,
New York. What more can the SBA do, whether it is training,
increasing awareness? And are there any incentives, financial
incentives that might be helpful for small businesses to
encourage them to have these plans in place?
Anyone can answer.
Ms. LECLAIR. I can start out. I think one of the things
that we could work on is perhaps grants for small businesses in
order to upgrade their security and train their staff. Those
would be a quick start to get us there.
Mr. GROBMAN. I think one of the other things is the very
nature of cyber security is that it changes very rapidly and it
is very difficult to use static policies to really resolve the
core issues. The SBA has a strong relationship with small
business and it is structured well to comprehend the rapid
change in the evolving landscape. And looking at it from that
perspective may be a key area of focus.
Mr. BERGER. And if I may add, the SBA actually has done a
pretty good job in creating recently some workshops and modules
in small business that deal specifically with cyber and data
security and do some of the components to protect their
business.
Ms. MENG. Do you think there are additional measures that
the SBA or federal government can take in addition to what they
are already doing? Maybe working or collaborating with law
enforcement? Is that something we should see more of in
relation to small businesses?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. One suggestion I have is actually is helping
us to sharpen the focus on the problem because, of course, when
you talk about it today, when we say small business, we are
talking about all different kinds of companies in various
stages of development, different supply chains, different
industries, different access to data. I really think that one
role some centralized agency, perhaps the SBA could play is to
try to define the nature of various threats and the kinds of
companies that might face them the most and try to figure out
how we can focus our efforts. Instead of saying outreach to
small business, let us talk about what do we need to do with
this type of retailer or someone who has access to health
records. And I think we really have to get much more specific
about the kinds of approaches that we need to use, and the SBA
might be able to help with that.
Ms. MENG. And just lastly, in terms of just curious, can
you tell if a lot of these attacks are coming more from
international or domestic? Does that have an effect on the kind
of attacks?
Mr. GROBMAN. I think we see attacks coming from all facets,
and I think the thing that we do see is regardless of whether
an attack is coming from an origin that is domestic or
international, they are using the same playbook. So the way
that we ultimately defend against cyber security issues I think
will be less about where they originate than what they are
actually trying to achieve.
Mr. BERGER. We are seeing the same thing. They do not
discriminate. The cyber criminals will attack from anywhere.
Ms. MENG. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back. And the
gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Lawrence, is recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. LAWRENCE. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to our
ranking member as well.
Over 250 credit unions have their headquarters in my state
of Michigan, and more than 4.5 Michiganders have membership in
these credit unions. I want to thank the credit union
representatives for making sure that my staff and I clearly
understand the challenges you face in the event of data
security for no fault of your own.
Mr. Berger, what are data breaches costing credit unions,
and have these costs been increasing? And what do these cost
impacts have on credit unions to provide services to their
members?
Mr. BERGER. For just the Home Depot breach alone was $30
million, and you combine Target and all the other breaches in
2014, it is close to $80 million it hit credit unions. And what
happens is that we rarely get any reimbursement for those
recouped losses. And so what we are calling for is some kind of
national standard that holds people accountable for those
breaches.
And we talked about shifting to EMV and chip technology and
that is a really important component, but it is not a panacea.
That will prevent credit card fraud, but going to EMV or chip
technology would not have stopped any of the Target or Home
Depot breaches whatsoever. And so it is really important to
separate credit card fraud from data breaches, and we need to
address data breaches and make sure it is a level playing
field. Because I had mentioned earlier, when you look at the
payment ecosystem, the cyber criminals attack the weakest
component of it, and so if everybody is doing their job and
everybody is responsible for cyber and data security, everybody
has to be on that level playing field and doing their part.
Ms. LAWRENCE. Well, I look forward to working with the
chair and the ranking member, as well as my fellow members of
Congress. I just left a briefing, the issue of cyber security
and I thank you for understanding that we need to look at data
breaches as well as a separate entity. And I just look forward
to joining with you to address this issue.
I thank all the individuals who are here today to testify.
Thank you so much, and I yield back the rest of my time. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And in lieu of a second round, having discussed this with
the ranking member, we have just one question I think we both
jointly would like to ask the panel and you can respond in any
way that you would like to.
Chairman McCaul, who is chair of the Homeland Security
Committee has legislation which will be coming to the floor
tomorrow, so it was very timely, the Small Business Committee
looking at the aspects of how cyber attacks affect small
businesses, so it was very timely to have you all here today
because we are going to be voting on legislation that is
somewhat relevant this week, tomorrow. The legislation seeks to
strengthen the National Cyber security and Communications
Integration Center's role as the lead civilian interface for
the sharing of cyber security risks and incidents. It also aims
to preserve existing public-private partnerships to ensure
ongoing collaboration on cyber security .
I will just start with you, Mr. Grobman, and we just go
down the line, do you want to comment?
Mr. GROBMAN. Yes, I would.
I think one very important aspect to comprehend is that
sharing of information is one aspect of what is needed for an
effective cyber defense. Getting data from global threat
intelligence, sharing between entities, but also very important
is the data that is local to the organization, and combining
all of those types of data together in an analytical capability
to determine when a breach is underway and be able to react
quickly is critical. I do become concerned that there is a
focus on just one of the elements around data sharing being the
thing that will make things go away. It is as much about
looking at the data we have more effectively than just
collecting more data.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. McCracken, did you want to comment?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Not at length, but I would generally agree
with Mr. Grobman's remarks. And the bill seems, I think,
positive, and a step in the right direction. But obviously, it
will not be a panacea, but it will certainly help. Information
for small companies is useful but we have got to actually give
them a lot more direction on how to use that information as
well.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mr. Berger?
Mr. BERGER. Yes, Mr. Chairman, we do support the
legislation, but we think there needs to be really three key
components to be successful in all this cyber and data
security. One is the sharing of information. Two is
notification. And three, we still think there needs to be a
national standard for retailers and merchants. We need to make
sure there is a level playing field and everybody is doing
their part in holding folks accountable.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And Dr. LeClair?
Ms. LECLAIR. I think that goes back to my earlier comment
where I talked about the nuclear industry where you have a
central entity that looks at lessons learned, what is
happening, identifying that; notification to other
organizations within that area; and then standards were created
there. So those are the three things, very similar to what you
were talking about. So a very similar comment.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And I know the ranking member and I would like to thank our
witnesses for their participation today.
I ask unanimous consent that members have five legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.

[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Good afternoon. My thanks to Chairman Chabot, Ranking
Member Velazquez and the members of the Small Business
Committee for inviting me to testify today on the impact of
cybersecurity and credit card fraud issues on the health and
growth potential of millions of small businesses.

My name is Todd McCracken, and I am President and CEO of
the National Small Business Association (NSBA)--the nation's
first small-business advocacy organization. NSBA is a uniquely
member-driven and staunchly nonpartisan organization. NSBA has
members in all sectors and industries of the U.S. economy from
retail to trade to technology--our members are as diverse as
the economy that they fuel. Small employers comprise 99.7
percent of all employer firms in the U.S. One in two workers in
the private workforce run or work for a small business, and one
in four individuals in the total U.S. population is part of the
small-business community. Those are certainly impressive
figures.

In the last few years, cybersecurity has emerged as a
significant problem and concern for the small-business
community. By the end of 2014, according to NSBA's Year-End
Economic Report, fully half of small businesses reported having
been the victim of a cyber-attack (up from 44 percent in 2013).
Of those, 61 percent say an attack had occurred within the last
year.

Cyber-Attacks on Small Businesses are Becoming More
Prevalent

While a 14 percent increase in the number of small-business
victims of a cyber-attack is significant, we believe the real
story is the increasing impact those attacks are having on
small businesses, in terms of both the interruption of normal
business operations and the direct financial cost of the
attack.

In 2013, only 12 percent of businesses reported that
resolution of the cyber-attack required more than one week; by
late 2014, more than one in five such attacks were still
unresolved after one week, with 13 percent of them requiring
more than two weeks. Three in five businesses experienced a
service interruption, and a third had their websites go down
for some period.

Small Companies Have Fewer Resources to Deal with Cyber-
Attacks

Many small companies are not in a position to have a
dedicated IT department, and many either outsource IT functions
or assign such duties to an employee with other
responsibilities--often the owner him/herself. In fact, the
number of business owners who personally handle IT support
appears to be on the rise. When we asked in 2010, 25 percent of
business owners indicated that they were primarily responsible
for IT support in their companies, while a larger number (36
percent) said they contracted with an outside vendor. By 2013,
those numbers had essentially reversed, with 40 percent of
business owners handling IT personally and only 24 percent
indicating that they outsourced the function.

In the case of an outsourced IT function, a very small
business might not be high on the IT firm's priority list of
clients, even though such a firm is more likely to have the
experience and technical expertise to resolve the issue
quickly. In the case of in-house functionality, new issues
might require research and training, making mistakes and delays
more likely. In either scenario, dealing with the technical
side of a cyber-attack presents unique challenges to our
smallest companies.

Cyber-Attacks are Becoming Much more Costly

Perhaps the most startling finding of our most recent
cybersecurity data was the sharp increase in the direct
financial cost of cyber-crime on small companies. Of those
companies reporting some kind of cyber-attack, the average
amount of money stolen from a bank account rose from $6,927 in
2013 to $19,948 by late 2014, a 188 percent increase in a short
amount of time.

This dramatic increase in stolen funds appears to be
related to a sharp rise in the incidence and sophistication of
so-called phishing scams. These scams send emails closely
mimicking those of banks or other trusted institutions and
citing an urgent need to login to an account or provide some
other vital information. Small businesses are particularly
vulnerable to these attacks, since multiple employees could
have access to vital information. Further, business accounts do
not enjoy the same level of protections and guarantees against
loss and theft as those provided to consumers--a reality that
many small-business owners do not discover until it is too
late. Consumers are protected by Regulation E, which
dramatically limits their liability in a cyber-heist.
Commercial accounts, however, are covered by the Uniform
Commercial Code (UCC). The UCC does not hold banks liable for
unauthorized payments so long as ``the security procedure is a
commercially reasonable method of providing security...'' Few
small businesses that are the victims of theft from their bank
accounts ever recover those funds.

According to Verizon's 2015 Data Breach Investigations
Report, phishing has increased dramatically in just the last
four years, having gone from about 2 percent of cyber-attacks
in 2010 to over 20 percent in 2014. Moreover, these phishing
attacks have become much more sophisticated, with a high degree
of verisimilitude. Small companies need to engage in ongoing
employee training to recognize and avoid these dangerous traps.

Credit Card Fraud and Small Businesses

Various forms of credit card fraud have been part of our
financial landscape for some time. However, the increased
technical prowess of cyber-thieves--and the continued
prevalence of magnetic stripe cards--has taken credit card
fraud to heightened levels. The U.S. finally appears to be
taking significant steps toward the introduction chip (EMV)
enabled cards, or so-called chip and PIN cards.

Liability Shift

As EMV cards begin to enter the U.S. market, the credit
card issuers will begin to shift liability for card fraud to
the entity with the lowest level of security. The practical
effect of this rule--effective Oct. 1, 2015--is that merchants
will, for the first time, become liable for fraudulent card use
if they have not upgraded to the latest EMV card reader
technology and software.

This move to EMV means that millions of countertop card
readers will need to be replaced. The change is also likely to
mean new software and a need for employee training. Therefore,
since the transition will both be expensive and time-consuming,
smaller merchants should carefully consider whether the shift
to EMV card readers makes sense for their businesses, at least
for now.

Merchants who sell low-priced goods and consumables, for
instance, are unlikely to be targets for credit card fraud, so
they are unlikely to see their potential liabilities
significantly rise as a result of the shift. However, merchants
that sell more expensive goods with strong re-sale value (e.g.,
electronics, jewelry), and who do not know their customers
well, have a higher incentive to move to EMV card readers.
Small businesses should carefully examine their own ``charge-
back'' history to determine whether the investment in the new
technology and processes makes sense for them at this time.

Hastening the Transition to a More Secure EMV Environment

Besides a general lack of awareness of the liability shift
issue, there are two other major reasons that smaller merchants
have not generally made the switch to EMV card readers:

1. Card issuers are not offering reduced interchange
fees for merchants using EMV care readers, despite
promised reduction of fraud resulting in their use.
Given that card issuers have long blamed fraud as a
prime cause for high interchange fees, merchants will
naturally expect that EMV implementation will drive
down those fees.

2. Card issuers have not yet made their own
transition to EMV cards. Until smaller merchants see a
market demand (in the form of their customers using
chip-enabled cards), they are unlikely to move quickly
to accommodate a non-existing demand.

Stepped-up issuance of EMV-enabled cards, combined with the
eventual elimination of magnetic-stripe cards altogether is the
only logical path toward a significant and lasting reduction in
card-based fraud, at least for ``card-present'' transactions.

Recommendations

Cybersecurity is a large and growing threat to the small-
business community. NSBA urges Congress to move forward on
establishing streamlined guidelines and protocols to ensure the
protection and security of online data and financials, but
cautious against a knee-jerk reaction that would unfairly place
a disproportionate burden on America's smallest firms:

Legislation to enhance America's
cybersecurity should provide clear, simple steps for
companies to follow when their data is breached and
must balance the need for greater information sharing
with privacy rights.

Any federal discussion on cybersecurity or
development of a private-public partnership or advisory
board must include representatives of small business.

Extend consumer banking protections to the
banking accounts held by America's smallest firms.

Congress should maintain oversight on the
credit card technology transition and ensure small
firms are protected against any unfair or seriously
burdensome costs or liabilities associated with
transitioning to the new technology.

Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I
hope that we can work with each of you as we advance to
solutions to the significant cybersecurity issues before us.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T4346.018

Introduction

Good Morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez and
Members of the Committee. My name is Dan Berger and I am
testifying today on behalf of the National Association of
Federal Credit Unions (NAFCU) where I serve as President and
CEO.

Credit unions and their 100 million members have been
heavily impacted by ongoing data security breaches by no fault
of their own and I greatly appreciate the opportunity to
testify before the committee today on cyber and data security.
More can and must be done to better protect consumers. As
NAFCU's chief advocate on Capitol Hill, at the White House, and
before the regulatory agencies, I know firsthand how important
yet complicated this issue is for policy makers to navigate.

Over the past 25 years I have worked in public policy and
in a variety of business management positions. I earned a
Master's degree in public administration from Harvard
University and a bachelor's degree in economics from Florida
State. Before joining NAFCU's executive team in 2006, I served
as a chief-of-staff in the United State House of
Representatives. I was named NAFCU's President and CEO in
August, 2013.

As you are aware, NAFCU is the only national organization
exclusively representing the interests of the nation's
federally-chartered credit unions. NAFCU-member credit unions
collectively account for approximately 70 percent of the assets
of all federally chartered credit unions.

Background on Credit Unions

Historically, credit unions have served a unique function
in the delivery of essential financial services to American
consumers. Established by an Act of Congress in 1934, the
federal credit union system was created, and has been
recognized, as a way to promote thrift and to make financial
services available to all Americans, many of whom may otherwise
have limited access to financial services. Congress established
credit unions as an alternative to banks and to meet a precise
public need--a niche that credit unions still fill today.

Every credit union, regardless of size, is a cooperative
institution organized ``for the purpose of promoting thrift
among its members and creating a source of credit for provident
or productive purposes.'' (12 USC 1752(1)). While over 80 years
have passed since the Federal Credit Union Act (FCUA) was
signed into law, two fundamental principles regarding the
operation of credit unions remain every bit as important today
as in 1934:

credit unions remains wholly committed to
providing their members with efficient, low-cost,
personal financial services; and,

credit unions continue to emphasize
traditional cooperative values such as democracy and
volunteerism.

Credit unions are small businesses themselves, especially
when compared to our nation's mega banks and largest retailers,
facing challenges of meeting the products and service needs of
their community, while dealing with various laws and
regulations.

Credit Unions and Data Security

My testimony today will cover what credit unions currently
do to have a successful track record of protecting information.
NAFCU's work on the cyber security and data security front, how
recent data breaches hae impacted credit unions and consumers,
including the financial burdens they have faced, and NAFCU's
principles for data security reform and thoughts on some of the
ways forward on this issue.

As members of the committee are well aware, cyber and data
crime has reached epic proportions in nearly all sectors of the
economy. Symantec's 2015 Internet Security Threat Report
characterized 2014 as a year with ``far-reaching
vulnerabilities, faster attacks, files held for ransom and far
more malicious code than in previous years.'' According to the
report, more than 317 million new pieces of malware were
created in 2014 and breaches were up 23 percent from 2013.
While large companies across all sectors are still a prime
target, 60 percent of all targeted attacks struck small and
medium-sized companies last year.

The U.S. government is also constantly working to identify
malicious actions within their networks. Earlier this year the
Department of Homeland Security's Office of Cybersecurity and
Communication announced that a network monitoring program will
fully cover the government by the end of fiscal year 2016
through the Einstein program used to strengthen perimeter
defenses and the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program
designed to better detect hacker's once systems have already
been penetrated.

NAFCU supports comprehensive data and cyber security
measures to protect consumers' personal data. Credit unions and
other financial institutions already protect data consistent
with the provisions of the 1999 Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA).
Unfortunately, there is no comprehensive regulatory structure
similar to what was put in place for financial institutions
under GLBA for other entities that may handle sensitive
personal and financial data.

In today's digital economy, cybersecurity poses a threat to
businesses of all sizes, individual consumers, and even
national security through our government's critical
infrastructure. From the financial services perspective, cyber
security and data security are inextricably linked--both
require the entire payments ecosystem to take an active role in
addressing emerging threats, and both require all players to be
proactive in protecting consumers personally identifiable and
financial information from the onset.

As will be discussed in my testimony, credit unions have
been able to successfully minimize emerging threats and data
breaches. Still, consumers unwittingly put themselves at risk
every time they swipe their debit or credit card. Given the
magnitude of the many recent data breaches and the sheer number
of consumers impacted, policy makers have a clear bipartisan
opening to ensure all players in the payments system have a
meaningful federal data safekeeping standard to help prevent
breaches from occurring.

This hearing is an important one as we are at a critical
juncture in the cyber and data security discussion on Capitol
Hill. On behalf of NAFCU and our member credit unions, I
appreciate the opportunity to be here today.

Financial Institutions and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act

GLBA and its implementing regulations have successfully
limited data breaches among financial institutions and this
standard has a proven track record of success since its
enactment in 1999. This record of success is why we believe any
future requirements must recognize this existing national
standard for financial institutions such as credit unions.

Consistent with Section 501 of the GLBA, the National
Credit Union Administration (NCUA) established administrative,
technical and physical safeguards to ensure the (1) security,
(2) confidentiality, (3) integrity, (4) and proper disposal of
consumer information and other records. Under the rules
promulgated by the NCUA, every credit union must develop and
maintain an information security program to protect customer
data. Additionally, the rules require third party service
providers that have access to credit union data take
appropriate steps to protect the security and confidentiality
of the information.

GLBA and its implementing regulations have successfully
limited data breaches among credit unions. The best way to move
forward and address data breaches is to create a comprehensive
regulatory scheme for those industries that are not already
subject to oversight. At the same time, the oversight of credit
unions, banks and other financial institutions is best left to
the functional financial institution regulators that have
experience in this field. It would be redundant at best and
possibly counter-productive to authorize any agency--other than
the functional financial institution regulators--to promulgate
new, and possibly duplicative or contradictory, data security
regulations for financial institutions already in compliance
with GLBA.

Below, I outline the key elements, requirements and
definitions of the GLBA. Specifically, the GLBA:

Requires financial institutions to establish
privacy policies and disclose them annually to their
customers, setting forth how the institution shares
nonpublic personal financial information with
affiliates and third parties.

Directs regulators to establish regulatory
standards that ensure the security and confidentiality
of customer information.

Permits customers to prohibit financial
institutions from disclosing personal financial
information to non-affiliated third parties.

Prohibits the transfer of credit card or
other account numbers to third-party marketers.

Prohibits pretext calling, which generally
is the use of false pretenses to obtain nonpublic
personal information about an institution's customers.

Protects stronger state privacy laws and
those not inconsistent with these federal rules.

Requires the U.S. Department of Treasury and
other federal regulators to study the appropriateness
of sharing information with affiliates, including
considering both negative and positive aspects of such
sharing for consumers.

Sensitive Consumer Information

Sensitive consumer information is defined as a member's
name, address, or telephone number in conjunction with the
member's social security number, driver's license number,
account number, credit or debit card number, or personal
identification number or password that would permit access to
the member's account. Sensitive consumer information also
includes any combination of components of consumer information
that would allow someone to log into or access the member's
account, such as user name and password or password and account
number. Under the guidelines, an institution must protect
against unauthorized access to or use of consumer information
that could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to any
consumer.

Unauthorized Access to Consumer Information

The agencies published guidance to interpret privacy
provisions of GLBA and interagency guidelines establishing
information security standards. The guidance describes response
programs, including member notification procedures, that a
financial institution should develop and implement to address
unauthorized access to or use of consumer information that
could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to a member.

The security guidelines require every financial institution
to have an information security program designed to:

Ensure the security and confidentiality of
consumer information;

Protect against any anticipated threats or
hazards to the security or integrity of such
information; and,

Protect against unauthorized access to or
use of such information that could result in
substantial harm or inconvenience to a member.

Risk Assessment and Controls

The security guidelines direct every financial institution
to assess the following risks, among others, when developing
its information security program:

Reasonably foreseeable internal and external
threats that could result in unauthorized disclosure,
misuse, alteration, or destruction of consumer
information or consumer information systems;

The likelihood and potential damage of
threats, taking into consideration the sensitivity of
consumer information; and,

The sufficiency of policies, procedures,
consumer information systems, and other arrangements to
control for the risks to sensitive data.

Following the assessment of these risks, the security
guidelines require a financial institution to design a program
to address the identified risks. The particular security
measures an institution should adopt depend upon the risks
presented by the complexity and scope of its business. This is
a critical aspect of GLBA that allows flexibility and ensures
the regulatory framework is workable for the largest and
smallest in the financial service arena. As the committee
considers cyber and data security measures, it should be noted
that scalability is achievable and that it is a misnomer when
other industries claim they cannot have a federal data
safekeeping standard that could work across a sector of varying
size businesses.

At a minimum, the financial institution is required to
consider the specific security measures enumerated in the
Security Guidelines, and adopt those that are appropriate for
the institution, including:

Access controls on consumer information
systems, including controls to authenticate and permit
access only to authorized individuals and controls to
prevent employees from providing consumer information
to unauthorized individuals who may seek to obtain this
information through fraudulent means;

Background checks for employees with
responsibilities for access to consumer information;

Response programs that specify actions to be
taken when the financial institution suspects or
detects that unauthorized individuals have gained
access to consumer information systems, including
appropriate reports to regulatory and law enforcement
agencies;

Train staff to implement the credit union's
information security program; and,

Regularly test the key controls, systems and
procedures of the information security program. The
frequency and nature of such tests should be determined
by the credit union's risk assessment. Tests should be
conducted or reviewed by independent third parties or
staff independent of those that develop or maintain the
security programs.''

Service Providers

The security guidelines direct every financial institution
to require its service providers through contract to implement
appropriate measures designed to protect against unauthorized
access to, or use of, consumer information that could result in
substantial harm or inconvenience to any consumer.

Third-party providers are very popular for many reasons,
most frequently associated with cost-savings/overhead
reduction. However, where costs may be saved for overhead
purposes, they may be added for audit purposes. Because audits
typically are annual or semi-annual events, cost savings may
still be realized but the risk associated with outsourcing must
be managed regardless of cost. In order to manage risks, they
must first be identified.

An institution that chooses to use a third-party provider
for the purposes of information systems-related functions must
recognize that it must ensure adequate levels of controls so
the institution does not suffer the negative impact of such
weaknesses.

Response Program

Every financial institution must develop and implement a
risk-based response program to address incidents of
unauthorized access to consumer information. A response program
should be a key part of an institution's information security
program. The program should be appropriate to the size and
complexity of the institution and the nature and scope of its
activities.

In addition, each institution should be able to address
incidents of unauthorized access to consumer information in
consumer information systems maintained by its service
providers. Where an incident of unauthorized access to consumer
information involves consumer information systems maintained by
an institution's service providers, it is the responsibility of
the financial institution to notify the institution's consumers
and regulator. However, an institution may authorize or
contract with its service provider to notify the institution's
consumers or regulator on its behalf.

Consumer Notice

Timely notification to members after a security incident
involving the unauthorized access or use of their information
is important to manage an institution's reputation risk.
Effective notice may also mitigate an institution's legal risk,
assist in maintaining good consumer relations, and enable the
institution's members to take steps to protect themselves
against the consequences of identity theft.

Content of Consumer Notice

Consumer notice should be given in a clear and conspicuous
manner. The notice should describe the incident in general
terms and the type of consumer information that was the subject
of unauthorize4d access or use. It should also generally
describe what the institution has done to protect consumers'
information from further unauthorized access. In addition it
should include a telephone number that members can call for
further information assistance. The notice should also remind
members of the need to remain vigilant over the next 12 to 24
months, and to promptly report incidents of suspected fraud or
identity theft to the institution.

Delivery of Consumer Notice

Notice should be delivered in any manner designed to ensure
that a consumer can reasonably be expected to receive it.

NAFCU's Work in Various Cyber and Data Security Initiatives

NAFCU has been an active participant in various industry
and government cyber and data security initiatives, doubling
down these efforts as data breaches continue to rise and
innovations in payments technology make the entire ecosystem
more complex for financial institutions and consumers.

Specific to payments, NAFCU is a member of the Payments
Security Task Force, a diverse group of participants in the
payments industry that is driving a discussion relative to
systems security. NAFCU also supports many of the ongoing
efforts at the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council
(FSSCC) and the Financial Services Information Sharing and
Analysis Center (FS-ISAC). These organizations work closely
with partners throughout the government creating unique
information sharing relationships that allow threat information
to be distributed in a timely manner.

NAFCU also worked with the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) on the voluntary cybersecurity framework
released in 2013 designed to help guide financial institutions
of varying size and complexity through the process of reducing
cyber risks to critical infrastructure. The recommendations are
designed to evolve and will be updated to keep pace with
changes in technology and threats.

Earlier this year, I also had the opportunity to attend
President Barack Obama's White House Summit on Cybersecurity
and Consumer Protection at Stanford University which featured
leaders from across the country--industry, tech companies, law
enforcement, consumer and privacy advocates, law professors who
specialize in this field, and students--to collaborate and
explore partnerships that will help develop the best ways to
bolster cybersecurity. Credit unions continue to pursue greater
data security through innovation.

During the Summit, NAFCU-member First Tech Federal Credit
Union's recent partnership with MasterCard in the area of card
security was announced. First Tech is innovative in this area
and will implement a new pilot program later this year that
will allow consumers to authenticate and verify their
transactions using a combination of unique biometrics such as
facial and voice recognition. This type of innovation is not
unusual at member-owned and member-driven credit unions as they
take data security seriously.

Credit Unions and Consumers Continue to Suffer

With the increase of massive data security breaches at
retailers, from the Target breach at the height of holiday
shopping in 2013 impacting over 110 million consumer records to
the recent Home Depot breach impacting 56 million payment
cards, Americans are becoming more aware and more concerned
about data security and its impact. A Gallup poll from October
12-October 15, 2014, found that 69 percent of U.S. adults said
they frequently or occasionally are concerned about having
their credit card information stolen by hackers, while 27
percent of Americans say they or another household member had
information from a credit card used at a store stolen in the
last year. These staggering survey results speak for themselves
and should cause serious pause among lawmakers on Capitol Hill.

Data security breaches are more than just an inconvenience
to consumers as they wait for their plastic cards to be
reissued. Breaches often result in compromised card information
leading to fraud losses, unnecessarily damaged credit ratings,
and even identity theft. Symantec's Internet Security Threat
Report issued earlier this month found that 36% (roughly 74
million consumers) of the 205,446,276 individuals compromised
in retail breaches in 2014 had their financial information
exposed. That percentage doubled from 18% in 2013. More than
23% of the US population had their financial identities
compromised by a retailer data breach in 2014.

While the headline grabbing breaches are certainly
noteworthy, the simple fact is that data security breaches at
our nation's retailers are happening almost every day. A
February of 2015 survey of NAFCU member credit unions, found
that respondents were alerted to potential breaches an average
of 164 times in 2014. Two-thirds of the respondents said that
they saw an increase in these alerts from 2013. When credit
unions are alerted to breaches, they take action to respond to
protect their members. The chart below outlines the actions
that credit unions took in 2014 in response to merchant data
breaches.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Credit unions suffer steep losses in re-establishing member
safety after a data breach occurs. They are often forced to
charge off fraud-related losses, many of which stem from a
negligent entity's failure to protect sensitive financial and
personal information or the illegal maintenance of such
information in their systems. Moreover, as many cases of
identity theft have been attributed to data breaches, and as
identity theft continues to rise, any entity that stores
financial or personally identifiable information should be held
to minimum federal standards for protecting such data.

Merchants and credit unions are both targets of
cyberattacks. The difference, however, is that credit unions
have developed and maintain robust internal protections to
combat these attacks and are required by federal law and
regulation to protect this information and notify consumers
when a breach occurs that will put them at risk. Every credit
union must comply with significant data security regulations,
and undergo regular examinations to ensure that these rules are
followed. A credit union faces potential fines of up to $1
million per day for compliance violations. These extensive
requirements and safeguards discussed earlier in my testimony
have evolved along with cyber threats and technological
advances and have been enhanced through regulation since they
were first required in 1999. In contrast, retailers are not
covered by any federal laws or regulations that require them to
protect the data and notify consumers when it is breached.

A credit union data security program to protect its own
system can have many security components, such as:

1. Firewall
2. Intrusion Prevention
3. Botnet Filtering
4. Anti-Virus protection
5. Malware protection
6. Management and Monitoring Services
7. Anti-Phishing and Phishing site takedown services
8. Third party vulnerability assessments and testing
9. Web Filter
10. Spam Filter
11. Secure Email
12. Encryption
13. End point security
These elements can have a significant cost to the
institution. A February, 2015, survey of NAFCU members found
that the average respondent credit union spent $136,000 on data
security measures in 2014, and that doesn't even factor in the
additional costs that the credit union faced due to data
breaches at other entities.

The ramifications of recent data breaches for credit unions
and their members have been monumental. The aforementioned
survey of NAFCU members found that the estimated costs
associated with merchant data breaches in 2014 were $226,000 on
average per credit union. Almost all respondents noted that
merchant data breaches lead to increased member-service costs
and needs that are not reflected in these direct costs. The
three main elements of these costs were card reissuing costs,
fraud investigations/losses and account monitoring. The chart
on the next page outlines how these various costs from merchant
data breaches are broken down.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Charlotte Metro Federal Credit Union is a prime example.
Their estimated cost for reissuing, additional staffing, member
notification, account monitoring, increase in call volume and
branch visits among other things is over $200,000. However, a
cost cannot be placed on the vulnerability their cardholders
are left with as well as the lack of trust and confidence that
is created. They have indicated that the impact from the losses
and increased expenses affect the fees and rates they are able
to offer their members.

Additionally, one of the residual effects that goes largely
unnoticed is the impact that the reissuance of a card has on
the neural network of a credit union. This is a credit union's
own fraud detection system. Some of the components of the
system are payment patterns and history of card usage, as is
the case with most neural networks. Every time a credit union
has to reissue a card, the pattern and history for that member
is erased and it starts over. This increases the chance that
the member will make a purchase that is perfectly acceptable,
but get denied because the network doesn't recognize that what
they are doing is perfectly normal. This is especially true for
credit union members who travel.

Smaller credit unions such as Diebold Federal Credit Union,
a small credit union with only 3,300 members and $17 million in
assets in North Carolina, Ohio, are especially feeling the
impact. Since the beginning of 2014, Diebold has had over
$32,000 in losses from data breaches at retailers. While that
may not seem like much, it is nearly $10 in loss for every one
of their members and a real burden on the institution. They are
not alone. Over that same time period, Chicago Patrolmen's
Federal Credit Union has had over $143,000 in losses, which is
over a $5 loss for each of their 28,000 members.

Unfortunately, credit unions often never see any
reimbursement for their costs associated with the majority of
data breaches. Even when there are recoupment opportunities,
such as the recent Target settlement with MasterCard, it is
usually only pennies on the dollar in terms of the real costs
and losses incurred. Meanwhile, big box retailers that were
negligent in recent data security breaches are posting record
profits. A 2015 Columbia University review of financial
statements of merchants such as Target and Home Depot reveals
that retailers barely notice a financial hit from massive data
breaches, and breach costs were less than one-tenth of one
percent of these giant retailers 2014 annual sales.

Payment networks are critical partners to credit unions in
ensuring credit union members have the credit and debit card
programs they need and demand. Collectively, the networks have
worked together to standardize the Payment Card Industry (PCI)
Data Security Standard designed to provide merchants and
retailers with a framework of specifications, tools,
measurements and support resources to ensure the safe handling
of cardholder information. While NAFCU appreciates the positive
progress in this regard, credit unions and other issuers are
still seeing steep losses in the wake of retailer and merchant
data breaches and would like to see the networks do everything
they can to make reimbursement in the wake of fraud stemming
from a data breach more equitable. As discussed, NAFCU believes
the negligible entity should be wholly responsible for such
damages.

NAFCU's Key Data Security Principles

NAFCU has long been active on the data security front, and
was the first financial services trade association to call for
Congressional action in the wake of the 2013 data breach at
Target. Recognizing that a legislative solution is a complex
issue, NAFCU's Board of Directors has also established a set of
guiding principles to help define key issues credit unions
would like to see addressed in any comprehensive cyber and data
security effort that may advance. These principles include:

Payment of Breach Costs by Breached
Entities: NAFCU asks that credit union expenditures for
breaches resulting from card use be reduced. A
reasonable and equitable way of addressing this concern
would be to require entities to be accountable for
costs of data breaches that result on their end,
especially when their own negligence is to blame.

National Standards for Safekeeping
Information: It is critical that sensitive personal
information be safeguarded at all stages of
transmission. Under the GLBA, credit union and other
financial institutions are required to meet certain
criteria for safekeeping consumers' personal
information. Unfortunately, there is no comprehensive
regulatory structure akin to the GLBA that covers
retailers, merchants and others who collect and hold
sensitive information. NAFCU strongly supports the
passage of legislation requiring any entity responsible
for the storage of consumer data to meet standards
similar to those imposed on financial institutions
under the GLBA.

Data Security Policy Disclosure: Many
consumers are unaware of the risks they are exposed to
when they provide their personal information. NAFCU
believes this problem can be alleviated by simply
requiring merchants to post their data security
policies at the point of sale if they take sensitive
financial data. Such a disclosure requirement would
come at little or no cost to the merchant but would
provide an important benefit to the public at large.

Notification of the Account Servicer: The
account servicer or owner is in the unique position of
being able to monitor for suspicious activity and
prevent fraudulent transactions before they occur.
NAFCU believes that it would make sense to include
entities such as financial institutions on the list of
those to be informed of any compromised personally
identifiable information when associated accounts are
involved.

Disclosure of Breached Entity: NAFCU
believes that consumers should have the right to know
which business entities have been breached. We urge
Congress to mandate the disclosure of identities of
companies and merchants whose data systems have been
violated so consumers are aware of the ones that place
their personal information at risk.

Enforcement of Prohibition on Data
Retention: NAFCU believes it is imperative to address
the violation of existing agreements and law by
merchants and retailers who retain payment card
information electronically. Many entities do not
respect this prohibition and store sensitive personal
data in their systems, which can be breached easily in
many cases.

Burden of Proof in Data Breach Cases: In
line with the responsibility for making consumers whole
after they are harmed by a data breach, NAFCU believes
that the evidentiary burden of proving a lack of fault
should rest with the merchant or retailer who incurred
the breach. These parties should have the duty to
demonstrate that they took all necessary precautions to
guard consumers' personal information but sustained a
violation nonetheless. The law is currently vague on
this issue, and NAFCU asks that this burden of proof be
clarified in statute.

Preventing Future Breaches

NAFCU has long argued that protecting consumers and
financial institutions by preventing future data breaches
hinges on establishment of strong federal data safekeeping
standards for retailers and merchant akin to what credit unions
already comply with under the GLBA.

The time has come for Congress to enact a national standard
on data protection for consumers' personal financial
information. Such a standard must recognize the existing
protection standards that financial institutions have under the
GLBA and ensure the costs associated with a data breach are
borne by those who incur the breach.

While some have said that voluntary industry standards
should be the solution, the recently released Verizon 2015
Payment Card Industry Compliance Report found that 4 out of
every 5 global companies fail to meet the widely accepted
Payment Card Industry (PCI) data security standards for their
payment card processing systems. In fact, Verizon found that
out of every data breach they studied over the past 10 years,
not one single company was in compliance with the PCI standards
at the time of the breach. This should cause serious pause
among lawmakers as failing to meet these standards, exacerbated
by the lack of a strong federal data safekeeping standard,
leaves merchants, and therefore consumers, more vulnerable to
breaches.

In addition, the report finds that the use of EMV cards
(``chip cards'') in other countries has not been a silver
bullet solution to preventing fraudulent activity, but merely
displaces it. The report shows that once EMV use increases,
criminals shift their focus to card not present transactions,
such as online shopping. While some have argued for a ``chip
card'' solution, the reality is that it is not a panacea and
does not replace a sound data security standard.

One basic but important concept to point out with regard to
almost all cyber and data threats is that a breach may never
come to fruition if an entity handling sensitive information
limits the amount of data collected on the front end and is
diligent in not storing sensitive personal and financial data
in their systems. Enforcement of prohibition on data retention
cannot be over emphasized and it is a cost effective and
commonsense way to cut down on emerging threats. If there is no
financial data to steal, it is not worth the effort of cyber
criminals.

Legislative Solutions

NAFCU believes that the best legislative solution on the
issue of data security that has been introduced in this
Congress is bipartisan legislation in the Senate by Senators
Roy Blunt and Tom Carper. Their bill, S. 961, the Data Security
Act of 2015, sets a national data security standard that
recognizes those who already have one under the GLBA. We
support this legislation and would urge introduction of a House
companion measure.

As the committee is aware, the cyber and data security
discussions cross the jurisdiction of several Congressional
committees. Given the daunting task of making meaningful reform
in these areas, early this Congress NAFCU called on
Congressional leadership to create a bipartisan and bicameral
working group to find a legislative path forward to help better
protect consumers from ongoing data breaches.

Conclusion

Cyber and data security, ensuring member safety, and how to
incentivize and emphasize data safekeeping in every link of the
payments chain is a top challenge facing the credit union
industry today. Given the breadth and scope of many recent
retailer data breaches, we have reached a tipping point in the
public dialogue about how to tackle these issues. NAFCU member
credit unions and the 100 million credit union members across
the country are looking to Congress to continue work on cyber
and data security issues and move forward with legislation that
will make a meaningful difference to consumers. It is time to
level the playing field and require equal data security
treatment to all those who collect and store personally
identifiable and financial data.

Consumers will only be protected when every sector of
industry is subject to robust federal data safekeeping
standards that are enforced by corresponding regulatory
agencies. It is with this in mind that NAFCU urges Congress to
modernize data security laws to reflect the complexity of the
current environment and insist that retailers and merchants
adhere to a strong federal standard in this regard.

Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today on
behalf of NAFCU. I welcome any questions you may have.
Statement for the Record

Dr. Jane LeClair, Chief Operating Officer

National Cybersecurity Institute of Excelsior College

Before the

United States House of Representatives

Committee on Small Business

Small Business, Big Threat:

Protecting Small Businesses from Cyber Attacks

April 22, 2015

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, on behalf of the
National Cybersecurity Institute at Excelsior College. I
appreciate the opportunity to address you and provide a
statement for today's hearing. The National Cybersecurity
Institute is dedicated to increasing knowledge in the
cybersecurity discipline and assists small businesses (SMB's)
to better understand and meet the challenges in today's digital
world. My name is Dr. Jane LeClair, and I am the Chief
Operating Officer of the National Cybersecurity Institute
located in Washington, D.C.

SMB's are challenged both by the ability and the desire to
secure themselves against cyber threats which makes them
uniquely vulnerable to cyber attacks. Fifty percent of SMB's
have been the victims of cyber attack and over 60 percent of
those attacked go out of business. Often SMB's do not even know
they have been attacked until it is too late.

SMB's are under attack from many avenues including social
engineering, the internet of things, insider threat, weak
passwords and cyber theft through weak payment systems. Mobile
devices and the lack of formal cyber plans and policies spell
trouble. Infections brought in through browsers pose a threat,
and finally, outdated technology and poor maintenance top the
list of problems. SMB's are characterized by central management
focused around the owner, with lack of a specialized IT or
cyber staff, inadequate control systems, and day-to-day rather
long term planning for asset protection. Almost 70% of SMB's
manage their own websites, use the Internet for sales, social
media, marketing, and a host of other needs. SMB's have
resource contraints and often ignore cyber-security in favor of
day-to-day operations or other financial needs. Yet SMB's
remain a gateway to gain access to clients, business partners,
donors, and contractors working with the SMB ... a backdoor
into many large organizations. These organizations frequently
lack the knowledge needed to develop and implement a cyber
policy or the expertise to develop a response strategy.
Surprisingly, 96% of the attacks on SMB's were fundamentally
basic attacks. SMB's need employees trained in networking,
operating systems and multiple layers of security.

Otherwise, who's watching for signs of an attack and making
sure the operating systems are properly patched? Who's
responsible for regular backups and reviewing system logs?

There are several ways that the National Cybersecurity
Institute is offering assistance to SMB's. An affordable
package that provides a targeted cybersecurity plan, basic
training for owners, IT staff and employees, and ensures that
the basics of antivirus software and firewall protection are in
place, is under development. Our media campaign raises
awareness through quarterly webinars and weekly blogs. The
National Cybersecurity Institute is publishing two short books
on Cyber for Small Business and Cyber Insurance, and is
partnering to offer a SMB workshop in medium-sized cities
around the country that is affordable and aimed at SMB owners
and their IT staff. Cybersecurity is without a doubt one of the
prime concerns of the SMB community in America today. The
efforts of this Committee in seeking ways to help alleviate
those concerns cannot be understated. Mr. Chairman and members
of this Committee, thank you for your interest in this
important area, and I thank you for the opportunity to address
you today.

[all]
