- FOREIGN CYBER THREATS: SMALL BUSINESS, BIG TARGET

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FOREIGN CYBER THREATS: SMALL BUSINESS, BIG TARGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 6, 2016

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-067
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-701                      WASHINGTON : 2017
_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Jamil N. Jaffer, Director, Homeland and National Law Program,
George Mason School of Law, Arlington, VA......................     5
Mr. Justin Zeefe, Co-founder & Chief Strategy Officer, Nisos
Group, Alexandria, VA..........................................     7
Mr. Nova J. Daly, Senior Public Policy Advisor, Wiley Rein LLP,
Washington, DC.................................................     9
Ms. Angela Dingle, Founder, President and CEO, Ex Nihilo,
Washington, DC.................................................    11

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Jamil N. Jaffer, Director, Homeland and National Law
Program, George Mason School of Law, Arlington, VA.........    31
Mr. Justin Zeefe, Co-founder & Chief Strategy Officer, Nisos
Group, Alexandria, VA......................................    43
Mr. Nova J. Daly, Senior Public Policy Advisor, Wiley Rein
LLP, Washington, DC........................................    47
Ms. Angela Dingle, Founder, President and CEO, Ex Nihilo,
Washington, DC.............................................    51
Questions and Answers for the Record:
Questions from Hon. Grace Meng and Answers from Mr. Nova J.
Daly.......................................................    57
Additional Material for the Record:
Statement from Hon. Robert Pittenger.........................    62

FOREIGN CYBER THREATS: SMALL BUSINESS, BIG TARGET

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 6, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:03 p.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Hanna,
Gibson, Brat, Radewagen, Curbelo, Hardy, Kelly, Davidson,
Velazquez, Clarke, Hahn, Payne, Meng, Lawrence, and Adams.
Also Present: Representative Pittenger.
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order. Good
afternoon, I want to thank everyone for being here. A special
thank you to all our witnesses who came here to share their
experience and their expertise with us here this afternoon. We
very much appreciate it.
Small business cybersecurity has been a top priority for
our Committee throughout this Congress. In our previous
hearings, we have heard stories from small business owners who
have been the victims of cyber attacks. We have also heard dire
warnings from cybersecurity experts about the new and varied
cyber threats facing America's 28 million small businesses all
across the country.
There is no doubt that the information technology, or IT,
revolution has provided small businesses with new tools and
opportunities to compete in the global economy. However, we
must be mindful that as small businesses use this technology,
the risk of a foreign cyber attack has increased dramatically.
According to a recent report by Verizon Enterprise, over 70
percent of cyber attacks occurred in businesses with fewer than
100 employees, so small businesses. As we have heard many
times, even one cyber attack can be devastating for small
businesses, making prevention and protection absolutely
critical. A 2014 survey from the National Small Business
Association estimated the average cost of a cyber attack on a
small business to be over $32,000, which is a huge hit for a
small business.
Our Committee's efforts to spotlight these serious and
growing threats have made it abundantly clear that the Federal
Government needs to step up its game when it comes to
protecting the cybersecurity of small businesses and
individuals.
Today's hearing will examine the increased threats posed by
foreign actors to American small businesses in cyberspace. This
is an important dimension of the cybersecurity threat that
impacts both our national security and our economic security,
and I believe it demands much more attention than it has
received thus far.
The FBI has already determined that foreign state actors
pose a serious cyber threat to the telecommunications supply
chain. It is also clear that many foreign nations are
responsible for direct cyber attacks on the United States in an
effort to steal intellectual property and sensitive personal
information.
The Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive
released a report in 2011 stating that tens of billions of
dollars in trade secrets, intellectual property, and technology
are being stolen each year from computer systems in the Federal
Government, from corporations, and from academic institutions.
China and Russia were cited as the two largest participants in
cyber espionage.
In a report by our colleagues on the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence, U.S. businesses and cybersecurity
experts have reported persistent attacks that could be traced
back to China and were thought to be supported by the Chinese
Government. Studies from the Department of Defense have warned
of the difficulties associated with defending against threats
posed by foreign nations, stating, quote, ``means and
opportunity are present throughout the supply chain and
lifecycle of software development,'' unquote.
This is particularly troublesome for small businesses that
not only rely on products from but also engage in commerce with
globalized telecommunications firms from countries like China.
Small businesses play an indispensable role in providing the
Federal Government with products and services. They are
integral links in the government's supply chain, but are often
ill-equipped to combat against sophisticated foreign cyber
attacks. This makes them a prime target for state sponsors of
cyber terrorism who wish to undermine America's commerce and
security.
I think we all look forward to hearing from our witnesses'
assessment of this threat, as well as their suggestions for how
we may better guard against this cybersecurity that we are
discussing here today.
I ask for unanimous consent that our colleague from North
Carolina, Mr. Robert Pittenger, be permitted to sit on the dais
today and also ask questions in the order that we would
normally follow. He will be at the end of the list of members
that were here when we started, of course.
Without objection, so ordered.
I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member, Ms.
Velazquez, for her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Over the past 15 years, the Internet and associated
technologies have changed the way business is conducted. The
Internet allows businesses of all sizes and from any location
to reach new and larger markets, and provides opportunities to
work more efficiently by using computer-based tools. It affords
America's 23 million small businesses a unique opportunity to
sell their products not only across the country but around the
world. And while the Internet has fostered a tremendous degree
of economic growth, it has also introduced profound security
risks. Reports of massive data breaches have become
commonplace, and the average cost of such breaches are
devastatingly high.
Whether a business is thinking of adopting cloud computing
or just using email and maintaining a Web site, cybersecurity
should be a part of their plan. Theft of digital information
has become the most commonly reported fraud, surpassing
physical theft, and small businesses are the primary target.
Just last year, 60 percent of all targeted attacks struck small
and medium sized entities.
Among the worst threats to American businesses,
particularly small firms, is cyber warfare performed by foreign
entities. Not only are these cyber infiltrators accessing
intellectual property and trade secrets, they are using the
company's PCs to disguise attacks against other companies and
the Federal Government. In fact, the Office of the National
Counterintelligence Executive reported that tens of billions of
dollars in trade secrets, IP, and technology are being stolen
each year.
These actions have costly implications for small businesses
and their ability to operate. According to research, 74 percent
of small- and medium-sized businesses reported being affected
by cyber attacks in 2011, with an average cost of $188,000 per
incident and totaling over $2 million.
Combating these attacks have led to the U.S. Government
issuing bans on certain foreign products and services, and also
requiring small business contractors to meet demanding IT
specifications. While these efforts are necessary, they prove
confusing and costly to small businesses who are attempting to
protect themselves and their customers from data breaches, stay
globally competitive, and win Federal contracts.
Clearly, cybersecurity should be a priority to protect our
national security and the economy. Failure to do so leaves all
of us at risk. As we move forward, comprehensive reform must
balance a number of priorities, including being able to adapt
to evolving technologies, preventing undue costs and
regulations of small businesses, and protecting our sensitive
information.
During today's hearing, we will explore the critical issues
facing small businesses that operate online and the resources
they need to leverage innovative technologies. I look forward
to hearing your recommendations to better educate and inform
the small business community on cyber issues and how the
Federal Government can facilitate a more robust and efficient
cybersecurity environment.
I also would like to thank all the witnesses for being here
and providing your expertise and have a broad discussion on
this issue. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
If Committee members have opening statements prepared, I
would ask that they submit them for the record.
I would now like to take a moment to explain our timing
lights here and how we operate. We are under the 5-minute rule.
It is pretty simple. You all will get 5 minutes and then we
will ask questions, and we will limit ourselves to 5 minutes as
well.
The lighting system is to assist you. The green light will
be on for about 4 minutes, then the yellow light will come on
to let you know you got about a minute to wrap up, and then the
red light will come on and we would ask you to stop, not
necessarily exactly at that point, but, within reason. Try to
stay within those times, if at all possible.
I now would like to introduce our very distinguished panel
here this afternoon.
Our first witness will be Jamil Jaffer, Director of
Homeland and National Law Program at George Mason School of Law
in Arlington, Virginia. He also serves as the Vice President
for Strategy and Business Development in IronNet Cybersecurity.
Prior to IronNet, Mr. Jaffer served as Chief Counsel for the
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. He attended the
University of Chicago Law School, the Naval War College for a
master's degree, and received his bachelor's degree from UCLA.
We welcome you here this afternoon.
Our next witness will be Justin Zeefe, who is Cofounder and
Chief Strategy Officer of Nisos Group in Alexandria, Virginia.
The Nisos Group is a collection of former military and
intelligence agency officials who specialize in cyber warfare,
counterterrorism, and geopolitical operatives. Before the Nisos
Group, Mr. Zeefe worked for the Department of Defense. He went
to law school at the Boston University School of Law and earned
his bachelor's from the Ohio State University. We welcome you
here this afternoon, Mr. Zeefe.
Our third witness is Nova Daly, senior public policy
adviser at Wiley Rein LLP in Washington, D.C. Mr. Daly
specializes in international trade, cybersecurity, data and
network security issues. Prior to joining Wiley Rein, Mr. Daly
held senior positions at the Departments of the Treasury and
Commerce, the White House, and the U.S. Senate. Mr. Daly
received his master's in international law and organizations
from American University and his bachelor's from the University
of California Irvine. We welcome you here.
I would like to yield to the Ranking Member for the
introduction of our fourth and final witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure
to introduce Ms. Angela Dingle, Founder, President, and CEO of
Ex Nihilo Management, a management and consulting firm that
specializes in strategic assessments and information technology
management. Ms. Dingle is a certified management consultant
with over 20 years of experience in business leadership, IT
governance, and risk management. She holds an MS in management
information systems from Bowie State University and a BS in
computer science from DeVry Institute. She is testifying today
as a national partner for Women Impacting Public Policy, a
national nonpartisan public policy organization advocating for
and on behalf of women and minorities in business. Welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Jaffer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF JAMIL JAFFER, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND AND NATIONAL LAW
PROGRAM, GEORGE MASON SCHOOL OF LAW; JUSTIN ZEEFE, COFOUNDER
AND CHIEF STRATEGY OFFICER, NISOS GROUP; NOVA DALY, SENIOR
PUBLIC POLICY ADVISOR, WILEY REIN LLP; AND ANGELA DINGLE,
FOUNDER, PRESIDENT, AND CEO, EX NIHILO

STATEMENT OF JAMIL JAFFER

Mr. JAFFER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for
inviting me and our panel here today to testify. I also want to
thank the Chairman for his leadership on these issues. You
know, you had a successful amendment recently, the State
Department authorization legislation requiring the comptroller
general to report on the State Department's potential use of
devices and systems from cyber threat nations.
This is all the more important in light of FBI Director
Comey's statement yesterday about the evidence they have
acquired about the State Department's culture regarding the
lack of security with respect to classified information, and in
particular, the critical role the State Department plays in
negotiations with foreign countries and the sensitive
information they deal with from allies. In 2014 and 2015, we
saw significant breaches of the State Department, breaches that
actually led them to shut down their unclassified email systems
and potentially expose classified--or sensitive data.
Now we are in a very evolving threat environment. The speed
at which the Internet is growing is dramatic. 26.3 billion
devices by 2020, almost three network-connected devices per
person. There are a lot of opportunities and benefits that this
environment provides to us. People in developing nations will
have the opportunity to access information and markets they
never had the opportunity to, and for people in developed
countries like ours, we will have the opportunity to rapidly
innovate.
Small businesses will be at the leading edge of that
innovation. Startups in the Silicon Valley, from Chattanooga,
Tennessee, to Northern Virginia, to various other places in the
country are at the heart of this developing Internet
environment. In our new economy, protecting our technology and
our innovative edge is critical.
There are huge issues with cybersecurity threats today. The
vast majority of breaches today, 75 percent by one estimate,
are focused on the United States. That includes three out of
the top five breaches last year alone.
We know about the cyber threats we face from nation--
states. Countries like China are engaged in a constant and
steady effort to siphon off our intellectual property for their
own economic benefit. Russia is attempting to put in place
efforts and programs for the next major conflict. North Korea
and Iran have increasingly important cyber capabilities and are
perhaps more willing than nations like China and Russia to use
those capabilities.
We have seen in recent years the use of destructive cyber
attacks. We saw Saudi Aramco in 2012 and Qatari Gas Ras
attacked, roughly 30,000 computers bricked at Saudi Aramco.
Here in the United States, at the Las Vegas Sands Corporation
and the Sony Corporation last year, we saw cyber attacks where
there were actual destructive efforts taking place, and that is
a real concern.
The DNI, the director of the NSA, the FBI director, and the
CIA director have all recently told us that cyber threats are
the number one threat facing the nation, even exceeding the
threat, as prevalent as it is, of counterterrorism.
Key to protecting our cyberspace is ensuring the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information
that flows through these networks. In order to do so, we must
architect ourselves as a nation to defend against these
threats, that means cooperation between the public and private
sectors. Today, over 90 percent of the Internet is controlled
by the private sector. We look to private sector companies to
defend themselves, and yet in no other context do we expect the
private sector to defend themselves against nation-state
threats. We don't expect Target, for example, to have surface-
to-air missiles on the top of their warehouses. To be sure, we
expect them to have high fences, armed guards, and perhaps
guard dogs, but we don't expect them to defend against a
Russian bomber coming and bombing their warehouses, and yet we
expect our private sector companies today to defend against the
Chinese, the Russians, North Koreans, and the Iranians. We need
to have a national conversation about how to defend ourselves.
Now, this is not to say that we expect the government to be
on our networks at all times constantly protecting the nation
with surveillance and the like methods. Nobody wants that
today. To the contrary, we enjoy an open, free Internet, but we
have to have that conversation about what the right role for
the government and the private sector working together is in
this modern threat environment.
In particular, China, we have talked about their IP theft,
but one other thing we should really talk about is their desire
to access key U.S. infrastructure. When I was at the House
Intelligence Committee working for Chairman Mike Rogers, our
Committee issued a report talking about the threat posed by
Huawei and ZTE, two major Chinese telecommunications companies,
to U.S. infrastructure. That report had very strong
recommendations over 4 years ago about what the government and
private sector entities should do with respect to Huawei and
ZTE, and it is critical, as the chairman's amendment does, that
we continue to look at this issue.
I would like to sum up by saying there are seven things
that we could consider doing as a country, Congress working
with the private sector, to address these issues. Number one,
large and small businesses alike need to think about and get
buy-in from their highest levels, board of directors to the C
suite, down to workers about the need for cybersecurity.
Second, small businesses must consider working together
collaboratively to share cyber threat information and use their
collective buying power to address cyber threats.
Third, small businesses and large businesses must work
together with the government to share information in real time
and network speed.
Fourth, we need to get more serious about deterring cyber
threats.
We need to make sure that the government gives more
classified information to private sector entities. We need to
consider positive incentives like tax breaks for investments in
cybersecurity and information sharing.
Finally, if Congress is willing, we might want to consider
amendments to the recently passed Cybersecurity Information
Sharing Act to provide better and more incentives for
cybersecurity information sharing.
That is just a short list, but thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
know I am over time. I appreciate you taking the time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Zeefe, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JUSTIN ZEEFE

Mr. ZEEFE. Good afternoon. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking
Member Velazquez and all Small Business Committee members, for
the opportunity to testify on foreign cyber threats to American
small business.
It is an honor to address members of this distinguished
body, both as a small business owner and also as a citizen who
notes that small businesses not only employ 50 percent of the
private sector workforce in this country, but also produce
approximately 50 percent of the non-farming GDP in the United
States. They are, therefore, a vital part of the economy, and
their well-being and the need to ensure their ability to
operate in a transparent and secure environment is paramount.
My name is Justin Zeefe. I am Cofounder and Chief Strategy
Officer of the Nisos Group, a cybersecurity firm in Alexandria,
Virginia, composed of entirely former elite cyber operators and
U.S. special forces officers. I and each of my associates have
more than a decade of assessing and mitigating cyber risk to
U.S. national security interests.
We each observed, over recent years, a shift by foreign
cyber threats increasingly toward private sector concerns. This
evolution, magnified by our observation that the commercial
sector is wildly unprepared for this inbound threat, prompted
us to bring our capabilities to industry.
It is also an honor to speak to you today regarding the
most significant present and near-term threat to the national
business economy: foreign cyber threats in the form of
cybercrime. There are no shortages of statistics to this end.
It is indeed the fastest growing economic crime, according to
PWC, and is projected to cost the global economy $445 billion
by the end of 2016. In fact, according to McAfee, the well-
known security research firm, if cybercrime were a country, its
GDP would rank 27th in the world, above Austria, Norway, and
Egypt, along with others.
How would we collectively react if we knew that the 27th
largest economy in the world was absolutely dedicated to
attacking our value? What if they were overwhelmingly directing
their actions against small business here in the United States?
In fact, if you turn both of those into statements, they would
be accurate.
Symantec, another very well respected research firm, found
in June of 2015 that 75 percent of cyber attacks were directed
at organizations with fewer than 2,500 employees, a dramatic
increase from years prior. Not a week goes by that we don't
read about a major data breach in the paper, with mention of
what the attackers stole and often how they managed to gain
access.
Most voices and solutions in the field of cybersecurity
address the what and the how of the threat, yet without an
intimate understanding of the threat actors, their motivations,
vulnerabilities, capabilities, intent, and adaptability, the
discussion is really incomplete. Never in the history of
mankind has there been an industry, illicit or otherwise, which
could be addressed strategically without factoring in the
players of the game. Cybercrime and the threat it represents
against small business and large alike is no outlier.
This very thing, the why, is a vital part of the equation,
which requires understanding the humans behind the threat and,
just as importantly, the vulnerabilities which these threat
actors seek to exploit. By understanding the driving forces and
motivations behind the threat actors, as well as the evolution
of their tools, it is possible to narrow the gap between threat
actor capability and cybersecurity solutions in the
marketplace.
Once we understand those threat actors and their
motivations, it becomes easier to model future behavior from
state-sanctioned or state-sponsored activity and criminal
enterprise, the source of almost all cyber incidents. Armed
with these insights, only then should we deliberately consider
legislative incentives, penalties, and appropriate distribution
of risk to aid, not hamper, small business.
So, why? Why do foreign cyber threats target small
business? One word and one analogy are sufficient to
encapsulate this trend. The word is ``profit.'' The analogy is
that like water or electricity, malicious actors follow the
path of least resistance.
As larger organizations professionalized their defensive
and reactive posture to cyber incidents, and as stolen data
became less profitable due to stricter regulatory and law
enforcement environments, threat actors in search of profit
turned the focus of their targets to small business, which had
neither the capacity nor the budget to address this threat. A
positive feedback loop ensued, and continues to this day, in
which threat actors become only more dangerous as they adapt to
this sophisticated target set and the unsophisticated target
set alike.
The first and most significant evolution was the
professionalization of the threat actor. What only a few years
ago was best described as small bands of hackers who
occasionally worked together have, by virtue of their success,
drawn the attention of traditional organized crime. These
groups, with many years of experience in the conduct of
criminal enterprise, accurately assessed that cybercrime
represented an opportunity for increased profit and decreased
risk. Rather than trafficking in weapons, drugs, or other
contraband as they had been accustomed, activities dependent on
physical items, which present a significant risk of detection
or interdiction, these groups of experienced criminals
increasingly invest in individuals or groups whose cybercrime
activities are wildly successful and stealthy when it comes to
attribution.
In conclusion, it is vital that we not only consider the
what and the how, but the why and the actors behind these
incidents. Thank you for your time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Daly, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NOVA DALY

Mr. DALY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Velazquez and members of this Committee. Thank you very much
for the opportunity to appear before you today.
Today, I offer my perspective on cybersecurity broadly and
distinctly as it pertains to small business. My perspective is
drawn from experience as a former official with the U.S.
Department of Treasury helping administer the Committee on
Foreign Investment for the United States, which saw much
cybersecurity transactions; with the National Security Council
helping with not only trade and investment, but also cyber
policy; and also in the private sector working with my
colleagues to help small businesses confront the cybersecurity
threats that are out there.
As this Committee knows very well, cybersecurity issues are
clearly significant and growing economic risks for all small
businesses, and Americans broadly. These issues have become
increasingly relevant as we now depend on Internet access and
connectivity in nearly every aspect of our work and lives, from
the communication devices and processing devices we use at home
and at work, to the vehicles we drive, the infrastructure we
depend on, and even the appliances in our home.
It has been forecast that, on average, 5.5 million new
devices are connected to the Internet each day, and that by
2020, over 20 billion devices will be connected to the
Internet. For small businesses, the very connectivity that
allows for greater freedom and versatility in conducting day-
to-day business, linking phones, computers, routers, copiers,
even alarms and ventilation systems, also brings with it
significant and sometimes paralyzing risk, risk that is often
difficult to address both financially and in terms of human
resources.
As small businesses increase their connectivity to the
Internet, they face significant challenges, not just in
infrastructure and the nuts and bolts of establishing business
connectivity, but also in security-related costs. Both domestic
and foreign criminals, as well as foreign governments, have
been known to exploit and are even actively targeting Internet-
based vulnerabilities in order to gain access to financial
information, customer data, and intellectual property. Three
years ago, a study issued by the Center for Strategic and
International Studies estimated that the annual cost of
cybercrime in the U.S. was $1 billion. According to more recent
reports, cybercrime costs quadrupled since then and are even
going to quadruple into 2015 to 2019.
While large businesses typically have the means to fund and
invest in strong and resilient cybersecurity measures to
protect their interests, small businesses generally do not have
this luxury. They often lack the capabilities or the resources
to pursue strong entity-wide cyber protections. Further, small
businesses often may not be privy to the kinds of broad
industry-wide threat notifications to which larger companies
may be. Often, larger companies have the resources to
continually monitor and review threats that may arise from
certain technology and supply chains, and at times are
contacted by the U.S. Government when breaches occur. A notable
example was a 2014 Department of Justice investigation and
prosecution of several Chinese military officials who were
responsible for breaches of numerous U.S. companies' security
perimeters. There, at least some of the affected companies were
contacted and alerted while the breaches were occurring.
However, given the breadth of existing cyber threats and
continued growth of our cybercrime, our government simply does
not have the resources to address all the cybersecurity-related
issues faced by businesses, critical infrastructure, and
government systems, let alone those faced by small business.
In 2012, the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence issued a report on its findings regarding security
threats posed by certain telecommunications companies doing
business in the United States. Despite the report's negative
findings, the companies investigated continue to grow as
dominant players in the global technology market. While it has
been effectively restricted from selling network equipment to
Tier 1 carriers, Huawei is growing its sales to smaller
wireless U.S. carriers, supplying network infrastructure
equipment to cities in the States of Washington and Oregon, and
is targeted to continue growth in cell phone sales. Last year,
ZTE was the fourth largest smartphone vendor in the United
States, with 7.2 percent market share. Both these companies
were notably sanctioned for export control violations.
Although much larger U.S. companies can engage other
vendors and many vendors to provide certain cybersecurity
monitoring and reinforcement of their perimeters, small
businesses don't have the funds or capacity to do so.
While doing business with such companies can present
heightened risk, it should not be overlooked that there is
significant and growing vulnerability within the entire U.S.
technology supply chain. Increasingly, our technology
communications equipment and systems are produced or assembled
abroad, and we are seeing nations taking strong measures to
grow their own semiconductor and technology industries.
Further, the United States is finding itself with a talent
shortage in cybersecurity.
So how do we deal with this issue? I present a couple ideas
or perspectives or views. First, focus on current laws.
Enforcement is key. We should continue to do so and send
signals to the market and to the private business and small
business.
Promote cyber standards. We should consider frameworks such
as ISO standards to promote best practices.
We should engage small businesses not only in education and
outreach, but also in funding. A bill that was introduced, H.R.
5064, the Improving Small Business Cybersecurity Act of 2016,
would be an important end.
Lastly, we have to address the supply chain security issues
in the United States and close the cyber deficit. As I
mentioned earlier, our supply chains and much of our equipment
is being produced abroad. If we lose the capabilities and
talents, not only in cybersecurity, but also in our
capabilities of technology, we will lose our edge and our
innovation.
Thank you very much for this time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Dingle, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANGELA DINGLE

Ms. DINGLE. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member Velazquez,
and distinguished members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
My name is Angela Dingle. I am the president and CEO of Ex
Nihilo, a woman-owned small business based in Washington, D.C.,
that provides cybersecurity, IT governance, and risk management
services to government agencies. I am here today representing
Women Impacting Public Policy, which is a national nonpartisan
public policy organization advocating on behalf of women
entrepreneurs.
First, I would like to thank the Committee for holding this
hearing. Few topics are as timely as today's hearing.
The National Cybersecurity Alliance found that 60 percent
of businesses will close within 6 months of a cyber attack.
Narrowing the focus, businesses that work with the Federal
Government are an additional security risk, given that the U.S.
Government's research data and engineering specifications are
of high value to individuals, companies, and governments across
the world. Due to increasing privacy requirements and recent
cybersecurity attacks, the Department of Defense responded by
implementing new contract requirements.
In August of 2015, DOD finalized a regulation requiring
companies of all sizes to safeguard unclassified, controlled
technical information that resides on their information
systems. The goal of the rule is to provide minimum standards
to protect government information that finds its way into
contractor information systems. The guidelines include 14
families of security requirements, commonly known as security
controls or security objectives, that must be satisfied. These
groupings range from identification and authentication, to
physical protection.
Contractors that do not implement safeguards for the 14
families must submit a written explanation of why the required
security control is not applicable or explain how an
alternative control or protective measure is being used to
achieve the same level of protection.
This past February, the SBA Office of Advocacy found that
this DOD rule grossly underestimated the number of affected
small businesses. The cost of compliance with this rule will be
a significant barrier to small businesses engaging in the
federal acquisition process.
Even more concerning is the May 2016 National Industrial
Security Program Operating Manual, or NISPOM, Conforming Change
2, commonly referred to as the insider threat program. This
regulation stems directly from concerns over contractor
employees' ability to bypass security safeguards. The rule
requires contractors to gather, integrate, and report relevant
credible information that may indicate a potential or actual
insider threat. It is especially burdensome for small
businesses because it has to be implemented by November 30,
2016. WIPP is particularly concerned about the significant
burdens associated with these new requirements and their
potential to push women-owned firms out of the federal market.
Lack of technical knowledge is not an excuse for failure to
comply with basic cybersecurity regulations. Small businesses
need to proactively understand the scope and impact of changes
on the business; align organizational policies, practices, and
procedures to comply; empower those with the technical
expertise necessary to implement changes; provide adequate
training to ensure employees are aware of their
responsibilities; and hold individuals accountable for
compliance.
The first step is to get a jump start on the new
requirements by assessing current information systems and
determining changes necessary for compliance with new
guidelines. Implementing effective governance processes can
help small businesses manage information security risks,
increase stakeholder confidence, and reduce the costs
associated with compliance. To that end, small businesses could
use assistance in determining their cybersecurity needs.
WIPP supports Representative Hanna's H.R. 5064, which was
included in this year's National Defense Authorization Act. The
legislation authorizes small business development centers to
support small businesses in developing affordable cybersecurity
plans. However, we would encourage the Committee to consider
adding other SBA resource partners, including over 100 women's
business centers.
In conclusion, women entrepreneurs consider the federal
marketplace a key opportunity to grow their businesses. While
there is a need to protect federal data and small businesses
need to protect themselves from cyber attacks, the government
has gone too far with new regulations. One size did not fit
all. Ensuring that new cybersecurity requirements are
attainable for small business is of paramount importance. This
Committee has always acted in a bipartisan manner to support
women entrepreneurs, and we appreciate your examination of this
issue.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to
answer any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
We will now move into the questioning part, and I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jaffer, I will begin with you. When a foreign company
is caught stealing data or information from another entity,
what are the common enforcement mechanisms available and what
recommendations would you make to improve on those enforcement
mechanisms in order to further deter foreign cyber attacks?
Mr. JAFFER. Sure. Mr. Chairman, part of the challenge, as
you know, with foreign companies stealing U.S. information is
our ability to get jurisdiction over them, and particularly if
they are state actors. State actors are particularly the most
problematic, whether it is China or its proxies or other
nation--states, stealing our information is something we have
got to critically address.
The best way to deter nation states from doing it, whether
they are operating through their companies or not, is to have a
deterrence policy. The key elements of a deterrence policy are,
one, describing what our capabilities are; describing how we
might use them, if and when we have information stolen or
attacks made on our country; and then actually carrying those
out, and part of it is credibility. So that is one of them.
In addition, we obviously have the ability to prosecute
folks, but we have got to be able to get jurisdiction over
them. That is the really hard part.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Zeefe, I will move to you next. You had mentioned, why
are so many small businesses in particular targeted, and you
said it is because of profit, it is the least resistance is
among small business folks. What are a few things that small
business folks who may be watching or may hear about the
hearing or that we may correspond with, what are some things
practically that they could do, as small businesses, to protect
themselves from cyber attacks?
Mr. ZEEFE. Thank you. The majority of threat actors
operating today are operating for profit, as mentioned. The
best thing that a small business could do is ensure that their
network is relatively secure by following the protocols that
are standard across all industry; that is, ensuring that you
have configured your network correctly, ensuring that you are
encrypting your most sensitive data when possible, not being
lax when it comes to security, ensuring that your password
management is reasonable, ensuring that the folks who have
administrator access on your domain do not use the same
password there as they do at their gymnasium or anywhere else
that might be hacked, as very regularly these hacks come
through third-party incidents. So it is not that your business
is hacked, but rather that a third party is hacked, I gain
credentials to your business and I use them.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Daly, I will move to you next, if I can. What are, and
this is somewhat related to what I just discussed with Mr.
Zeefe, some of the common mistakes that you see made by small
business folks that leave them vulnerable to cyber attacks?
Mr. DALY. I think it is not providing the education within
their own workforce to let their employees know the
vulnerabilities that are out there, in terms of making sure
their passwords are protected, making sure the systems are
protected in the way they operate it. So I think it is that
employee knowledge.
Also, in terms of not necessarily the equipment, but making
sure they have the right software, making sure it is updated,
and continuously taking sort of a proactive approach to the
cybersecurity that they provide their systems.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Dingle, let me ask you this. When you started off, it
struck me that you said 60 percent of businesses, I guess small
businesses in particular, close within 6 months of a cyber
attack. I had mentioned in my opening statement that the
average loss is about $32,000 that a business suffers.
Do you want to expound upon why such a large number do go
out of business when there is a cyber attack? Are there any
stories or cases in particular that you would want to let us
know about?
Ms. DINGLE. Certainly. As many of the panelists here have
spoken about, the cost of responding to a cybersecurity breach
is very expensive. As this Committee may be aware, small
businesses don't necessarily have the financial means. They
don't necessarily have reserves that they can quickly allocate
to address a cybersecurity breach. The cost of having to pay
for outside expertise to come in, help investigate and identify
the actual problem that has occurred, and mitigate that can be
very expensive, and that is why they end up going out of
business.
I personally know of small businesses who, like some of the
other panelists have spoken about, just did not understand what
it takes to properly secure their business, only to be hacked
or to have a security breach, and have had to tap a number of
different resources that one would tap to finance your business
for payroll or other sources to try to combat these
cybersecurity issues.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
My time has expired.
The gentlelady from New York, the Ranking Member, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Dingle, as you mentioned before, the DOD, NASA, and GSA
recently issued rules pertaining to all future federal
contracts, which require a contractor to implement a set of
cybersecurity measures to safeguard information, and more
agencies will continue to identify and prioritize cyber
standards.
What can we do to ensure that small contractors are
involved in this process as uniform cybersecurity guidelines
are developed?
Ms. DINGLE. Thank you. It is really important that small
businesses have education sources. A lot of times these
discussions are happening in environments where small
businesses don't necessarily have a representative or a
presence, and the Federal Acquisition Council may be having
discussions about the timing of when these will be implemented.
Although there was research that was done about that DOD rule,
as the owner of a federal contractor, we certainly were not
questioned about how timely we thought the requirements should
be with respect to our ability to comply.
I think education is really important, and allowing the
small business resource centers to provide that education would
be extremely helpful to small businesses.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Do you see any active role being played by
the Small Business Administration to make sure that small
businesses understand the risks so that they could implement
cybersecurity measures?
Ms. DINGLE. In the last 12 months, I have seen webinars and
other information that the SBA has tried to make available to
small businesses. But, again, depending on how small the
business is, finding the time to participate in those and to
stay ahead of and abreast of those is really what is difficult.
Partnerships between the SBA and resource centers and
organizations such as WIPP to educate small businesses is what
I think would really be beneficial to them.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Jaffer, federal spending to combat cybercrime continues
to grow at an extremely rapid rate. What steps can be taken to
tap the unique talents of nimble small technology firms in an
effort to strengthen our national security defenses?
Mr. JAFFER. Thank you, Ranking Member Velazquez. I think
that is exactly right. We have to tap the resources that
startup companies in the Silicon Valley and across the nation
have, the innovative ideas to address concerns that the Federal
Government has, but the Federal Government is challenged when
it comes to buying from small startups. There are all these
regulations, that Ms. Dingle correctly talked about, that make
it hard for small businesses to get in front of and actually
sell to the government, even though they have some of the best,
newest ideas.
We have to figure out a way to reduce that burden on small
businesses and allow the government to buy from the most
innovative parts of our community to address these very real
threats. If we don't do that, we are never going to have access
to that capability. It is unfortunate because the government,
most of all, needs that access to innovative, smart, capable
companies that are at the leading edge of cybersecurity
technology. I think Ms. Dingle is exactly correct. We have to
reduce the regulatory burden on those companies.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Daly, nearly every single company selling technology to
the U.S. Government and consumers, HP, Dell, Cisco, Apple, use
foreign components in their products. Many of these products
are used by small businesses. If there are any ill intentions,
small firms are often not savvy enough to monitor foreign
threats posed by these products or components.
What danger does this product integration within our market
pose for small firms, and what is the best way to assist small
firms in combating it?
Mr. DALY. Thank you, Ranking Member. I think the threats to
our supply chain are very significant, and they permeate not
only into large businesses, but our government systems and
small businesses equally as well. So those vulnerabilities that
the large businesses have, small businesses are going to have
as well.
The issue is how to address that, as I alluded to, we have
to think long term and structurally towards ways we can secure
our supply chains, whether that be standards we are going to
use in terms of making sure that the equipment is certified to
a certain industry-held standard, and then that standard is
something that the GSA complies with that will permeate its way
into the private sector and flow down to private small
businesses.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is the
Vice Chairman of this Committee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jaffer, you made some interesting comments, and I
appreciate you being here today. You were talking a minute ago
with regards to the small businesses being attacked and the
venues for going after the attackers. I want to focus on the
small business, because I think you were talking mainly about
the government side of this, but I want to talk about the small
business guys.
If you have a small business out there and they get
attacked by a hacker, where do they go? Who is the law
enforcement agency that they need to go to, talk to, to get
some sort of restitution? Is it possible, because I think a
comment was made a minute ago with regards to tracking these
people down, and if it is a government-sponsored hack, how do
you go after something like that? Can you elaborate a little
bit on that?
Mr. JAFFER. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. The first
responder in these circumstances typically is the FBI. Small
businesses and large businesses should go to the FBI. The
challenge we have as a government, though, is you have DHS out
there talking about its capabilities, you have FBI, you have
DOD, and everyone is talking about the role they play. We as a
government, haven't done a very good job of bringing that
together and telling the private sector, particularly small
businesses, who the lead is.
When it comes to investigations, I think the Bureau is the
first place to go, at the local field office. The FBI is
engaged in an effort to build bridges, but they are typically
doing it with large companies. We need to figure out how to get
small businesses, particularly private sector small business
resource centers, like Ms. Dingle highlighted, and get the FBI
and other agencies in with that part of the community to better
address their concerns when they are hacked.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Do we have the ability and have you seen
cases where we actually win against the bad guys, we catch the
bad guys and then the small business gets restitution for
whatever IP they have lost?
Mr. JAFFER. I am not aware of specific examples. I know
that we have prosecuted folks and put them in jail. Getting
actual restitution may be harder, and it may be an opportunity
for Congress to consider legislation to create a cause of
action to allow going after foreign cyber threat actors for
restitution with stolen IP.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. So right now, because there is
limited ability to get restitution, the small business is
sitting there basically on its own if it gets hacked, hopefully
the information is not such that it is going to drive it out of
business.
Mr. JAFFER. One area to think about might be sanctions
collections and look at that as a potential pot of money that
is here domestically that might be accessed by small businesses
and other folks that are hacked by foreign nation-state actors
or foreign companies.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Very good.
Mr. Daly, you talked a minute ago about a talent shortage
in cybersecurity. It is interesting, because today in the
Washington Times commentary section is a story titled Meeting
the Cyber Challenge. In the article it says, during the last 20
years, the size and skill level of the technology workforce has
not kept pace with the demand for workers. Routinely, American
companies and government agencies post more job vacancies than
there are qualified candidates to fill. Over three-quarters of
K through 12 schools do not offer computer science classes.
The article goes on to say that the Bureau of Labor
Statistics estimates that almost 5 million jobs will be
available in computing and information technology by 2024.
The gist of the article is to try and get Congress to spend
more money and help bridge this technology gap. But we have a
problem here that is recognized by a lot of folks, apparently,
that we have a shortage of people in this field to be able to
do the work to protect our companies, our government, and our
assets from being hacked or being taken advantage of.
Where do we go from here? This is very concerning, because
if we don't have the experts to be able to keep us in the lead,
we are going to fall behind and then we are going to be in real
big trouble. Do you care to comment?
Mr. DALY. I absolutely agree with you. I have talked to
folks at Mandiant and Symantec and McAfee and others, and this
is something that is very apparent, that we don't have the
capabilities to deal with this sort of knowledge-base gap in
cybersecurity.
I think you have to make market-based incentives that drive
people to want to get that education, want to get those
capabilities, and that is where people respond. Look, if they
can get a great job, they are going to do the extra technology
training, go to additional schooling to be able to have a job
that is going to be very secure.
Unfortunately, I took a recent trip and talked to three
folks who are in college. They told me they were psych majors.
I was, like, that is great, but, we really need to get back to
the basics, focus on the technologies that are going to be
core, and find incentives, market-based incentives to get us
there.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
Ranking Member of the Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations Subcommittee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Ranking
Member Velazquez, for hosting the hearing today. Thank you all
for your testimony.
My first question, Mr. Jaffer, it seems like most
cybersecurity solutions are geared toward larger companies,
leaving small- and medium-sized enterprises vulnerable to cyber
criminals and hackers. What options are there for small
businesses that want to protect themselves but have limited
resources?
Mr. JAFFER. Yes, ma'am. That is a great question. One
opportunity that small businesses could take is to band
together in associations or the like to use their purchasing
power to buy larger scale cybersecurity solutions, have perhaps
common security operations centers. A lot of big companies have
these amazing rooms with big flat screen TVs, and they are
looking at all the cyber threats and confronting them. Small
businesses don't have the ability to do that, obviously. Maybe
by banding together through their associations they can buy
that capability from larger companies and work collectively.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. One issue for small firms is the theft of
intellectual property. This type of crime can be devastating to
small firms and will result, as has been said, with many of
them going out of business. How can IP theft, particularly from
small businesses, hurt our economy and national security?
Mr. JAFFER. Again, I think you are absolutely right. It is
a totally crushing threat, particularly for small businesses,
but net net for our larger economy. As we shift to this
technology-driven industrial and services economy, our economy
fundamentally depends on our innovative capabilities and our
ability to protect our intellectual property. If we can't do
that--and today we simply aren't, China is taking it right out
the backdoor in tremendous amounts--we have got to find a way
to do that. That is a collective government and private sector
problem. I think we have to address it for small businesses, as
Ms. Dingle said, through the SBA and other organizations.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you.
Mr. Zeefe, human error can usually be blamed for a fair
amount of security breaches. How could setting a minimum
threshold for cybersecurity best practices help small firms
reduce the number of and severity of cyber attacks?
Mr. ZEEFE. The cybersecurity insurance industry has been
setting the benchmark for that by creating checklists and
essentially a punch list of things that an organization must
accomplish in order to qualify for a policy, and then
identifying and closing those loopholes which might trigger
that policy or an exemption thereto.
Probably the best way, ultimately, is for both the small
business community around the United States, as well as
governments, to create a regimented checklist of things that
organizations must do. Many of them revolve around human error,
which incidentally is the vector by which the vast majority of
these attacks are promulgated.
Ms. ADAMS. Could these best practices also help to reduce
the burdens and the costs of keeping up with ever changing
threats?
Mr. ZEEFE. They could. To your last point, they also have
to be ever changing, because the methodology by which these
attacks are conducted is shifting in response to our defensive
posture. In order for us to stay ahead of the problem, we have
to focus--in my opinion, we have to focus less on purely
automated solutions and more on a hybrid of understanding what
can be automated. That which cannot be automated has to be
human driven, as the threat is entirely human driven.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay.
Ms. Dingle, implementation costs for IT security is of
paramount concern that can cause small institutions to lose or
even decide not to compete for bids against larger companies
for federal and state government bids. In your estimation, what
steps can be taken to ensure that small businesses don't have
to choose between security and their bottom line?
Ms. DINGLE. Thank you for the question, and it is really an
interesting one. In particular, entry into the federal
marketplace can make or break a revenue source for a small
business, and with these new regulations, very often a small
business does have to make that choice. I think providing some
balance between what is expected of a very large corporation
and what is expected of a small corporation from a
cybersecurity standpoint is going to be that balancing act.
Is it that everyone has to comply all at the same time, or
to one of the other panelist's point, is it possible for small
businesses to be able to band together to try to address those
requirements? In particular, the DOD regulation that I
mentioned earlier in my testimony requires that the small
business itself handle some of those things. They have taken
away that small business's ability to partner with either a
contractor or with someone else to assist them in solving the
problem. So just some flexibility in a small business's ability
to respond would be helpful.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Kelly, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you witnesses
for being here.
In my experience working with small businesses, number one,
is the education or technical expertise of owners in this area
is lacking. It is also very expensive in time, it is
inconvenient, it is expensive in money. A lot of times small
businesses use the hope method, which is, I hope I don't get
attacked and they don't do that. It is very frustrating.
I am in the Guard and I have spent time with cybersecurity,
also I was with the district attorney's office when I was
there. A lot of the things that you have to do are extremely
frustrating, especially to upper management old people like me
who don't understand what these kids understand. We don't like
changing our passwords, because we can't remember it. We don't
like keeping things on separate computers because it is
inconvenient. We don't like all the things that are necessary
to do that.
That is across the board, whether you are military, whether
you are civilian in small businesses, it is a cost. But the
reality is they can't afford not to be prepared for this. I
know that hard targets right now are going to be bypassed,
because there are plenty of weak targets out there. How do we
get this message across?
Mr. Jaffer and Mr. Zeefe, if you would answer this, how do
we get this message across to our small business owners in a
way that they understand, you can't afford to be a soft target,
you have to harden up?
Mr. JAFFER. Mr. Kelly, that is exactly right. I think we
have to figure out a way to ensure that small businesses get
how critical it is to them. For them, at the core of their
business is their reputation and their intellectual property,
that innovative thing that makes them special and that makes
them more competitive against these bigger companies. That is
what makes them unique and makes them such a productive part of
our economy.
Through the SBA and other organizations that this Committee
has jurisdiction over, we have to strengthen them at the heart
of their role as small business to protect that very unique
edge. Without doing that, they are going to be much more
vulnerable than larger businesses are, and that is a real
problem.
Mr. ZEEFE. There are a number of policy prescriptions we
could put in place to encourage, but ultimately, I suspect it
will be an existential event or a series of existential events
whereby a number of medium- or large-size companies have their
reputations damaged or financial positions damaged to such a
point that they go out of business. I think that will be the
clarion call that brings some awareness to the table.
By and large, the reason that small businesses are being
attacked with such aggressiveness is because they are so weak,
because they are third-party providers to larger organizations,
and because they can be squeezed for small amounts of money
across the board. So as an attacker, I can go after 10 or 15
companies in an hour and extract $10- or $15,000 from each
apiece far easier than I can going after a large financial
institution and making an effort there.
So the short answer is, I don't know that there is much
that can be done other than making this a public affair.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Jaffer, again, I am a father, I have a young
kid, and we all want to take work home, especially when we
don't have the millions to buy multiple tools. A lot of parents
take home their work computer and let their kids play games, or
their work iPad or their work iPhone, and they let them use
those. They don't understand that there is a danger of
spillage. That is what we refer to in the military as spillage,
it is when you take something from one net and take it to
another net and expose it to threat.
Is there any way that you can think of so people understand
that when you take either different classifications of
information or when you have an intranet, and you expose it to
the extranet--you know, you can't even use thumb drives on a
lot of military computers and other things. How do we
communicate this to let them know it is simple, but it is
inconvenient?
Mr. JAFFER. Well, I think you raise a really good point. I
have a 7-year-old, Nikko, and he plays on my iPad and my
laptop; you are exactly right. He recently purchased a bunch of
apps, so I learned about parental controls first hand. I think
we have got to create separate accounts for our kids and for
other family members that don't have access to those parts of
the system.
Of course, hackers will be able to get through some those
walls, but the higher we can build those walls, just at the
very base level, keeping your system up-to-date, patch,
creating separate accounts, that can help a lot. For small
businesses, doing small things like that can make a difference.
As you said, they are going after the weakest targets, and so
we have to make ourselves stronger and not be the weak gazelle
in the herd, as it were.
Mr. KELLY. I don't have to run faster than the bear. I just
have to run faster than you.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Jaffer, I hope you will encourage your son to go on the
Small Business Committee Web site. I am sure he will find this
fascinating.
Mr. JAFFER. As long as you have apps to purchase.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady from Michigan, Mrs.
Lawrence, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. LAWRENCE. Thank you so much.
Ms. Dingle, you stated that there were some webinars
available for small businesses, but has the SBA proven to be
effective in educating the small business owners and employers
on the need to safeguard against potential threats? In your
view, what are some of the recommendations you have had? I
heard that we really need to get this going, and it is so
critical. Can I get your opinion and recommendations?
Ms. DINGLE. Sure. Let me first address the latter part of
your comment about whether or not people have been informed.
Cybersecurity and information technology is a huge, huge issue.
For companies that are not in the business of providing
information technology products or services, it is a whole new
world, for lack of a better term. If you have a firm whose day-
to-day business is providing healthcare services or providing
home improvement services, they are not thinking about
technology.
The SBA, even if it is able to help, has to, first, make
businesses aware that these regulations and the cybersecurity
issues apply to all of us. I don't think that across the board
people understand that this is a problem that affects us all.
It affects us as individuals; it affects us as employees, as
managers, and as business owners.
I am in the information technology space, so I don't look
to the SBA for that assistance. I will tell you that I have not
seen a lot of that, but that does not mean that the resources
are not available. Trying to comply with the newest set of
regulations, even though we are in the technology business,
they are occurring so quickly that we have to bring in external
resources to help us to comply with them all.
If there were small business cyber centers that were
available, where we could go--and to Mr. Jaffer's point combine
our resources to get access to the tools and technologies and
expertise that we need to address this problem, that would be
really helpful and beneficial.
Mrs. LAWRENCE. I just--I try to support small business, and
they have these pop-ups I went to one of these pop-ups, and I
saw something I wanted to purchase. The owner of this upcoming
business said, I can't take a credit card. I have been hacked.
She went over to a fellow pop-up person there saying, we are
friends, can you pay? I found that very concerning, because
here she is trying to start a business, and the pop-up industry
is so exciting and really growing around America, and before
she got off the ground, she had been hacked. It impaired her
ability to take credit cards, because they had shut her down.
Ms. DINGLE. Indeed.
Mrs. LAWRENCE. The other question I have is to Mr. Daly. In
your testimony, you mentioned strengthening information-sharing
initiatives as a way to engage small business. Can you briefly
talk about the organizations, we call them ISAOs, that were
established by the executive order of President Obama in 2015,
and is it enough, or what do we need to enhance it?
Mr. DALY. I think it was definitely very helpful, the work
that it is looking toward making the SBA do, I think, is also
very helpful. One of the intuitive things I draw from is one of
the things we did at the White House. When we knew intellectual
property was being stolen to such a degree, we did an entire
initiative where we essentially ran it out of the White House
pulling all the agencies together saying, look, can we do a
combined initiative? It is called the Stop Initiative. We
combined the resources of all the departments, made sure that
they communicated, functioned, and had a one-stop shop for
dealing with that issue.
I still think while it is helpful, that sort of initiative
needs to occur.
Mrs. LAWRENCE. So, then, did it occur and stop, or is it
still available?
Mr. DALY. It did occur. In terms of STOP, yeah, it did
occur. At Department of Commerce, we have an IP czar that was
established and continued. It led to a number of initiatives,
not only creating a czar, but also creating commerce at a
point, and was able to put new legislation as part of it too.
So it was effective.
Mrs. LAWRENCE. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mrs. LAWRENCE. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. DAVIDSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for you all being here and having some good
information for small businesses and for our Committee. It is a
pleasure to talk with you guys.
Ms. Dingle, one of my questions involves the National
Institute of Standards and Technology framework. Are you
familiar with that?
Ms. DINGLE. Yes, I am.
Mr. DAVIDSON. Okay. How have you found that to be--I think
there was recently a review in April on how is that process
going? What kind of impact is that likely to have for small
businesses and industry in general?
Ms. DINGLE. The NIST framework that you reference does
provide a framework for all things information security with
respect to how you protect your information systems. There is
an overarching 800-53 special publication that is revised on a
regular basis, recently to Revision 4, and then there are
associated special publications that have to do with various
things that need to be protected. It is essentially the Bible
that one needs to follow with respect to securing your systems.
The challenge, when you talk about a small business being
able to comply with that, I talked about the new regulation for
Department of Defense that had 14 families of controls. This
one has much larger families of control to the tune to 2- to
300 things that a technical person would have to implement in
order to secure a system.
In terms of a guideline, it is a very clear and distinct
guideline on how one should protect information systems. It is
just a very big, big, big set of regulations.
Mr. DAVIDSON. Okay.
Maybe, Mr. Jaffer, internationally, are there any
technologies or practices that are not currently accessible or
permissible here in the United States that are in use elsewhere
in the world that would actually improve our cybersecurity
here?
Mr. JAFFER. Thank you, Mr. Davidson. I am not sure--I am
not aware of any specific technologies, but I do think that
this goes to the larger issue about getting innovation into our
system, whether it is foreign or American. We have got to find,
particularly as a government, but also large businesses, ways
to buy from the most innovative amongst us, the startups, those
young companies.
I think, as Ms. Dingle correctly highlighted, it is a real
challenge for small businesses worldwide to get into the U.S.
Government sector. The U.S. Government needs our help. It needs
the help of small, startup companies to get in there and give
them innovative ideas. Whether it is international or the U.S.,
we have to figure out a way to make that happen.
Mr. DAVIDSON. Thank you.
In the assessment that you do, it seems like you do a bit
of overall view of security. Is there a best practice that you
would say, globally, if there is a country that really has a
strong--that is actually connected to the grid--obviously, the
countries that have no infrastructure maybe are more secure
because there is nothing to be hacked. But those of us that
choose to have access to the world, who has the best practices
right now? If we wanted to say, is the U.S. a world leader or
is the U.S. lagging, and who is leading?
Mr. ZEEFE. There are probably statistics. I am just using,
what metrics I don't know, but I would say Estonia would be a
surprising but accurate choice. They are the home of the NATO's
Cyber Centre of Excellence. They are very careful to proscribe
best practices to both their citizens as well as their
companies that are formed from within the country. They take it
very seriously, particularly as they have Russia on their
doorstep.
Whether and where the United States would rank in that, to
be honest, I don't know.
Mr. DAVIDSON. Not sure.
Okay. And then, Mr. Daly, just a question. In light of this
week's news about the handling of confidential, if not
classified, information and security, are there new laws that
ought to be in place to make it clear that all of America, are
subject to the Lady Justice, that there is no exemptions
regardless of whomever you are?
Mr. DALY. I think that is a good and tough question. I
think the laws, in terms of handling classified information,
are fairly strong and you just need a Federal workforce that
makes sure that it follows those guidelines strictly. When I
had to handle that classified information, losing that
privilege meant the loss of my job and a loss of confidence.
That public awareness is necessary. New laws, that is
something that could be considered. Vigilance on what we have
is always the key, so----
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. DAVIDSON. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. CLARKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank our Ranking
Member, and I thank our panelists for bringing your expertise
to bear on today's subject matter.
I want to start with Ms. Dingle by asking, what would you
say are the greatest barriers for small contractors wishing to
break into the federal marketplace as it pertains to
cybersecurity guidelines?
Ms. DINGLE. Thank you for the question. For small
businesses that are not familiar with doing business with the
Federal Government, the Federal Acquisition Regulation, and in
particular if you are talking about doing business with the
Department of Defense, is a whole other language that they are
not accustomed to.
Again, as I was answering Ms. Adams' question, if you are
not in the business of doing technology, the fact that you have
to comply with the cybersecurity regulations that are very
technical in nature can be a barrier. There are essentially
three types of security measures that one needs to put in
place. One has to do with management and operations, the other
has to do with technical implementations, so operations,
management, and technical.
The average businessperson is thinking about how to manage
and operate their business, but then you add these technical
requirements on top of it. More and more often, when you submit
a proposal to do business with the government, the requirements
are already in the solicitations. If you are not able to
comply, then you can't compete for that business.
Ms. CLARKE. What makes it difficult for small businesses to
comply? Is it a financial? Is it a human resource issue? Is it
a combination of both?
Ms. DINGLE. Yes.
Ms. CLARKE. Does the SBA have a role in assisting those who
may be themselves qualified but do not have the capacity as
designated in the solicitations?
Ms. DINGLE. Certainly, it is a combination of those things.
It would be wonderful for new business owners, as you go to the
Small Business Administration to get information about how to
define your target market and how to learn about how different
Federal agencies buy business, It would be really helpful if at
that same time small businesses could learn about cybersecurity
regulations, understand what their responsibility is, because
that gives you the information that you need to make a decision
about whether or not you can actually do business with the
federal market and how great the barriers are.
It might be partnership with another business or teaming up
with a larger business or holding off for a little bit of time
until you can get the resources that you need to be able to
satisfy all----
Ms. CLARKE. And build the capacity?
Ms. DINGLE. Correct.
Ms. CLARKE. So you would say there is a threshold that
business has to meet in order to even offer themselves with
respect to these solicitations?
Ms. DINGLE. Certainly. The more and more that we begin to
focus on cybersecurity, it becomes a threshold; it is a barrier
to entry.
Ms. CLARKE. Very well. Thank you.
Mr. Daly, what recommendations would you have for
encouraging public-private partnerships to address the
cybersecurity needs of small businesses, particularly those
that contract with the Federal Government?
Mr. DALY. Yeah. I think creating standards with government
procurement, it is amazing how those standards flow down the
line to secondary providers all the way down to small
businesses. If we set up a strong set of guidelines--for
instance, there was a CGS appropriations bill that required
certain measures to protect critical systems, NASA was involved
in that, too, and that flowed down their entire supply chain.
Once you make those standards, the market responds to it.
If we lift the water on our cybersecurity protections, I think
all of those, including small business folks, rise with it.
Ms. CLARKE. So you are saying that the standards aren't
clear right now? Are they evolving? Because, cybersecurity
itself, that is a space that is continually shifting. How do we
standardize a hygiene or a practice to the extent where a small
business could actually sort of get in on the first floor?
Mr. DALY. As you said, it is an evolving issue of cyber,
what the attacks and vectors are. But, as Ms. Dingle talked
about, creating the standards that are out there that, the
government response to in terms of its purchasing would be
something that----
Ms. CLARKE. Just quickly to everyone on the panel. Do you
think it is possible for a small business to be able to
actually meet those standards and still be considered small?
Mr. ZEEFE. I do.
Ms. DINGLE. I do as well.
Ms. CLARKE. Okay.
Mr. JAFFER. I think it is very hard. I think we have go to
try and find a way to lift that burden.
Ms. DINGLE. It is hard.
Ms. CLARKE. Very well. Very well.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Hanna, who is the Chairman
of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am curious, what is the shelf life of security? We know
it has some expense to get into it, but the theme here is that
it is a cat-and-mouse, constant getting unsecure, getting
secure, getting unsecure. What does that look like in the real
world? What is the cost in the real world? What are the
dynamics of that based on the size of your business? Along with
that, what would be that kind of critical mass that everybody
has to spend? Anybody that might feel comfortable.
Mr. ZEEFE. I would say relative to other forms of risk that
enterprise, whether small or large, have faced in the past,
cyber is relatively new. There is not a lot of actuarial data,
whether you are looking at it from a regulatory or----
Mr. HANNA. But is it 6 months, a year, or a week?
Mr. ZEEFE. I don't know that you can put a bracket around
either side of it. It is continually evolving. It is, as you
said, a cat-and-mouse game. A more apt analogy might be, as you
build a higher castle wall, I build a trebuchet. As you build a
thicker castle wall, I develop, you know, air superiority.
Mr. HANNA. How do you manage that? Based on what you are
saying, it is a moment by moment.
Mr. ZEEFE. It is, but really, all things offensive and
defensive by definition have been. It is a matter of staying
ahead of the threat actors and making sure that you are not the
most attractive----
Mr. HANNA. But then the next logical question for me would
be, is that doable, I mean, in the real world, with that kind
of dynamic?
Mr. Jaffer?
Mr. JAFFER. Certainly for large companies, it is more
doable than it is for small companies. The financial service
sector is very innovative when it comes to defense, and they
are constantly working together and evolving that. But that is
why, we have to figure out how to get small businesses to work
together. They are not going to be able to do this on their
own.
One thing that Ms. Dingle mentioned was this notion of
small business cyber centers. That is a really interesting
concept, where the government might invest alongside a group of
small businesses to get them a common operational capability
and buy from some of the big vendors. It is an interesting
idea. I have never really thought about it, but it is an
interesting concept.
Mr. HANNA. Ms. Dingle, I heard what you said about women
centers. I take it to heart and consider it.
Ms. DINGLE. Thank you. I wanted to address your question
about whether or not you can, if it is a moving target, how do
you ever try to address it? We answered our question about the
NIST framework. You have to set some form of baseline,
otherwise, you never get there from here, because the
technology is changing so frequently.
I talked about the managerial and operational components of
cybersecurity, and that really boils down to on any given day,
if someone leaves your firm or you stop doing business with one
of your partners, you have just introduced a new set of----
Mr. HANNA. So what you are really saying is it is a
continuum?
Ms. DINGLE. It really is.
Mr. HANNA. And on that continuum, you can be at any point,
and the goal is to be as advanced as you can be at any moment.
As everyone here has implied and said directly, those people
that are on the lower end of that food chain, if you will, are
the ones that people go after.
Along those lines, Mr. Zeefe, I wonder if you could explain
to me you said that someone would go into five companies and
collect $10- or $15,000 apiece. How does that look? What does
that look like in the real world? How would that be?
Mr. ZEEFE. At present, that is through Ransomeware.
Mr. HANNA. I hope nobody is taking notes.
Mr. ZEEFE. At present, Ransomeware is the attack, I want to
say du jour, but it has really been months and will continue to
be so in the future. That is effectively--are you familiar with
the concept?
Mr. HANNA. Uh-huh.
Mr. ZEEFE. So for those that aren't, Ransomeware is
effectively unlocking the doors of your organization, making it
impossible for you to conduct business, and in exchange, I am
trying to extract a modest toll respective to what your company
is worth. It is my hope, as the attacker, that----
Mr. HANNA. Do people succumb to that kind of extortion?
Mr. ZEEFE. All the time. I don't have the exact statistics
in front of me, but I believe it is over half a billion
dollars.
Mr. HANNA. So I will give you back your system if you send
me X amount?
Mr. ZEEFE. It happens all the time. And, in fact, quite
regularly we see companies paying it, because the amount of
money that they lose just for being down for a day dramatically
eclipses the amount that they would have to pay to unlock it,
reaching out----
Mr. HANNA. So nobody succumbs to the kill the captive
thing? They always rescue the individual.
Mr. ZEEFE. No. In fact, there's been a development recently
where it is getting kind of ugly. You have competing
organizations out there, generally criminal in nature,
affiliated with traditional organized crime, 85 percent plus,
who are using tools that are copies of a copy sometimes. Their
intent may be to release you after you have paid the ransom,
but the practical effect is that they weren't very good at what
they were doing, and therefore, even though you have paid the
ransom, they are unable to unlock you. It creates some
uncertainty in the marketplace of cybercriminal tools, which,
believe it or not, is actually a pretty professional----
Mr. HANNA. That is a wake-up call for anybody who has to
pay that. That person will respond, like Mr. Jaffer said, they
go out and do what they needed to do to make sure it doesn't
happen again.
Thank you. My time has expired. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. PAYNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
Mr. Daly?
The export control system has long been criticized by
exporters as being too rigorous, cumbersome, and inefficient.
On the other hand, some argue that the defense and foreign
policy considerations should trump any commercial concerns. How
do you balance these two competing forces of increasing
American competitiveness and American security as it pertains
to cybersecurity?
Mr. DALY. It is definitely difficult. I know there is a
serious issue going on right now in terms of encryption and
what encryption technology can go abroad and its effect. Like
anything, the devil is in the details and you have to be smart
about it. You have to look at what is happening out there in
the market internationally and say, are U.S. companies being
disadvantaged, that their technologies are already being sold
abroad? I know that BIS and the State Department are doing a
lot to reform that system to make it not only commercially
appropriate, but also ensuring that it protects national
security.
So it is keeping that focus and making sure we are not
disadvantaging companies where commercial technology is already
available, readily available outside, but making sure we guard
the crown jewels of the U.S. national security in terms of
encryption technologies, and that just means being smart.
Mr. PAYNE. Okay. Thank you.
And, Ms. Dingle, the implementation cost for IT security is
of paramount concern. These costs cause smaller institutions to
lose or even decide not to compete for bids against larger
companies for federal and state government bids. In your
estimation, what are the steps that can be taken to ensure that
small businesses do not have to choose between security and
their bottom line?
Ms. DINGLE. Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and
the answer to the question, I go back to my earlier comments
about the small business' ability to combine forces to get
either economies of scales or access to the resources that some
of our larger competitors have. It can be as simple as having
to buy a piece of technology that is $200 for you to purchase
and use to access a federal system, or it could be as expensive
as a half a million dollars to secure systems based on the NIST
framework that I was talking about.
Anything that we can do to provide a set of resources that
could be shared amongst small businesses or could be leveraged
by small businesses to lower their costs and to decrease the
timeline associated with implementation would be--would be very
helpful.
Mr. PAYNE. Thank you.
In the interest of time, I'll yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman yields back. Thank you very
much. The chair is very appreciative of that, since we have
votes called on the floor, and we have one more of our
colleagues.
The gentleman from New York is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PITTENGER. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
panelists.
A couple of different questions here. The first one is for
anyone that wants to jump in, are there any telltale signs that
the hack, is foreign versus domestic and what are the legal
ramifications? Are they the same or might they be different? I
heard earlier, we certainly got the recommendation, FBI is the
initial entry point for the small business, but is that for
both domestic and foreign? So let me just start with that one.
Mr. ZEEFE. I would like to address the nonlegal part of
that question, the attribution question which you have raised.
It is a good one and it plays into a lot of questions,
predominantly the hacking back question which some people ask,
can we go after them if we know who it was? Can we
affirmatively ascertain who was responsible for the attack? The
answer is, it depends. It depends on whether they intended for
you to know who they were, whether they were very competent at
what they were doing, and whether there is a reason for them to
hide who they are.
The ability of a sophisticated attacker to effectively mask
their identity or replace it with someone else's identity, it
is difficult, if not impossible, to determine whether that is
the case. So if you have been attacked and all of the signs are
that it was somebody from Russia, that doesn't really mean
anything. You have to get in there deeper, and it is less a
forensic question and more of a human question. Is the pattern
of coding that they used similar to what would be used by
Russia? Or is it more likely Chinese or Romanian or somewhere
else in Eastern Europe? The ability to understand who was
attacking you is very, very complicated issue.
Mr. JAFFER. The answer to your question is, the FBI does
operate internationally, so they can be a starting point. But
they need to work better with the intelligence community, with
NSA and the like, to figure out who is connected to these
attacks. In particular, we have never really, as the
government, made a good case for why the NSA can help the
private sector. Part of what that is, we are inside of foreign
government systems all the time looking over what they are
doing and trying to take their information. One thing that
could be useful for American companies is to provide some of
that information back to the private sector in usable form to
protect themselves. We don't do a very good job doing that.
Information sharing is a good beginning point, but we need to
do more there.
Mr. PITTENGER. The last question is really one I am
inquisitive about, not necessarily in your inbox, but given
your expertise, you may very well know. What are the
requirements now for small business if they win a Federal
contract? What requirements do they have in terms of briefings,
compliance, accreditations as it relates to cyber, and
particularly dealing with potential foreign attacks?
Mr. JAFFER. I think I will defer to Ms. Dingle on that.
But, there are a lot, and they are hard.
Ms. DINGLE. Thank you. The regulations that are outlined in
my testimony, they are new regulations that have come about in
the last 12 to 24 months that have to do with protecting
unclassified information, as well as if you hold a Department
of Defense contract, those things are defined in the NIST
framework and in the NISPOM. Essentially, you have to report
any instances associated with that to the FBI as part of the
burden that the small businesses are encountering, because they
have to put a number of tools, techniques, and processes in
place to enable them to be able to do so.
Mr. PITTENGER. I thank you, ma'am.
I apologize for being late. I was on the floor with our
mental health bill. I don't seem to have your testimony. Maybe
I can get that from staff in a little bit. I do have Mr.
Jaffer's testimony. Perhaps they are just all out, you know,
given the fact that I came late, but I do appreciate that
input.
I can imagine for a small business, it is very daunting. So
many things, so many balls to keep in the air and juggle, and
then the prospect, the possibility of being hacked and then,
first of all, what that means for them, and then also what that
means for them in terms of their requirements. I appreciate you
putting attention to that, and I look forward to reading that.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for this hearing, and I appreciate
it. I will yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
We want to thank the very distinguished panel this
afternoon. Your testimony was excellent. Your answers,
responses to questions are very, very good. I think it has been
very informative for members on both sides here.
Ms. Dingle, what you said about 60 percent of the small
businesses after being attacked go out of business within 6
months is particularly disturbing for those of us on this
Committee who are doing everything we can to make America a
great place for a small business to be successful. So thank
you, all of you, for providing that information.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 3:32 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Testimony of Justin Zeefe, Small Business Committee, 6 July
2016

Foreign Cyber Threats: Small Business, Big Target

Introduction

Good afternoon and thank you Chairman Chabot and Ranking
committee member Velazquez and all Small Business Committee
members for the opportunity to testify on foreign cyber threats
to American small business.

It is an honor to address members of this distinguished
body, both as a small business owner and also as a citizen who
notes that small businesses not only employ approximately 50%
of the private sector workforce, but they also produce
approximately 50% of the non-farming GDP in the United States.
They are therefore a vital part economy and their well-begin
and the need to ensure their ability to operate in a transport
and secure environment is paramount.

My name is Justin Zeefe, and I am co-founder and Chief
Strategy Officer of Nisos Group, a cybersecurity firm of former
elite cyber operators and Special Forces officers from within
the U.S. government. I, and each of my associates, have more
than a decade of assessing and mitigating cyber risk to any
system which, if compromised, could damage U.S. national
security interests. These systems range from critical
infrastructure to financial institutions and everything in
between. We each observed, over recent years, a significant
shift by foreign cyber threats increasingly toward private
sector concerns. This evolution, magnified by our observation
that the commercial sector is unprepared for the inbound
threat, prompted us to bring our capabilities to industry.

It is an honor to speak to you today regarding the most
significant present and near-term threat to the national small
business economy--foreign cyber threats in the form of
cybercrime. There are no shortages of statistics to this end--
it is the fastest growing economic crime according to PWC, and
is projected to cost the global economy $445 billion by the end
of 2016, according to the World Economic Forum. In fact,
according to McAfee, the well-renown security company, if
cybercrime was a country, its GDP would rank 27th in the
world--above Austria, Norway, and Egypt.

How would we collectively react if we knew that the 27th
largest economy was absolutely dedicated to attacking our
value? What if they were overwhelmingly directing their actions
against small businesses? In fact, both of these statements are
accurate. Symantec found in June 2015 that 75% of cyberattacks
were directed at organizations with fewer than 2,500
employees--a dramatic increase from years prior. Not a week
goes by that we don't read of a major data breach in the paper,
with mention of what the attackers stole, and often how they
managed to gain access.

Most voices and solutions in the field of cybersecurity
address the `what' and `how' of the threat; yet without an
intimate understanding of the threat actors--their motivations,
vulnerabilities, capabilities and adaptability--the discussion
is incomplete. Never in the history of mankind has there been
an industry--illicit or otherwise--which could be addressed
strategically without factoring in the players in the game.
Cybercrime, and the threat it represents against small
businesses and large alike, is no outlier.

This very thing--the `why'--is a vital part of the equation
which requires understanding the humans behind the threat and
just as importantly, the vulnerabilities which these threat
actors seek to exploit. By understanding the driving forces and
motivations behind the threat actors, as well as the evolution
of their tools, it is possible to narrow the gap between threat
actor capability and the cybersecurity solutions in the
marketplace.

Once we understand attacker motivations, it becomes easier
to model future behavior from state-sanctioned or state-
sponsored activity, and criminal enterprise--the source of
almost all cyber incidents. Armed with these insights, only
then should we deliberate legislative incentives, penalties,
and the appropriate distribution of risk to aid--not hamper--
small businesses.

The `why'

So, why? Why do foreign cyber threats target small
businesses? One word and one analogy are sufficient to
encapsulate this trend. The word is `profit' and the analogy is
that like water or electricity, malicious hackers follow the
path of least resistance. As larger organizations
professionalized their defensive and reactive postures to cyber
incidents, and as stolen data became less profitable due to a
stricter regulatory and law enforcement environment, threat
actors--in search of profit--turned their focus to targets
which had neither the capacity nor the budget to address cyber
threat. A positive feedback loop ensued, in which threat actors
only became more dangerous as they adapted to the increasingly
sophisticated target set.

The first and most significant evolution was the
professionalization of the threat actor. What were only a few
years ago best described as small bands of hackers who
occasionally work together have, by virtue of their success,,
drawn the attention of traditional organized criminal elements.
These groups, with many years of experience in the conduct of
criminal enterprise, accurately assessed that cybercrime
represented an opportunity for increased profit and decreased
risk. Rather than trafficking in weapons, drugs or other
contraband--activities dependent on physical items which thus
present a significant risk of detection or interdiction--these
groups of experienced criminals increasingly invest in
individuals or groups whose cybercrime activities are both
wildly successful and stealthy when it comes to attribution.

The second most significant evolution, inextricably linked
to the first, has been the dramatically improved defensive
posture of larger organizations. These whales were the first to
be targeted and given their deep pockets, they were also the
first to fund an improved posture informed by a corporate
hierarchy which lends itself to coordinated risk mitigation as
well as a keen awareness that the regulatory and judicial
systems track their behavior. This evolutionary development is
in part driven organically within an organization as well as
the result of free market products and services which address
the technical problem.

A third and critical component, which is less of an
evolution than it is a failure to evolve, deserves
consideration here. Small businesses underestimate the degree
to which they are vulnerable and they often believe--in the
face of plain evidence--that they aren't a legitimate target of
cybercriminals. A 2015 survey by the National Small Business
Association found that half the respondents had been knowingly
targeted, and that the average cost to remediate was more than
$20,000. Nevertheless, a report by Travelers Insurance found
that only 23% of small businesses ``worried a great deal''
about cyber risk. In addition to willfully ignoring the first-
degree risks, there are often larger secondary risks presented
by a vulnerable small business. They are often service
providers or vendors to larger businesses and often are, to
reuse the analogy, the path of least resistance by which
malicious actors can gain unauthorized access to larger
organizations.

These two evolutions, along with small business' failure to
adapt, readily explains the explosive growth of successful
ransomware attacks. If you will permit another analogy, imagine
thieves targeting the Louvre museum. Now imagine that a year
ago, they could have easily gotten in and stolen the Mona Lisa,
which they could have then sold on the black market for
millions of dollars. Now consider, much like big business in
the United States, that the Louvre has upgraded its security.
At the same time, law enforcement has gotten much better at
policing the black market. As a consequence, the costs
associated with both stealing and reselling the painting exceed
the potential benefit. To this, the thieves realize they can
simply padlock the entire museum shut, wire all of the art with
explosives, and demand payment to disarm the explosives and
unlock the doors. Now imagine the costs of conducting this sort
of attack were low and could be conducted against thousands of
museums in an hour, and that the fee charged to remove the
padlock was tens of thousands of dollars--a significant sum but
acceptable when compared with the reputational cost of losing
revenue or reputation by going public with the incident or by
refusing to comply. A dramatic example perhaps, but considering
the havoc that ransomware is, at this very moment, causing
predominantly to small business, it is not an ill-fitting
example.

Conclusion

While understanding the motivations which drive the threat
actors is not on its own sufficient to build an effective
framework for deterring or interdicting cyberattacks targeting
small business, it is a vital component of the problem which
cannot be ignored and which needs to be prioritized alongside
other more established business risks. When taken in
consideration with other factors--such as the advancement of
technical solutions (both offensive and defensive)--the
knowledge of the enemy and their tactics, techniques and plans
may permit a logical and cohesive approach to the ever-evolving
problem.
House Committee on Small Business

``Foreign Cyber Threats: Small Business, Big Target''

Testimony of Nova Daly

Senior Policy Advisor, Wiley Rein LLP, Washington, DC

July 6, 2016

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The views and opinions expressed in this statement are mine and
do not necessarily reflect the views or opinions of Wiley Rein LLP or
any of its clients.

In this age of the Internet, we have never had so much
opportunity and with it so much risk. Today, I offer my
perspective on cyber security, broadly, and distinctly as it
pertains to small businesses. This perspective is drawn from my
experience as a former official with the U.S. Department of
Treasury administering the Committee on Foreign Investment in
the United States (``CFIUS''), work at the National Security
Council, and my ongoing efforts in the private sector with my
colleagues at Wiley Rein to address these issues as they impact
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. companies.

As this Committee knows, cyber security issues are clearly
significant and growing economic risks for small business and
Americans broadly. These issues have become increasingly
relevant as we now allow and depend upon Internet access and
connectivity in nearly every aspect of our work and lives, from
the communication and processing devices we use at home and
work, to the vehicles we drive, the infrastructure on which we
depend, and even the appliances in our homes.

It has been forecast that, on average, 5.5 million new
devices are connected to the Internet each day and, by 2020,
over 20 billion devices will be connected to the Internet.\2\
For small businesses, they very connectivity that allows
greater freedom and versatility in conducting day-to-day
business--linking phones, computers, routers, copiers, and even
alarm and ventilation systems--also brings with it significant
and sometimes paralyzing risk, risk that is often difficult to
address both financially and in terms of human resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3165317

As small businesses increase their connectivity to the
Internet, they face significant challenges and additional
costs, not just in infrastructure and the `nuts and bolts' of
establishing businesses' connectivity, but also security-
related costs. Both domestic and foreign criminals, as well as
foreign governments, have been known to exploit and are
actively targeting internet-based vulnerabilities in order to
gain access to financial information, customer data, and
intellectual property. Indeed, three years ago, a study issued
by the Center for Strategic and International Studies estimated
that the annual cost of cybercrime in the United States was
approximately $100 billion. According to more recent reports,
cybercrime costs quadrupled since then, and we are on target
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
for still another quadrupling of these costs from 2015 to 2019.

While large U.S. businesses typically have the means to
fund and invest in strong and resi8lient cyber security
measures to protect their interests, small businesses generally
do not have this luxury. They often lack the capabilities and/
or the resources to pursue strong, entity-wide cyber security
protections. Further, small businesses often may not be privy
to the kinds of broad, industry-wide threat notifications to
which larger companies may be. Often, larger companies have the
resources to continually monitor and review threats that may
arise from certain technology and supply chains, and at times
are contacted by the U.S. government when breaches occur. A
notable example was the 2014 Department of Justice
investigation and prosecution of several Chinese military
officials, who were responsible for breaches of numerous U.S.
companies' security perimeters. There, at least some of the
affected companies were contacted and alerted as the breaches
were occurring. However, given the breadth of existing cyber
threats and the continuing growth of cybercrime, our government
simply does not have the resources to address all of the cyber
security-related issues faced by business, critical
infrastructure, and governmental systems, much less those faced
by small businesses.

In 2012, the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence issued a report on its finding regarding
counterintelligence and security threats posed by certain
telecommunications companies doing business in the United
States. Despite the report's negative findings, the companies
investigated continue to grow as dominant players in the global
telecommunications market. While it has been effectively
restricted from selling network equipment to tier-one U.S.
wireless carriers, Huawei is growing its sales to smaller
wireless carriers in the United States, supplying network
infrastructure equipment to cities in the states of Washington
and Oregon, and is targeted to continue growth in cell phone
sales in the U.S. market. Last year, ZTE another of the
investigated companies, was the fourth-largest smartphone
vendor in the United States, with a 7.2% market share. In the
fourth quarter of last year, the single largest market for ZTE
smartphones was the United States. These companies also sell
tablets, routers, hotspots, data storage, and cloud computing
infrastructure and services, all of which are used by small
businesses.

Although larger U.S. companies can engage other vendors to
provide certain cyber security monitoring and reinforcement of
their security perimeters, small businesses often do not have
the funds or capacity to do so. Notably, this year, ZTE was
sanctioned, and according to reports, Huawei has been
subpoenaed by the U.S. Department of Commerce for potential
violations of U.S. export laws in sending controlled items to
countries that have been designated as supporters of
international terrorism, or are otherwise subject to U.S. trade
sanctions and economic embargoes, such as Cuba, Iran, North
Korea, Sudan, and Syria.

While doing business with such companies can present
heightened risk, it should not be overlooked that there is
significant and growing vulnerability within the entire U.S.
technology supply chain. Increasingly, our telecommunications
equipment and systems are produced or assembled abroad, and we
are seeing nations taking strong measures to grow their own
semiconductor and other technology industries. Further, the
United States is finding itself with a talent shortage in
cybersecurity know-how. Thus, there are also broader structural
problems that should be closely addressed. Cyber security or
insecurity, as compounded for small business, does have a
correlation to the capability of our cyber work force and
security of our entire technology supply chains.

So how do we ensure that small businesses are not left to
fend for themselves in an increasingly hostile cyber world? For
the consideration of this Committee I respectfully submit the
following recommendations.

A focus on current laws. A continued focus on the
enforcement of our export control, cyber and other national
security laws, such as CFIUS, is appropriate. Understandably,
when implementing restrictions that prohibit exports,
reexports, and transfers (in-country) of items subject to the
punitive action, an administration must take into consideration
the broader effects that such actions will cause. However,
ensuring that our laws are enforced against those who violate
them sends important signals to the market. Such signals can
make their way to small businesses, allowing them to be better
served through purchases of products by vendors who follow the
laws.

Promoting cyber standards. This Committee should continue
to consider actions that build and promote industry-led cyber
security standards in the framework of ISO standards, or
otherwise, of best practice. Such standards could be applied to
government procurement, ensuring that government agencies
access equipment from vendors that achieve acceptable standards
of cyber security protection. Doing so could ensure that such
equipment permeates to the private sector broadly and
especially to small business. Agencies such as the Small
Business Administration could help to educate small businesses
on these standards so that they are aware of where best to turn
for equipment and services that reduce their cyber risk.

Engaging small businesses. Increasing outreach and
education to small businesses and finding appropriate funding
so that they are aware of the risks to their systems and have
the means to address that risk could be pursued. As part of
those efforts, it would be useful to strengthen information-
sharing initiatives between entities in order to provide small
businesses with a more immediate understanding of emerging
threats and patterns, and arm these businesses with the lessons
learned from others. We could also consider ways to build
incentives for purchasing safer equipment. Such market-based
cyber incentives, whether in purchasing, insurance, or
otherwise would help justify investments in cyber security.
Profit-minded organizations must see clear benefits to their
actions, as every dollar or hour spent on cyber security is not
spent on the organization's core goals. These actions
accompanied with industry norms and standards could highlight
cyber security investments as requisite. Passage of H.R. 5064,
The Improving Small Business Cyber Security Act of 2016, would
be important to these ends.

Addressing supply chain security issues and closing the
cyber deficit. As noted earlier, given the global nature of
technology production and cyber threats, we must find ways to
address the threats that emanate from these supply chains.
While important work is being done in the government and
private sector to find and achieve the right answers, this
should continue to be a focus of U.S. policy. Toward that end,
and as has been widely reported, we have a troubling cyber
deficit in terms of talent and training here in the United
States. We need to build the next generation of cyber
technicians and engineers. If we do not build this capacity, it
will be sourced from abroad, and doing so could put us behind
the technology and innovation curve. One element that makes
America strong is our ability to innovate, and that comes with
building the next technologies. We need to reclaim that field.

Thank you very much again for the opportunity to testify
before this Committee today on this important topic. I look
forward to answering any questions that you may have.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
