- SIZING UP SMALL BUSINESS: SBA'S FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT CONGRESSIONAL DIRECTION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SIZING UP SMALL BUSINESS: SBA'S FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT CONGRESSIONAL
DIRECTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 4, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-014
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-804 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
TOM RICE, South Carolina
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Stephen Dennis, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Richard Hanna...............................................     1
Hon. Mark Takai..................................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Jim Fontana, Dempsey Fontana, PLLC, Reston, VA, testifying on
behalf of the Small Business Value Added Reseller Consortium...     4
Mr. Stephen Charles, Co-Founder, Executive Vice President,
immixGroup, Inc., McLean, VA...................................     6
Mr. Ronald Reim, Executive Vice President, Oculus, Inc., St.
Louis, MO, testifying on behalf of the American Institute of
Architects.....................................................     7
Mr. Roger Jordan, Vice President of Government Relations,
Professional Services Council, Arlington, VA...................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Jim Fontana, Dempsey Fontana, PLLC, Reston, VA,
testifying on behalf of the Small Business Value Added
Reseller Consortium........................................    22
Mr. Stephen Charles, Co-Founder, Executive Vice President,
immixGroup, Inc., McLean, VA...............................    36
Mr. Ronald Reim, Executive Vice President, Oculus, Inc., St.
Louis, MO, testifying on behalf of the American Institute
of Architects..............................................    52
Mr. Roger Jordan, Vice President of Government Relations,
Professional Services Council, Arlington, VA...............    57
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
Engineering/Remediation Resources Group, Inc. - ERRG.........    64
Kemron Environmental Services................................    66
Nobis Engineering, Inc.......................................    69
The 562910 Small Business Community..........................    73
Sovereign Consulting Inc.....................................    77
Tantara Corporation..........................................    80
USA Environmental, Inc.......................................    82
Watermark....................................................    84

SIZING UP SMALL BUSINESS: SBA'S FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT CONGRESSIONAL
DIRECTION

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 4, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Richard Hanna
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hanna, Knight, Bost, Hardy, Chu,
Lawrence, Takai, and Clarke.
Chairman Hanna. I call this hearing to order. I want to
welcome Congressman Mark Takai, who is joining us today as the
new ranking member of this Subcommittee.
Welcome. I look forward to working with you. I look forward
to a hearing in Hawaii, incidentally. That might be not a bad
thing.
Mr. Takai. Everyone is invited.
Chairman Hanna. Also, I would like to welcome Congressman
Mike Bost, who is sitting in on this hearing today.
The topic of today's hearing goes to the essence of what we
do as a Subcommittee since it deals with who we consider a
small business. When we ask who qualifies as a small business,
the answer to that question has ramifications for all the Small
Business Administration programs. The answer also governs which
companies are eligible for the $200 billion in prime and
subcontracts each year.
The answer isn't necessarily a simple one. A small aircraft
manufacturer isn't going to look like a small architectural
firm. If you ask most businesses, they will tell you that they
are small, but that their next largest competitor isn't a small
business. For these reasons, Congress gave the SBA the ability
to decide which firms are small on an industry by industry
basis. However, we require that the SBA base these decisions in
a rigorous rulemaking process.
Unfortunately, today's hearing highlights a problem with
that process. During the 112th Congress, the Small Business
Committee strengthened the rules governing how the SBA defines
a small business. This legislative change, which was signed
into law on January 2, 2013, was prompted by complaints from
industries such as architects, engineers, and technology
service providers that the size standards do not reflect the
reality of who they were in their businesses.
However, 2-1/2 years later the SBA has yet to implement the
changes that were made during the 112th Congress. Indeed, a
recent proposed rule ignored these important bipartisan
statutory changes. At the time, the Committee submitted
comments warning the SBA that unless they withdrew the proposed
rule they were courting a lawsuit they couldn't win. The SBA is
proceeding with this proposed rule and says it will be
implementing the statutory changes sometime next year.
In the interim, they are deciding whether the size
standards that govern tens of billions of Federal contracts
each year. Currently, firms in these industries have little
recourse. They can sue in Federal district court at a great
cost of money and time that they can ill afford.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses about the
effects of the SBA's failure to comply with these statutory
changes. The Subcommittee also welcomes any comments you may
have on Congressman Bost's proposed solutions to the problem,
H.R. 1429, the Stronger Voice for Small Business Act of 2015,
which passed the House as part of this year's National Defense
Authorization Act.
The testimony collected today by us will go to the SBA, to
the Office of Management and Budget, in a effort to further
inform how the SBA is promulgating size standards.
I now yield to the ranking member for his opening comments.
Mr. Takai. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for holding
today's hearing.
Small business plays a critical role in America's economy.
I come from Hawaii where over 90 percent of the businesses are
considered small and more than 50 percent of the workforce
works for a small business.
Over the years, Congress has created numerous program set-
asides, tax preferences, and SBA loan programs to help these
small businesses succeed. However, the advantages conferred by
these programs have led to heated debate over what is truly a
small business and acceptable small business size standards to
govern eligibility.
The definition of what exactly is a small business has
eluded us in many different areas in policy as the definition
may work for a business in one context but may be entirely
inefficient in another. On numerous occasions, the SBA proposed
a comprehensive revision of its size standards, but the end
result was a confusing patchwork of regulation.
The Jobs Act of 2010 attempted to clarify these standards,
yet in conducting reviews various stakeholders raised concerns
about the oversimplification of the process and questioned
whether true small businesses were being left out of the
definitions.
To address these concerns, provisions were included in the
NDAA of 2013 that required SBA to continue its process only if
certain data was made publicly available prior to the issuance
of any proposed size standards revisions. But for reasons
unclear to us, SBA has yet to implement these requirements and
small businesses continue to be disadvantaged by these reviews.
Without an accurate small business definition, firms are
excluded from programs designed to aid in their growth and
allow them to create more jobs. For example, last year, small
entities accessed over $30 billion in capital using SBA loans.
Many businesses use loan proceeds to keep their doors open,
retain employees, and create new jobs. However, firms deemed
other than small were precluded from accessing this capital.
Not only does this process harm business operations, it
impacts Federal protections guaranteed to small firms. If a
business is not considered small, agencies are neither
obligated to review the impact that regulatory changes have on
small firms nor offer alternatives. Most importantly,
businesses excluded from the definition are barred from
participating in various contracting programs which awarded
almost $100 billion in contracting dollars just last year.
On the other hand, if a size standard is overinclusive,
businesses that would otherwise be considered large would be
able to compete in these programs, depriving small businesses
of contracting opportunities.
As previously attested before this Committee, small
businesses already have difficulty competing in the Federal
marketplace. With some large businesses already receiving small
business contracting dollars, it is vital the size process be
fair and balanced.
Today we will hear from multiple people that have been
affected by the process currently in place. I want to be clear
that we are not advocating for one size standard over another,
but rather looking for a transparent process that results in
sizes reflective of industry standards.
In advance of the testimony, I want to thank all the
witnesses for their participation and insights into this
important topic.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
Our first witness is Jim Fontana, cofounder and managing
partner of Dempsey Fontana, PLLC. He has over 30 years of
experience as an attorney, specializing in government and
commercial contracts. He is testifying today on behalf of the
Small Business Value Added Reseller Consortium.
Sitting next to him is our second witness, Stephen Charles,
cofounder and executive president of immix, Inc. Mr. Charles is
the coauthor of ``The Inside Guide to the Federal IT Market,''
a resource for technology companies interested in doing
business with the government. Immix's group manages the
contracts of many small businesses, working with more than 600
value added resellers.
I now yield to my colleague, Congressman Bost, to introduce
our next witness.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member, thank you
both for being involved with this hearing today and allowing me
to introduce the next participant.
Mr. Ronald Reim serves as executive vice president of
Oculus, Inc., a small business architectural design firm with
offices in St. Louis and Dallas. While Oculus is not physically
located in my congressional district, many of the employees
actually live in the 12th Congressional District of Illinois.
The company has also worked on a project in southwest Illinois,
which also include projects at Scott Air Force Base. He is
testifying here today on behalf of the American Institute of
Architects.
Mr. Reim, thank you for being here, and I look forward to
hearing your testimony.
Chairman Hanna. I now yield to Ranking Member Takai to
introduce our fourth witness.
Mr. Takai. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Roger Jordan. Mr. Jordan
is the vice president of government relations at the
Professional Services Council, a national trade association of
government, professional, and technical services industry
businesses. At PSC, he is primarily engaged in leading PSC's
legislative efforts on a number of issues impacting Federal
acquisition policy.
Prior to joining PSC, he worked for 10 years as executive
director of the Small Firm Council and the director of the
international and state legislative programs at the American
Council of Engineering Companies.
Welcome, Mr. Jordan.
Chairman Hanna. Mr. Fontana, you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF MR. JIM FONTANA, DEMPSEY FONTANA, PLLC, RESTON,
VA, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE SMALL BUSINESS VALUE ADDED
RESELLER CONSORTIUM; MR. STEPHEN CHARLES, COFOUNDER, EXECUTIVE
VICE PRESIDENT, IMMIXGROUP, INC., MCLEAN, VA; MR. RONALD REIM,
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, OCULUS, INC., ST. LOUIS, MO,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ARCHITECTS;
AND MR. ROGER JORDAN, VICE PRESIDENT OF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS,
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES COUNCIL, ARLINGTON, VA

STATEMENT OF JIM FONTANA

Mr. Fontana. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Hanna,
Ranking Member Takai, and members of the Subcommittee. As you
stated, my name is Jim Fontana, founding member of Dempsey
Fontana law firm. I thank you very much for the opportunity to
testifying today.
Today I am going to chat and testify on behalf of 13 small
information technology value added resellers. That is a
mouthful, so we will just say IT-VARs. These 13 companies have
formed a coalition called the VARC, Value Added Resellers
Coalition. The companies are representatives of thousands of
other, similarly situated IT-VARs around the Nation that
compete on individual Federal agency small business set-aside
solicitations or multibillion-dollar agency program
requirements only for small business.
The VARC members fall under various programs, including the
Small Disadvantaged Businesses, Women-Owned Businesses,
Veteran-Owned Businesses, and small businesses that are located
in what we know are HUBZones.
On behalf of the VARC, I am expressing my support for H.R.
1429, introduced by Representative Bost, called the Stronger
Voice for Small Business Act of 2015. The underpinnings of my
support are twofold. First, businesses selling goods and
services to the government that are certified as small under
SBA regulations are subject to the SBA's changing size
standards. And as was mentioned and as you are aware, the Small
Business Jobs Act of 2010 directs the SBA to conduct a detailed
review of all size standards every 5 years.
The only avenue for these small companies to challenge an
SBA size standard is for such companies to file Federal
lawsuits under the Administrative Procedures Act. The Stronger
Voice Act will allow small firms a quicker and much less
expensive administrative forum to challenge such size
standards, as opposed to the mounds of pleadings, motions,
discovery, hearing-related documents. At the end of the day,
these small companies will be afforded a much less expensive
forum than going to Federal court or resorting to full-blown
litigation.
Secondly, the administrative forum created by the Stronger
Voice Act is particularly needed at this time, given the SBA's
recent proposed deletion of the 150 employee-based size
standard contained under Note 18 of the NAICS Code 541519,
which applies to IT-VARs. The deletion of this employee size
standard would leave only the $25.5 million revenue-based size
standard under that code.
I say $25.5 million. That is what the SBA used to do its
analysis. The real standard was at the time $27.5 million. So I
will just use $27.5 million.
I will say that the SBA had mentioned to me, in a meeting
with them on March 24, that they had written a letter to the
full Committee stating that they would finalize the rule
sometime this summer.
Now, there are a number of reasons why this proposed rule
with respect to this particular NAICS code applying to IT-VARs
should not be implemented and represents a valid backdrop for
the Stronger Voice Act. And so in the interest of time, I will
just summarize those reasons.
First, the SBA's decision to eliminate the IT-VAR employee
size standard is based on outdated data that claims that the
IT-VAR, the 150-employee count, is more or less equivalent to
$27.5 million in receipts under this NAICS code. And just
quickly, that assumption is clearly wrong.
I have attached to my full statement data a survey of some
of the major government-wide acquisition contracts, or GWACs,
that show clearly, just on that data--it is not perfect data,
but just on that data--that at least 43 percent of those IT-
VARs that were considered small will not be considered small if
this proposal is put through. And so just doing our own
analysis, we find out that that percentage is much higher.
I will add that in 2002, going into 2003, the SBA, when
they first established this size standard, had concluded, and I
will just quote briefly from the language of that notice,
quote: ``An employee size standard is considered a better
measure of the size of IT-VAR operations than receipts.''
The SBA based this conclusion on a very exhaustive and
detailed quantitative analysis, but no such analysis was
performed under this proposed rule. Frankly, I don't think
those numbers are there. I don't think that the SBA can provide
any such explanation under any objective standard why the IT-
VAR business is different today than it was back then.
The bottom line is that the proposed rule is not supported
by accurate and relevant market data, and it should not be
passed. I think that the SBA should consult further with the
procuring agencies and affected small IT-VARs as well as this
Subcommittee.
In addition, Congress should adopt the Stronger Voice Act
to allow small businesses the ability to administratively
challenge these proposed changes to fairly protect their
interests.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to testify at this
hearing. I would be pleased to answer any questions you or any
member of the Subcommittee may have.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
Mr. Charles.
I should have mentioned there is a 5-minute rule, but we
want to hear what you have to say.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN CHARLES

Mr. Charles. Thank you, Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member
Takai, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for this
opportunity to testify on issues related to small business
contracting and size standards. My name is Steve Charles,
cofounder of the immixGroup, where for two decades I have
worked to help information technology manufacturers succeed in
the government marketplace.
Since our founding in 1997, with my partner and I,
immixGroup has grown into a recognized leader in the public
sector IT marketplace representing more than 250 manufacturers
as a distributor to more than 600 value added resellers, most
of them small businesses. We are a top 10 IT 70 GSA multiple
awards schedule contractor with IT product sales over $420
million in fiscal year 2014.
On March 31, immixGroup was acquired by Arrow Electronics,
a Fortune 200 company, so we are no longer small by any
standard. And moving forward, as a public sector subsidiary of
a global IT distributor, we do plan to continue our involvement
in small business and product procurement issues on behalf of
the hundreds of channel partners who source IT products from
us.
We believe it is critically important for the Federal
Government to maintain small business size standards that
accurately represent each industry sector and subsector and
support efforts to ensure that SBA's review of size standards
and NAICS code updates are based on accurate, relevant data
performed in a statutorily correct, transparent, and thorough
manner.
We also support an enforcement mechanism to formally
challenge size standards through the SBA Office of Hearings and
Appeals, such as that proposed in the Stronger Voice for Small
Business Act of 2015 introduced by Representative Bost and
cosponsored by our own Congressman, Representative Connolly.
A key recommendation of immixGroup is for SBA to analyze
Federal procurement data, in addition to census data, as part
of the size standard review process. By way of example, we look
at the SBA's recent proposed size standards rule eliminating
the IT-VAR exception, also known as Footnote 18 from NAICS Code
541519, which is entitled ``Other Computer Services.'' In its
proposal, the SBA notes that the lack of data on
characteristics of firms involved in IT-VAR activities to
evaluate the current 150-employee size standard also justifies
SBA's proposal to eliminate the IT-VAR subindustry category.
Indeed, immixGroup is not aware of any research conducted
to justify this subindustry. We firmly believe that if a
nonpartisan independent review were conducted on orders placed
pursuant to multiple award delivery order contracts set aside
under the IT-VAR exemption, the research would clearly show how
agencies' use of this exception to limit competition for the
purchase of products has been confusing and misguided,
categorizing many billions of dollars, about $10 billion to $12
billion a year spent for products manufactured by large
businesses as ``Other Computer Services'' under this NAICS
code, while inhibiting the ability of otherwise qualified small
contractors to compete for Federal IT product orders.
The use of Footnote 18 in this way excludes a large segment
of prospective small business contractors and violates a
contracting officer's obligation to designate a NAICS code that
describes the principal nature of the product or service being
acquired.
According to current statutes, should a mix of products and
services be required, the NAICS code chosen is supposed to
represent the industry accounting for the largest percentage of
the contract price. We believe that for the vast majority of
the nearly 60,000 contract actions per year conducted pursuant
to 541519 this is not the case.
For these reasons, immixGroup supports the SBA's objective
of striking the Footnote 18 exception. Our hope is that issues
related to eliminating this exception can be resolved in a way
that promotes clarity, consistency, and confidence in how
socioeconomic policy is being implemented within the
procurement system for the purchase of products.
Related to SBA's IT-VAR exception proposal, the SBA
released another proposal clarifying COTS software and the use
of the nonmanufacturer rule. We support these as well. Every
day we see solicitations requesting a quote for items
manufactured by a large business that are set aside for small
businesses with no NMR waiver, creating a Catch-22. Meanwhile,
all the dollars obligated count toward meeting the agency's
small business goals.
We respectfully request that before Congress considers
increasing the statutory government-wide small business prime
contracting goals, it requests order level line item data to
quantify the extent of this practice across all product
industries.
In conclusion, we thank the Subcommittee for considering
these commonsense measures to ensure that SBA conduct size
standard evaluations are based on relevant data in full
compliance with the law. Thank you for this opportunity.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
Mr. Reim.

STATEMENT OF RONALD REIM

Mr. Reim. Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Takai, and members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on behalf of my firm and on behalf of the American
Institute of Architects on the critical issues of SBA size
standards.
My name is Ronald Reim. I am an executive vice president
and founding principal of Oculus, Inc., a full service
architectural and strategic facility planning, interior design,
and move management firm with offices in St. Louis and Dallas,
Texas. In addition to serving these communities, we work with a
number of Federal agencies and do projects all across the
country.
My firm is grateful for the assistance that the SBA has
provided. Our designation as a small architectural practice has
helped our company bridge into more complex and interesting and
meaningful projects, giving us an avenue to work on private
sector work as well through gaining this experience.
Our SBA designation also helped us keep our doors open
during the recession. During that time, our firm was forced to
severely cut staff as our private sector work dropped off
precipitously. For the most critical 6-month period, we cut pay
20 percent for our senior people and laid off staff as a
necessary survival tactic, but our Federal Government work
provided an avenue for us to essentially keep our doors open,
and the SBA designation truly helped in that.
Dramatically increasing the size standards, as the SBA
proposed in 2011, would create a ripple effect for us much like
the recession, we think. It would just simply change the
competitive nature of our industry, opening up the door to much
larger competitors in our arena. The SBA proposed lumping
together architecture and engineering firms into a single
massive size standard that would have effectively defined 98
percent of the architectural practices as small.
Substantially raising the size allowance would for all
intents and purposes eliminate Oculus' ability to compete for
these Federal contracts for set-aside projects. It would
reclassify mid- to large-size firms, essentially making David
and Goliath the same. Yet competitively we are very different
organizations and companies.
The current size limitation provides opportunities for
truly small businesses to have a legitimate shot at performing
Federal work and opens the door for us to get in. And gaining
access to restricted set-aside contracts is essential for us to
essentially have a shot at it. This allows an emerging firm to
gain experience with these types of projects in the government
arena that allows us to build a portfolio that we then can
compete on a more even keel with larger companies, and that is
essential for us to be able to survive. You don't get Federal
projects unless you have that portfolio, and this is the way
for us to build it.
Had the proposed 2011 size standard been put into place, it
is very likely that we would have decided it was just too
difficult to even compete for Federal work and taken a
different direction, cutting off a very vital avenue for us to
gain those experiences. The SBA is required to review and
adjust size standards only once every 5 years. Five years of
being cut out of this type of work would be devastating to our
firm. It is just we couldn't survive that length of time.
This is why it is essential that the SBA gets the size
standards right. It is also why I am pleased that members of
this Committee, led by Representatives Bost and Connolly, have
introduced House 1429, the Stronger Voice for Small Business
Act. Giving us this avenue to be able to question and challenge
these designations in a more cost-effective manner is
absolutely essential as well. Litigation is just not really an
option for a small company like mine.
I am pleased that the House incorporated this bill into the
defense bill, and I hope it can become law later this year.
Related to the issue of size standards and how contractor
payments are calculated in net revenue of an architecture firm,
as much as 50 percent of our revenue passes directly through
our company as the team leaders on these contracts, so it is
money that goes to us directly through to our subconsultants.
We have very little, essentially, in that process at all to
manage that.
To suggest that a firm is not a small business merely
because it handles the revenue of these other companies,
however briefly, before using it to pay other firms is simply
unfair. The SBA could easily address this issue by not counting
that money passing through those firms or changing the standard
through which how it designates small business.
In conclusion, the SBA is an immensely valuable institution
that has helped innumerable small businesses. The SBA's vast
reach, however, means that even minor changes to the rules and
policies can have dramatic consequences for small businesses.
Therefore, we ask that the SBA follow the letter and intent of
the law and ensure that any size standard adjustments be made
to reflect current market conditions.
I would like to thank Chairman Hanna and Ranking Member
Takai and the distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank
you.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan.

STATEMENT OF ROGER JORDAN

Mr. Jordan. Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Takai, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today.
Prior to 2009, PSC was calling upon SBA to undertake a
thorough analysis of the size standards, particularly for the
54, or the professional, scientific, and technical services
sector in which many PSC member companies operate. We viewed
this review as necessary because it had been years since SBA
had last conducted a thorough review.
SBA began such a review in 2009 by first developing a
methodology to calculate size standards based on five factors,
only one of which was focused on the Federal contracting
marketplace. PSC commented on the methodology, which was
finalized without substantive change.
Subsequently, in March of 2011, SBA issued a proposed rule
to revise size standards for 36 industries in the 54 sector.
For most industries, the increase in the size standards were
fairly substantial. For example, most size standards that had
been established at $7 million in annual gross receipts were
increased to either $10 million or $14 million. That increase
provided much-needed flexibility for small firms to mature
while still having access to restricted competitions. However,
for other industries, primarily for computer-related services,
that size standard remained essentially stagnant.
In our comments on the proposed rule, we raised several
concerns, and our views remain unchanged. Our concern is that
SBA is ignoring the fact that computer-related services has
undergone and continues to undergo a significant change over
the last 25 years. The Federal Government is purchasing more of
these services than at any time in history, and companies
across industry are focusing on providing a comprehensive set
of solutions to the Federal Government that include a
combination of telecommunications, information technology, and
other solutions and services. Yet SBA proposed raising the size
standards for those categories only by $500,000, from $25
million to $25.5 million.
Additionally, SBA established a common size standard for a
handful of IT-related industries, even though the industry data
supported a distinct same size standard for some of those
industries. For example, SBA's own analysis shows that for
computer facilities management services the calculated size
standard was $35.5 million, but SBA still chose to retain the
lower common size standard for this category.
Therefore, by establishing the common size standard that
incorporates this NAICS code and other computer-related NAICS
codes at that common level of $25.5 million, SBA has eliminated
legitimate small businesses from being able to qualify as such.
PSC's comments to SBA focused heavily on this point.
However, in its 2012 final rule, SBA declined to adopt our
recommendation that common size standards be avoided altogether
or that they default to the higher threshold to avoid
negatively impacting small businesses. To this Committee's
credit, you recognized that reliance on a common size standard
could have a negative effect on small businesses, and in May of
2011 a hearing was held on the issue at which PSC provided
testimony.
Later, legislation was enacted via Section 1661 of the
fiscal year 2013 National Defense Authorization Act that
requires SBA to justify the use of common size standards.
Unfortunately, the NDAA language was enacted after the SBA
final rule changing the size standards for the 54 sector was
complete and no SBA justification has been provided. Thus,
legitimate small businesses have been denied the ability to
compete for set-aside contracts since the final rule went into
effect.
An additional effect is that companies have been denied the
ability to increase their revenues while maintaining their
small business size status. In the computer facilities
management services industry, for example, firms that were
close to exceeding the $25 million size standard in 2012 would
have been able to grow their business to $35.5 million while
still being afforded the benefits that come with being a small
business Federal contractor.
The added growth that the higher size standard would have
provided to these companies could have eased their transition
into the full and open competitive market. Instead, the result
has likely been that businesses have either refrained from
growth in order to maintain their small business status or they
have had to transition exclusively into the full and open
market much sooner that they would have had SBA actually
followed its own methodology.
We expect SBA to undertake a required review of the 54
sector within the next 2 years, and while SBA should not be
allowed to ignore the law in the interim, we are disappointed
that they have not proactively made necessary updates. We
certainly look forward to SBA complying with Section 1661 at
the time of the next review.
PSC also reiterates its support for an SBA size standard
methodology that gives more weight to the Federal marketplace
dynamics or creating a completely separate set of size
standards to be used for Federal procurement purposes only.
Lastly, it is important to recognize that 1661 is one of
many small business contracting statutory provisions enacted
since 2010. This Committee has been vigilant about holding SBA
and the FAR Council accountable for implementing those
provisions, and PSC shares the frustration expressed at the
recent Subcommittee hearing about the length of time it has
taken to complete implementation.
As such, PSC supports efforts to move towards concurrent
and collaborative SBA and FAR rulemaking to speed the
implementation process. It is simply unacceptable that
implementation of enacted small business provisions has taken 3
or more years to fully implement.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. Thank you again.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
I am going to yield the first question to Mr. Bost.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Reim, I am going to just go right into it. I know that
you have done work for Scott Air Force Base and Department of
Veterans Affairs, but your business obviously works for other
projects besides that. How is working on Federal projects
different than in the private sector?
Mr. Reim. In the private sector, we compete with large
companies and small businesses. What is different about it is
that the Federal work offers us the ability to team with large
companies and gain parallel experience along with them. So
prime contracts, for example, where we have large companies as
our subconsultants give us expertise and allow us exposure to
project types that we would never be selected for typically out
in the private sector. Those would normally be primed by large
firms and we might be the subconsultant to them.
So, for example, our work with the VA has allowed us
exposure to very high-level projects in a planning and
oversight role that then has opened the doors for us with our
private clients as well. So, for example, our work with the VA
has opened up project opportunities for us with local
healthcare provider BJC on larger, more complex projects.
Mr. Bost. All right. Good.
So in your type of business with architecture, what is the
level of competition that is out there, and how many are small
and how many of you are you going head to head with the larger
companies?
Mr. Reim. The vast majority of firms are small companies,
but there is a big, extreme difference between firms providing
architectural services that are independent architectural
firms, like mine, and larger conglomerate firms that consist of
a full array of product services and types, including
construction and construction management, all disciplines of
engineering, and there are essentially global companies doing
it.
We are a local company providing local jobs and keeping
expertise in the local community, and that is really important.
I think that if companies like ours weren't allowed to
essentially start and grow and use these types of tools to
merge into or emerge as more mature companies, then there would
be a separation of really big firms and really small firms not
doing Federal work and really almost nothing in between.
Mr. Bost. Would you say that having the opportunity to
compete on that level instead of everybody trying to go against
the big dogs without any opportunity like this, beneficial for
the taxpayer?
Mr. Reim. Yes, absolutely. I think that our small firm cost
structures for the government are lower than large firms. Our
overhead structure is lower. So we afford a good value for the
Federal Government in competing on those projects, as well as
we are able to put teams together that tap into the expertise
that some of these larger firms obviously have, given their
size and the number and types of projects they work on, to
provide the same level of knowledge back to the government and
a quality level to the service.
Mr. Bost. I have got one question for the whole panel, if I
can. Have any of you actually had to go through the law suit
process that, if the bill goes all the way through and passes,
that you can go directly to the appeals process to the Small
Business Administration? Have any of you had to go through the
process right now of law suits for any changing of definition
of a small business or not?
Mr. Jordan. No, sir.
Mr. Bost. Okay.
Mr. Fontana. Congressman Bost, I have been involved with
lawsuits under the APA, Administrative Procedure Act,
challenging agency decisions. You can challenge designations of
NAICS codes, but not the decision to change the size standard
of a NAICS code. So this would be a very new process.
Mr. Bost. Okay.
Mr. Fontana. But they are daunting and they are expensive
lawsuits, like any Federal lawsuit.
Mr. Bost. I have in my district right now a situation with
a boot manufacturer that has been a small business and always
been rated as small business, and a lot of the competitors are
now arguing, and they are actually smaller than they were when
they first got that standard. But I know they are going through
that process right now.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hanna. I yield to Ranking Member Takai.
Mr. Takai. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan, in your testimony you discussed how SBA
traditionally analyzes the five primary factors when making its
size determination. You also discussed that the impact of
government contracting should be given more weight. Why do you
believe this is such an important factor?
Mr. Jordan. Well, the Federal Government marketplace is
much different from the commercial marketplace. The services
and the solutions that our member companies are providing are
usually a lot bigger, a lot more complex, a lot more
comprehensive. And so we often see larger contracts. We have a
larger barriers to entry, some government-unique reporting and
compliance requirements, for instance, that businesses of all
size must comply with. So you have to be a little bit more
savvy to enter the marketplace, which usually means you are a
little bit bigger.
And back to my point on the size of contracts, I mean, we
continue to see some very large contracts being set aside for
small businesses, and that is not necessarily a bad thing, but
sometimes the Federal agencies go a little bit too far. There
is a great example within NGA that is moving right now that
would set aside a contract under a size standard of $15
million, and it is a 5-year contract with a ceiling of $850
million and they want to make award to four to eight companies.
So when you look at that and you do the math, it is
somewhere in the neighborhood of $20 million to $40 million per
year per company in terms of what they would need to perform
under a size standard of $15 million. It just doesn't make
sense.
Now, there are certainly other cases where contracts are
structured in the right way, but I think it paints a picture of
the requirements are often larger, more complex, and therefore
you don't get the kinds of one- or two-man small firms that are
operating in the commercial space.
Mr. Takai. Thank you.
So we have seen agencies, and you mentioned one in
particular, bundle contracts. I am assuming the one you just
mentioned is a bundled contract. This, along with the
predominance of multiple award contracts, has caused the
overall value of contracts to increase significantly. Do you
believe these developments have caused businesses to outgrow
their size standards at a higher rate than if they won single
award contracts?
Mr. Jordan. Absolutely. We are hearing that more and more
frequently, that, again, because of the size of these
contracts, you can win a single award and almost overnight
eclipse your size standard.
Now, that is not necessarily always a bad thing, but if it
is a 5-year contract and you are dedicating all of your small
business resources to performing on that contract, what happens
when that contract comes to conclusion? One, you are no longer
eligible to bid on the work if they set it aside as a small
business, and so you are going to lose that work when a
competition comes around, and if you haven't built up your
overall capacity, then you are going to see a precipitous drop
in your revenue, and that is going to be a real business
challenge.
Mr. Takai. So what would the size standards be for these
types of situations as a result of these trends?
Mr. Jordan. Well, it is hard to say. I mean, I continue to
believe that each and every NAICS code needs to be assessed on
an individual basis. And SBA has developed a methodology, it is
fairly complex, and without getting into the nuances of that, I
think that what they ought to be doing is applying that
methodology consistently to all the NAICS codes and avoiding a
reliance on common size standards where the individual NAICS
codes that are included under that common size standard would
be different. Why do we want to penalize any small business? It
just doesn't make any sense. Just for the sake of efficiency
for whom? Efficiency for SBA's process of establishing the size
standards?
Mr. Takai. All right. So during the initial review of your
organization's size standards, PSC requested additional
information from the SBA to better inform comments you
submitted. The NDAA provisions discussed here today were meant
to better inform the public about how SBA arrived at their
proposed size standards so that all relevant information was
available. What effect could this information have on the size
standards process, as well as industry's ability to participate
in the comment processing? You have got about 30 seconds to
answer that one.
Mr. Jordan. I think basically, sir, it comes down to
transparency, and that just by requiring the SBA to submit a
justification for why they have bundled NAICS codes together
under a common size standard can help industry understand their
approach, but also where we think that that approach is
misguided, it gives us a little bit more information to push
back on.
Mr. Takai. All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
It would be nice if the SBA was here to also participate in
this, but they are not.
The expectation is that H.R. 1429 will somehow settle some
of this. With all the different NAICS codes and size standards
and the proposal for more size standards, is the work, Mr.
Fontana--or anybody--so subjective as to never be able to get
it right, which in my mind would make the appeal process that
more critical? And how do you view the appeal process in terms
of resolution?
I mean, it is nice to be able to go to court, it is nice to
have some kind of arbitration, but at the end of the day you
want a resolution in a timely fashion that allows architectural
firms and IT firms to have a fair shot in their own sectors.
What would you like it to look like? What is your expectation,
Mr. Fontana?
Mr. Fontana. You mean of the appeal process?
Chairman Hanna. Yeah.
Mr. Fontana. I think as the bill, as written, it is as near
as you can get in terms of what that due process would be. You
would be able to challenge it before the SBA, go before the
SBA's Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is a fairly
simple--compared to litigation--it is a fairly simple process.
It would be like a small business size protest or a status
protest. Their paper exchange is usually one each, it might be
several others.
So it is a fairly simple process. And then after that you
would have judicial review of that process if the parties so
desire. So it does introduce a much less expensive process that
small companies would be able to afford relatively.
Chairman Hanna. But are there teeth within that that you
would like to see? I mean, it is one thing to win your own
appeal. It is quite another matter to have the kind of broad
change that you are appealing because what you are really
saying is that this industry, this sector is not being treated
fairly broadly, or you might not be there in the first place.
Do you agree with that?
Mr. Fontana. I agree with that in the sense that this is a
fairly narrowly tailored bill. It has to do with the creation
or revision of a size standard. So it is narrow in that
respect. There is no other forum, other than going through the
SBA comment period, as many have done, out of 170 there was
overwhelming opposition to elimination of Note 18, or going to
court. We took it a step further. We are having continuing
dialogue with the SBA on this issue prior to their finalization
of some rule.
But to answer your first question on the subjectivity, does
the SBA never get it right under these circumstances, I can
cynical and say, yes, they never get it right. In this case,
they just did not. They didn't follow the law, they didn't
follow the Jobs Act, they didn't follow NDAA 2013. They got all
the data wrong. The SBA said it would be a 1 percent impact. We
are showing much, much more of that.
So having this type of mechanism, and I would doubt that
this mechanism would be in place by the time the rule is
finalized, but having this mechanism would allow these
companies to challenge SBA in this case simply not following
the law.
Chairman Hanna. Mr. Charles, would you like to respond?
Mr. Charles. Well, I too wonder what the effect of an
appeal decision would be. Would SBA actually change course and
modify the size standard of a particular NAICS code? I don't
know. I am not familiar enough with the bill and the downstream
implications.
I would like to add the perspective that I would hope that
we could look at Federal procurement data in these discussions
in addition to census data. We are looking at census data in
terms of size of companies, and some of the other witnesses
here have alluded to this point, that the Federal marketplace
is a little different. And to my knowledge, SBA is not
analyzing Federal procurement data at the NAICS code level, and
further, is not analyzing procurement data down at the line
item level in these orders, which would bring us a whole lot of
information about whether or not Footnote 18 comports with
other statutes.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
Mr. Reim, you mentioned almost in passing, and I have got
about 30 seconds, that you see they are driving social and
economic policy. What did you mean by that?
Mr. Reim. You know, if these codes change or the amounts,
the limits, change dramatically, we would see the landscape for
competition change dramatically, and it would often restrict
small businesses from being able to gain an entree into that.
And it is pretty much making a decision then that if you are
not going to contract or not able to contract with the Federal
Government, that you are locked out of that element of
business.
Chairman Hanna. All right. Thank you very much.
I yield to Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. I thank the chairman and ranking member. I also
thank our witnesses here today.
Establishing up-to-date and pragmatic small business size
standard methodologies is important for the entire small
business sector. This is the determining factor behind many SBA
assistance programs, such as capital access and technical
assistance. And while I understand that the SBA faces a
cumbersome task in constantly updating size standards to keep
current with industry growth and inflation, I appreciate the
concerns that you have put forth here today.
I want to ask if you could just drill down a little bit
more on the bundling of the NAICS codes, because I think that
there may be where some realignment and perhaps the remedy may
exist. Mr. Jordan, you spoke about that, but I would like to
hear from the panel. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan. Sure. I will start.
So SBA is driving towards what they say is streamlining the
size standard process, and so they want to, in my view, limit
the number of different size standards that are out there. And
again, to my point earlier, that makes little sense when you
consider the variation and the dynamics of the vast number of
industries that are comprised within the NAICS code structure.
And so to me it is almost as if each industry should be
assessed on its own merits, and whatever that size standard,
based on that, the SBA's own calculation comes out to be, that
is really where they ought to focus. And again the example that
I used in my oral statement was around the computer-related
facilities where by SBA's own calculation they determined that
the size standards for that NAICS code was $35.5 million, yet
they chose to go with a size standard that was $10 million
lower.
And so that meant that any companies that were in between
that delta, essentially, by SBA's own definition, were small,
but would be considered to be other than small, they would be
ineligible to compete for small business set-asides. And to me,
I think that is a fundamental flaw.
Ms. Clarke. So let me ask, do you think there is
realignment required or do you think that there needs to be a
decoupling or debundling, if you will, and a breakdown of
industry? Because I am just trying to think about capacity of
SBA to do that level of assessment when you can be talking
about hundreds of industries.
Mr. Jordan. Well, let me be clear. I think that there
certainly are circumstances in which creating a common size
standard makes sense. For example, if you have a group of
industries where the capabilities or the functions are
essentially similar or there is a lot of overlap and the
individual size standard determination determined by the
methodology that SBA uses comes out and it is relatively the
same, then by all means go ahead and use a common size
standard, provide the justification, and I don't think you will
get a lot of opposition from industry. But when you have a
significant variation in those individual NAICS codes, then it
doesn't make sense to bundle them.
So I think it is, to answer your question, a mix of both.
In some cases, yes, it is fine, but in others it doesn't make
sense.
Ms. Clarke. Okay. Let me ask if you can please elaborate on
suggestions that you have to improve the current size standard
methodologies that affect your sectors.
Mr. Jordan. I will start by again focusing on the Federal
contracting marketplace. Again, it is very different, but it is
only one of the five significant factors that the SBA uses to
calculate size standards today. And there are factors like the
impact on the SBA loan programs that they factor in, and I
think that factor has a very minor impact. I mean, the
companies that are operating in the Federal space are not
necessarily the same companies that are seeking to access
capital through the SBA loan program.
So to the extent that they are artificially keeping those
size standards lower so they don't have a dramatic impact on
loan programs doesn't make a whole lot of sense when you are
looking at size standards through the Federal contracting lens.
Ms. Clarke. Gotcha.
Mr. Fontana. I will just add, I agree with Mr. Jordan's
analysis on this. It is very simple. With this particular
subindustry on IT-VARs or with any industry, the idea is for
the SBA to understand the business, understand that industry or
subindustry, use reasonable methodology, look at the market and
the competitive impact data, which the law requires to make
that reasonable decision, and that is it, but the SBA is not
doing that here.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hanna. Ms. Chu.
Ms. Chu. Yes. I would like to address this to Mr. Reim.
Last Congress I hosted a roundtable and heard from the
architects in my district about the effect that size standards
have had on their businesses, and they reported that the
average size of architectural firms is less than 15 people, but
the current size that the SBA has for architectural services is
$7.5 million, which they found to be very, very high. They were
extremely concerned about the potential changes to the size
standards and being forced to compete with larger firms that
are not actually small.
From your perspective, is the current size standard for the
architects, for your industry, is it too high?
Mr. Reim. I don't believe that it is. I think that when it
was much smaller we actually for a time grew out of the size
standard. I believe back the last standard was at $4.5 million.
We actually grew out of it.
In the current size standard, we might face that in a year
or 2 as our company continues to recover from the recession and
grow. But I think that if it goes up much higher than the $7.5
million that it changes the playing field rather substantially,
especially if it goes up to the newly proposed amount.
And even if it were to be raised, I think that one of the
things is the speed at which it is changing. If it were to
change from $7.5 million to the $19 million abruptly, then
suddenly the landscape looks instantly overnight very
different. If we were all told that it is going to migrate to a
different number, that would be a much more acceptable
transition to us.
But still, there is such wide variety in architectural
firms, from large to small, and there are so many firms that
are small, that the smaller, ours and down, I would say, would
have a very difficult time gaining entry into that market,
gaining the portfolio and experience they need to compete and
to have the actual credentials to do the projects in that
market if the standard goes up substantially.
Ms. Chu. What is the best indicator for an architectural
firm size standard?
Mr. Reim. You know, again, because when I testified about
the amount of pass-through revenue, we think that actually a
better size standard would be the number of employees or a more
accurate accounting of how much money is retained by the firm
in terms of direct labor cost. We think that would be a much
more accurate standard at least for our NAICS code.
Ms. Chu. And then there is this proposal to combine the
architecture and engineering industries together under one
standard. And I wonder what you think about this and how does
this impact the ability of truly small businesses to win
government contracts?
Mr. Reim. Well, we don't think that lumping the two, while
we are similar at businesses, we don't think that we are
aligned in the same way the engineering firms are. We think
that engineering is truly a different type of practice. Much
more of the revenue that goes to engineering firms, we often
see, stays with those engineering firms. Almost 50 percent of
our revenue passes through our firm and goes to engineering
firms. So for that reason we think that categorizing us both
together would be a big mistake.
Ms. Chu. And just for the panel, we have heard from
witnesses that certain size standards are either too high or
other size standards are too unrealistically low. How do we
find the balance between allowing those slightly larger firms
to compete for contracts while protecting the ability of
smaller businesses to gain access to the market?
Mr. Charles. I think one of the ways is actually to--I
heard the idea earlier, Mr. Jordan proposed it--the idea of
having different size standards for procurement, restricting
competition, as opposed to SBA assistance. I think there is
real validity in looking at that, and I believe that the
Federal Procurement Data Systems data would inform what the
size standard should be, separating the dominant from the
nondominant, in this particular market.
Mr. Jordan. I would just add to that. The key phrase there:
Separating the dominant from the nondominant. And right now,
when I look at where we are with computer-related size
standards, there are clearly nondominant firms that would not
be included in the definition of a small business today.
And I am not suggesting that our size standards should be
raised by tens of thousands, tens of millions of dollars. We
have this ongoing debate even within our own companies about
what a midsize firm is, and it ranges from anywhere from $25.5
million and above to up to a billion. And it really comes down
to where you sit is where you stand in terms of your position
on size standards.
So I think it is a big, big challenge, but certainly one
that needs to be explored further. And I think that, again, by
focusing more on what the Federal contracting market looks
like, you can begin to get a better sense of what a small
business contractor should look like.
Mr. Fontana. I think it is market driven and it is industry
and subindustry driven as well. I agree that using FPDS and
other sources to look at that and understand that subindustry
is very important; doesn't make it any less challenging or any
less daunting.
But looking at the business side of it to see what are the
business models, the organizational models of the companies in
that industry or subindustry are important, because that, along
with looking at the available data, or any other data that
could be obtained, would give a good indication of what the
size standard should be, whether it should be employee based,
revenue based, or a combination of both.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
Mrs. Lawrence.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here today.
Michigan has over 850,000 small businesses, so it goes
without saying that small businesses are the backbone of our
economy, making that much more important that we succeed.
Mr. Fontana, let's say a small business owner in Detroit
wants to challenge an established or revised size standard by
SBA. It is my understanding that the only avenue for the small
business owner is to file a Federal lawsuit against the
government. Is that correct?
Mr. Fontana. Yes, ma'am, that is correct. That is as
opposed to a particular NAICS designation on an individual
procurement. But that is correct, they would have to go to
Federal court.
Mrs. Lawrence. I want for the record, please, if you could
explain the time line and the costs associated with a small
business owner trying to make this appeal.
Mr. Fontana. Or any business owner. And don't hold me to
the numbers, because each case is always different.
In mounting an APA, Administrative Procedure Act, claim
against the government, it would have to be filed in Federal
district court, and I will just dispense with really the court
fees and other related costs. That can be anywhere from, if it
is very short where you get it to a summary judgment stage or
you get it to a higher stage where there are more briefs or
more motions and more delays, it can be anywhere from $50,000
to $100,000 or more.
Typically, they are not jury issues unless there are
disputed facts, and typically here that is not the case. But it
is still, for small businesses, a very, very expensive
proposition.
Some small businesses in the VARC that I represent, 13
companies, they have pooled resources in some cases, but it is
a little less common that their interests will be totally
aligned in that kind of challenge. So they would be more apt to
do individual lawsuits, and then each small business would have
to pay that individual expense.
Mrs. Lawrence. What is the time line?
Mr. Fontana. The time line for something like this, it is
usually several months. It could be up to or over a year,
depending on the court docket, depending on the amount of
evidence, or depending on the amount of hearings that would be
held. And discovery is another big issue where I call it the
long pole in the tent in litigation. Discovery itself could
take a year or more.
Mrs. Lawrence. So your recommendation to fix this would be?
Mr. Fontana. Well, the Stronger Voice Act is a good start.
For one, allowing small businesses like in size and status
protests, to use that administrative forum and that
administrative remedy, still have the availability of judicial
review as this bill has. But allowing that to go before the SBA
and the SBA Office of Hearings and Appeals is a start.
Another avenue, and it is the other way to look at it, as
the Subcommittee is, is to counsel the SBA or compel the SBA
through legislation to follow the standards that this Congress
has mandated.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Charles, I have a few minutes. I want to
ask this question. Michigan is home to very large numbers of
engineers in comparison to anywhere else in the world, so we
have a lot of technology companies and startups.
How would this proposed new rule have an impact on
technology manufacturing or the technology service providers?
Do you have a sense of the impact it would have? And I am
concerned about that because in Michigan that is one of our
driving economies.
Mr. Charles. So are we talking about the proposal to
eliminate Footnote 18? Is that the rule we are talking about?
Mrs. Lawrence. We are talking about the ability for these
entrepreneur startup incubators to provide opportunities for
small businesses going there. Will that impact it, the
legislation that you are speaking of?
Mr. Charles. I am sorry. I am not familiar with the rule
you are referring to.
Mrs. Lawrence. Okay. The new law, the new rule that we are
proposing to correct or make sure that the SBA is in
compliance, will that have an impact on startups?
Mr. Charles. So we are talking about the Stronger Voice?
Mrs. Lawrence. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Charles. Okay. So I believe it is really important for
truly small businesses to make sure that the government
understands what they do, how their business works within the
NAICS code structure, and that the government customers are
requesting the proper NAICS code for what it is they expect to
be happening under the contemplated contract action.
I believe I am very much in support of the Stronger Voice
Act. My concern, generally, about new technology companies is
that the NAICS code structure itself is perpetually a decade
old. And that is the root of the problem, in my opinion.
Mrs. Lawrence. That is where I was trying to go. Thank you.
Chairman Hanna. Thank you.
If the Committee doesn't mind, we can open this up to
another round or anybody who wants to ask a second question
can. Does anyone mind if I do?
Mr. Takai. No, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hanna. Okay. Thank you.
You have all been through the process with the SBA. How
receptive are they without going through hell?
Mr. Fontana. Of course, you would have to describe hell in
this.
Chairman Hanna. Sure.
Mr. Fontana. It varies. I have dealt with the SBA on more
than several occasions, and I have had the privilege to deal
with a number of Federal agencies over 30 years of being in
this practice.
There are times that the SBA is very accommodating. After
the comment period ended for this rule, they did entertain a
meeting with representatives of the VARC, the small IT-VARS
that we represent. Now, it took quite a bit to get them in a
room, but they did. I have had conversations with their general
counsel's office on this.
And so it is not that they have not been willing to
discuss. The issue is, are they willing to listen? And that is
the key issue, are they willing to listen to the realities of
this particular subindustry and understand that they have to
use and analyze the correct data in making these rulemakings
relative to size standards? If that is the case, they are not.
Chairman Hanna. Does that mirror your experience, Mr.
Charles, Mr. Reim?
Mr. Charles. I have had good relationships with SBA. They
take meetings and are happy to discuss things. I find that they
often are not familiar with the downstream consequences of
their rulemaking, and it is why I continue to repeat my
interest in having more thorough analysis of procurement data
at the line-item level be part of this process, because when I
bring these things up, they are not knowledgeable.
Chairman Hanna. Mr. Reim?
Mr. Reim. I would concur. The subject of our increase, for
example, and our NAICS code growing has been proposed several
times, and it doesn't seem to reflect the reality of our
business. So I wonder if they have really dug into it and tried
to understand it sometimes.
Mr. Jordan. I would agree with Mr. Fontana. They have been
open to sitting down and having a dialogue, but I haven't seen
them be willing to make a whole lot of changes. Their
methodology is what it is. I don't see them going back and
reviewing that and making changes to it, and I don't think they
are paying a whole lot of attention to the Federal contracting
dynamics.
So when we raised those concerns, we raised them both in
our comments to the methodology, we raised those concerns when
we commented on the proposed rules. And even though they were
willing to come down and sit and talk with us, it feels like
our comments fell on deaf ears.
Chairman Hanna. So it is atrophy and a war of attrition,
perhaps.
The interesting thing, Mr. Reim, is that in your business
you would like to have the size standard smaller. Ninety-five
percent of all architects fit under the standard that is
existing, $7.5 million.
And in your case, Mr. Charles and other people, it is kind
of the opposite. The relationship between revenue and employee
is completely different. So you need to have a different
standard.
I want to thank everybody.
Anybody else would like to ask another question?
Mrs. Lawrence. No.
Mr. Takai. No.
Chairman Hanna. We are pushing up against votes any second
here, so if there are no further questions for these witnesses,
I want to thank all of you for your testimony. Getting the size
standards right is one of the most important jobs the SBA has,
and it is shameful that they are not faithfully executing the
laws.
I want to thank you, Mr. Bost, for your legislation, 1429,
which would at least provide a check for the SBA and an
opportunity to appeal.
This issue is important to this Subcommittee, and we will
continue to monitor it.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Hanna. This hearing is now adjourned. Thank you
all.
[Whereupon, at 11:12 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Takai, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify and the
opportunity to discuss small business size standards.

My name is Roger Jordan and I am the vice president of
government relations at the Professional Services Council. PSC
is the national trade association of the government
professional services and technology industry. PSC's nearly 400
member companies represent small, medium, and large businesses
that provide federal agencies with services of all kinds,
including information technology, engineering, logistics,
cybersecurity, facilities management, operations and
maintenance, consulting, international development, scientific,
social, environmental services, and more. Roughly 20 percent of
our members are small businesses and another approximately 30
percent would be considered small mid-tier firms. Together, the
association's members employ hundreds of thousands of Americans
in all 50 states.

The Importance of Size Standards

Small business size standards and the associated North
American Industry Classification Systems (NAICS) play an often
overlooked, yet significant role in the federal contracting
marketplace. Whether a specific industry's size standard is
employee-based or revenue-based, the methodology used by the
Small Business Administration and the resultant size standard
impacts competitiveness throughout the marketplace, including
contracts that are set aside for small business competition and
prime contractors' subcontractor utilization plans and
implementation. For companies throughout the supply chain, size
status carries significant weight not only because of the
benefits offered by small business size status but also because
of the potential penalties associated with misrepresentation of
size status. Hence, there is broad interest whenever the SBA
undertakes a review of, or revision to, an industry size
standard.

Such interest and impact is amplified by the binary nature
of the size standards: companies are either small business or
``other-than-small.'' This binary approach means that once a
company exceeds its industry size standard, even if only by one
dollar or one employee, they are left on their own to compete
in the full and open marketplace. Some will succeed, others
will not. In short, since SBA's decisions can have
transformational impacts on individual companies, the
importance of accuracy and consistency in conducting size
standard reviews cannot be overstated.

At PSC, we believe the philosophy of the overall small
business program should be to facilitate long-term growth of
companies with entrepreneurial spirit through awards to and
performance of federal government contracts. We believe this
philosophy is shared by the current SBA leadership. However, it
is not always evident in policy or practice.

The statutory definition of a small business is designed to
include firms that are not dominant in their primary field. But
achieving an appropriate balance that allows companies with
revenues or employees at the lower end of the size standard to
break into the market while also protecting the ability of
companies that are larger, but by no means ``dominant'' in
their field, to compete for set-aside opportunities is not a
simple endeavor. At the time SBA initiated its review of the
size standards, PSC's position was, and remains, in support of
size standards that lean toward the higher range. SBA must seek
to balance size standards so that all small businesses have
legitimate opportunities to compete, yet higher revenue
generating small firms are not shut out from competing for
small business set-asides. PSC's position has been and
continues to be that federal government policies should foster
robust competition for federal contracts whether set-aside for
small businesses or not. As such, we have not endorsed
legislative proposals to create new set-aside programs,
particularly for emerging or very small businesses.

Prior to 2009, it had been nearly 30 years since a
comprehensive revision to industry size standards was
conducted, and PSC was calling upon SBA to undertake a thorough
analysis of the size standards, particularly for the ``54'' or
``Professional, Scientific, or Technical Services'' sector in
which many PSC member companies operate. Examples of industries
that fall under sector ``54'' include legal services, tax
preparation services, architectural and engineering services,
many computer related and information technology services, and
a number of consulting services, including management
consulting, logistics consulting, scientific and technical
consulting.

Hence, PSC was pleased that SBA began a comprehensive
review of the size standards in 2009. SBA began its process of
revising the size standards by developing a methodology based
on five significant factors: average firm size; startup costs
and entry barriers; industry competition; distribution of firms
by size; and impact on federal contracting and SBA loan
programs. SBA also considered other factors such as
technological changes and industry growth changes. In addition,
SBA established their discretion to use ``common size
standards'' for industries that share similar characteristics.
According to SBA, these common size standards reflect cases
where many of the same businesses operate in multiple
industries, and might also make size standards among related
industries more consistent than establishing separate size
standards for each of those industries.

PSC Concerns with the SBA Approach

In December 2009, PSC submitted comments to SBA on their
proposed methodology. SBA finalized this methodology in 2010
but did not accept any of our recommendations.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ PSC comments on the SBA Size Standard Methodology are available
at http://www.pscouncil.org/PolicyIssues/SmallBusiness/
SizeStandardsSetAsides/
Comments
--
on
--
Other
--
Se.aspx.

Subsequently, in March 2011, SBA issued a proposed rule to
revise the size standards for 36 industries in the ``54''
category. In total, federal spending on contracts in this
category represents over $100 billion, or 20-25 percent, of the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
government's annual spending on contracts.

While PSC recognized the difficulty SBA faced in collecting
and digesting significant amounts of data about the commercial
and federal marketplaces, we raised a number of concerns with
the SBA proposed rule.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ PSC comments available at http://www.pscouncil.org/
PolicyIssues/SmallBusiness/SizeStandardsSetAsides/
Comments
--
on
--
SBA
--
Prop.aspx.

On February 10, 2012 SBA published a final rule regarding
the ``54 category'' that increased size standards for 34
specific industries. For most industries, the increases to the
size standards were fairly substantial. For example, most size
standards that had been established at $7 million in annual
gross receipts were increased to either $10 million or $14
million. That increase provided much-needed flexibility for
small firms to mature while still having access to restricted
competition. In our comments on this proposed rule, we raised
concerns about proposals for computer-related services that we
believed required greater scrutiny, and our views remains
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
unchanged.

Our concern is that SBA is ignoring the fact that computer-
related services has undergone, and continues to undergo,
significant changes over the last 25 years. The federal
government is purchasing more of these services than at any
time in its history and companies across the industry are
focusing on providing a comprehensive set of solutions and
offerings to the federal government that include a combination
of telecommunications, information technology and other
solutions and services. Yet, in 2011, the SBA proposed raising
size standards for those categories by only $500,000, from $25
million to $25.5 million. The $25.5 million size standard
remained unchanged in SBA's final rule.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The size standard for computer-related NAICS codes is currently
set at $27.5 million because SBA has made inflationary changes over the
past several years.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Common Size Standards

Additionally, SBA established a common size standard for
the Computer Systems Design and Related Services industries
(NAICS 541511, NAICS 541112, NAICS 541513, NAICS 541519 and
NAICS 811212), even though the industry data supported a
distinct size standard for each industry. The common size
standard proposed by SBA for these categories was also $25.5
million. However, SBA's own analysis shows that for NAICS
541513--Computer Facilities Management Services--the calculated
industry-specific size standard is $35.5 million. Therefore, by
establishing a common size standard that incorporates this
NAICS category and other computer related categories at a
common level of $25.5 million, SBA has eliminated legitimate
small businesses from being able to qualify. PSC's comments to
SBA focused heavily on this point. However, SBA declined to
adopt our recommendations that ``common size standards'' be
avoided and instead retained a size standard of $25.5 million
for all computer-related NAICS codes.

To this committee's credit, you recognized that the
reliance on ``common'' size standards could have a negative
effect on small businesses, and in May 2011 the Subcommittee on
Economic Growth, Access to Capital, and Tax held a hearing on
the issue at which PSC provided testimony. Soon after,
legislation was introduced by Representatives Joe Walsh and
Gerry Connolly to restrict SBA's practice of relying on common
size standards. The legislative proposal was ultimately adopted
in Section 1661 of the fiscal year 2013 National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA). Unfortunately, the NDAA language was
enacted after the SBA final rule changing the size standards
for the ``54 category'' was complete and SBA has yet to take
any action to address the reliance on common size standards in
this category.

Thus, legitimate small businesses have been denied the
ability to compete for set-aside contracts since the final rule
went into effect in March 2012. An additional effect, and one
that is being felt by a broader number of companies, is that
companies have been denied the ability to increase their
revenues while maintaining their small business size status. In
the Computer Facilities Management Services category, for
example, firms that were close to exceeding the $25 million
small business size standard in 2012 would have been able to
grow their business to $35.5 million while still being afforded
the benefits that come with being a small business federal
contractor. The added growth that the higher size standard
would have provided to these companies could have eased their
transition into the full and open competitive federal market.
Instead, the result has likely been that businesses have either
refrained from growth in order to maintain their small business
status or they have had a tougher transition from their small
business status because they are entering the full and open
market much sooner than they would have if SBA had designated
the appropriate size standard that their own methodology
established.

Currently, SBA is required to update the individual size
standards at least every five years. Although PSC believes
rapidly evolving industries such as information technology and
complex professional service should be reviewed more
frequently, we understand the broad scope of SBA's
responsibility to review all the size standards. We expect SBA
to initiate and potentially complete a fresh review of the ``54
category'' within the next two years, and while SBA should not
be allowed to ignore the law in the interim, we certainly look
forward to SBA complying with Section 1661 of the fiscal year
2013 NDAA at that time.

Other Considerations

As mentioned above, SBA evaluated five major factors to
determine the proposed size standards: average firm size;
startup costs and entry barriers; industry competition;
distribution of firms by size; and impact on federal
contracting and SBA loan programs. SBA determined that each
factor would be given equal weight in its calculations.
However, PSC continues to recommend that greater weight be
given to the ``impact on federal contracting'' factor. In
addition, SBA should broaden its evaluation of the federal
contracting market to examine if typical contract requirements
under a specific category tend to gravitate toward larger
contracts. If so, SBA might determine that a higher size
standard is warranted. If typical requirements under a specific
category seem better suited to small contract awards, then
perhaps a lower size standard would be more appropriate.

PSC further encourages SBA to reconsider the merits of
adopting separate size standards for federal contracting. The
adverse impact on small businesses of a single size standard
that covers federal procurement and all other SBA programs is
documented in SBA's own methodology. SBA acknowledges that the
disparity between small business federal market share and
industry-wide share may be attributed to a variety of reasons,
such as extensive administrative and compliance requirements
associated with federal procurement, the different skillsets
required by federal contracts compared with typical commercial
contracting work, and the size of specific contracting
requirements of federal customers. Such a structure would allow
SBA to focus more on the market dynamics regarding federal
contracting and in turn make the size standards more reflective
of the realities of the marketplace they so significantly
impact.

PSC also recommends regular review of the NAICS codes
themselves to ensure that they are properly aligned with the
ever-changing dynamics within specific industries. Within the
information technology space, for example, the emergence of new
and much needed capabilities such as cybersecurity and cloud
computing are significant. Yet these capabilities or offerings
are lumped together with other computer-related industries
under a limited number of computer-related NAICS codes, which
does not reflect how industry is organized or how federal
agencies acquire these goods and services. This recommendation
is not intended to suggest that each new capability is
deserving of its own NAICS code. Instead, it is merely intended
to require regular review of the NAICS codes to ensure that, as
industries evolve at an increasing pace, the NAICS codes are
still appropriately structured.

Lastly, it is important to recognize that Section 1661 of
the fiscal year 2013 NDAA is one of many small business
contracting statutory provisions enacted since 2010. This
subcommittee has been vigilant about holding SBA and the FAR
Council accountable for implementing those provisions and PSC
shares the frustration expressed at the recent subcommittee
hearing about the length of time it has taken to complete
implementation. As such, PSC supports efforts to move toward
concurrent and collaborative SBA and FAR rulemaking to speed
the implementation process. The need to implement these laws
quickly is underscored by the fact that this year's House-
passed NDAA also contains a number of small business
provisions. It is simply unacceptable that implementation of
those provisions, if enacted, and other previously enacted
reforms, will take three or more years before they will be used
in the federal contracting marketplace.

Conclusion

PSC commends the Congressional action over the past several
years to improve the size standard determination process. The
enactment of Section 1661 is an important element of those
reforms, and although it was enacted after work on the ``54
category'' of NAICS codes was last revised, we look forward to
SBA complying with the law promptly and certainly no later than
their next substantive review of the Professional, Scientific
and Technology Services sector. PSC also reiterates its support
for an SBA size standard methodology that gives more weight to
federal marketplace dynamics and creating a completely separate
set of size standards to be used for federal procurement
purposes only.

Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. Again, thank you
for inviting PSC to testify today and for your attention to
this important issue. I would be happy to answer any questions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
