- REGULATION: THE HIDDEN SMALL BUSINESS TAX

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REGULATION: THE HIDDEN SMALL BUSINESS TAX

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 14, 2016

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-056
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-835                  WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Emily Murphy, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Ms. Karen R. Harned, Executive Director, National Federation of
Independent Business Small Business Legal Center, Washington,
DC.............................................................     4
Mr. Frank Earnest Knapp, Jr., President and CEO, South Carolina
Small Business Chamber of Commerce, Columbia, SC, testifying on
behalf of the American Sustainable Business Council............     6
Mr. Rosario Palmieri, Vice President, Labor, Legal and Regulatory
Policy, National Association of Manufacturers, Washington, DC..     7
Mr. Thomas M. Sullivan, Of Counsel, Nelson Mullins Riley &
Scarborough, Washington, DC....................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ms. Karen R. Harned, Executive Director, National Federation
of Independent Business Small Business Legal Center,
Washington, DC.............................................    23
Mr. Frank Earnest Knapp, Jr., President and CEO, South
Carolina Small Business Chamber of Commerce, Columbia, SC,
testifying on behalf of the American Sustainable Business
Council....................................................    33
Mr. Rosario Palmieri, Vice President, Labor, Legal and
Regulatory Policy, National Association of Manufacturers,
Washington, DC.............................................    36
Mr. Thomas M. Sullivan, Of Counsel, Nelson Mullins Riley &
Scarborough, Washington, DC................................    55
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
ABC - Associated Builders and Contractors, Inc...............    65
NACD - National Association of Chemical Distributors.........    66
NSBA - National Small Business Association...................    68

REGULATION: THE HIDDEN SMALL BUSINESS TAX

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 14, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Hanna,
Knight, Hardy, Kelly, Velazquez, and Adams.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order. We are here today to talk about small businesses and the
hidden federal regulatory burden that is weighing them down.
Small businesses are a huge contributor to the American
economy. They employ nearly 57 million employees, create 7 out
of every 10 new jobs, and produce nearly half of private sector
GDP. In my home state of Ohio, 2.1 million Americans go to work
every day at a small business. In fact, almost 90 percent of
U.S. employers have 20 employees or less.
The federal government should be doing everything it can to
help these small but mighty job creators flourish.
Unfortunately, federal regulators are doing the opposite
oftentimes by layering on new red tape and hiding the real
burden from the American public.
Too often, agencies do a poor job of assessing the impact
of regulations on small businesses. However, we know small
businesses shoulder a disproportionate share of the federal
regulatory burden. A 2014 study found that small businesses
with 50 employees or less spend 17 percent more to comply with
federal regulations and that regulations cost the economy over
$2 trillion annually.
The regulatory burden falls most heavily on small firms
because they have fewer resources and do not have in-house
lawyers and regulatory compliance staff to help them navigate
complicated federal rules. That is why it is critical that
federal agencies analyze the small business impacts of new
regulations and reduce unnecessary and excessive burdens.
Agencies have been required to do this for over 35 years but
still avoid these requirements in many instances.
We need to lighten the massive regulatory burden and make
it easier for small businesses to start, grow, thrive, and
create new jobs. So we need to understand the problems that
small businesses are facing and develop bold solutions.
One legislative solution that the Committee put forward
last year is H.R. 527, the Small Business Regulatory
Flexibility Improvements Act, which passed the House with a
bipartisan vote. The legislative window is closing, so I hope
the Senate will act quickly to move this important bill.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today, and I
would now like to recognize our ranking member for her opening
statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Reducing the cost of regulations is an important issue for
small businesses. Complicated rules and duplicative
requirements can create burdens for small firms across a wide
range of industries. Unchecked regulations can over time become
out of date requiring companies to devote significant resources
to compliance. This hurts their bottom line and their ability
to hire new employees. For these very reasons, Congress enacted
the Regulatory Flexibility Act in 1980. At its core, the act
requires agencies to assess the impact of their regulations on
small businesses. A panel process was also added in 1996
requiring the EPA and OSHA to hear directly from small
businesses on the most potentially burdensome rules. CFPB was
brought into the panel process in 2010 under the Dodd-Frank
Act. Overall, the result of the Regulatory Flexibility Act has
been impressive.
Since 1998, through its enforcement of the Act, the SBA's
Office of Advocacy has reduced the burden of Federal rules on
small businesses by almost $130 billion. The Regulatory
Flexibility Act is making a real difference for entrepreneurs
across the country. President Obama has built on this and taken
further actions in this area. He has issued several broad-based
executive orders on rulemaking. Most importantly, he instructed
agencies to conduct retrospective review of their regulations.
These reviews have resulted in near-term cost savings to the
U.S. economy of $10 billion. He also has required agencies to
estimate the costs and benefits of regulations, consider less
burdensome alternatives, and incorporate those that are
affected by regulations into the rulemaking process. Taken
together, these efforts are helping to reign in regulatory
costs, while ensuring that agencies can carry out their
mission.
While it is important to reduce the unnecessary burden on
small businesses, we have to be careful to not impede the
economic benefits of regulation. Clean water and air
regulations help ensure a healthy workforce and are critical to
many companies, especially those engaged in travel and tourism.
Safety rules keep our workers healthy and enhance productivity
by reducing workplace accidents. Financial regulation has
prevented individuals from being taken advantage of.
Earlier this month, we saw the CFPB close down a student
loan debt management company that fleeced 3.6 million from
4,300 consumers through a 3-year scam, so we have to be careful
to not use instances of regulatory burden to undo helpful
rules. Reduce compliance costs? Yes. That is something we can
all agree to, but neutralize critical environmental health and
safety rules, no, that is too far. Too often this debate is
framed in a strictly either/or context, meaning we must choose
between harming small businesses and preserving important
protections that keep workers and consumers safe. Perhaps a
better option is to focus on regulating in a thoughtful manner
that is sensitive to the burden imposed on small companies
while maintaining their underlying policies. The regulatory
review process that Congress and the president have laid out is
meant to achieve that goal, taking small firms' needs into
account.
Today, I hope to learn more about how mechanisms like the
Regulatory Flexibility Act are minimizing their regulatory
impact on small companies. Likewise, there might be other ways
that federal agencies can lessen small business compliance
costs, whether it is through compliance assistance, legal
advice, or other steps, it is my hope that this sort of
proactive thinking can also be part of the discussion. All of
us share the goals of protecting workers, preserving our
environment, and keeping consumers safe. Likewise, none of us
want these protections to hurt small companies or impede job
growth. It is my hope that by working together, we can achieve
both goals.
With that, I thank the witnesses for being here today, and
I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
If Committee members have an opening statement prepared, we
ask that they submit them for the record.
I will now take just a moment to explain our timing and
lighting system. It is pretty simple. Each of you gets 5
minutes. We will then get 5 minutes to question you back and
forth from Republican and Democratic side. The lights, the
green light will be on for 4 minutes, the yellow light will
come on to let you know you have got a minute to wrap up, and
then the red light comes on, and we would appreciate it if you
would conclude by that time if at all possible. We will give
you a little leeway but not a whole lot.
Now I would like to introduce our witness panel. I will
introduce our first witness, and then I will turn it over to
the ranking member to introduce our second witness, and I will
introduce the others.
Our first witness is Karen Harned. Ms. Harned is the
Executive Director of the NFIB, National Federation of
Independent Business, Small Business Legal Center. The NFIB
represents over 325,000 small and independent businesses. The
Legal Center advocates for small business in the nation's
courts and serves as a resource for small business owners
across the country. Prior to joining the Legal Center, Ms.
Harned worked at a law firm specializing in food and drug law.
I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member for our
second introduction.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mr. Frank Knapp, Jr., the
Founder, President, and CEO of the South Carolina Small
Business Chamber of Commerce, which has more than 5,000 members
and has a goal of making South Carolina more small business
friendly. He also serves as Vice Chair of the American
Sustainable Business Council, which advocates for the growing
universe of sustainable and socially responsible businesses and
social enterprises. Mr. Knapp holds a master's degree in social
psychology from the University of South Carolina and a
bachelor's degree in psychology from Indiana University of
Pennsylvania. Welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Our third witness is Rosario Palmieri. Mr. Palmieri is the
Vice President of Labor, Legal, and Regulatory Policy at the
National Association of Manufacturers, or NAM. NAM represents
manufacturers across the United States, the majority which are
small businesses. Before joining NAM, Mr. Palmieri served as a
staffer on several House Committees, including the Committee on
Small Business, the most important Committee in Congress.
Our final witness is Tom Sullivan, an attorney with the law
firm of Nelson Mullins. He leads the Coalition for Responsible
Business Finance, a group of businesses that advocate for the
value of nontraditional lending opportunities for small
businesses. Previously, Mr. Sullivan served as Chief Counsel
for Advocacy at the U.S. Small Business Administration from
2002 to 2008. We thank you all for being here today, and Ms.
Harned, we will begin with you. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENTS OF KAREN R. HARNED, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS, SMALL BUSINESS LEGAL
CENTER; FRANK EARNEST KNAPP, JR., PRESIDENT AND CEO, SOUTH
CAROLINA SMALL BUSINESS CHAMBER OF COMMERCE, TESTIFYING ON
BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS COUNCIL; ROSARIO
PALMIERI, VICE PRESIDENT, LABOR, LEGAL AND REGULATORY POLICY,
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS; THOMAS M. SULLIVAN, OF
COUNSEL, NELSON MULLINS RILEY & SCARBOROUGH

STATEMENT OF KAREN R. HARNED

Ms. HARNED. Thank you, Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member
Velazquez, for inviting me here today. On behalf of the
National Federation of Independent Business, I appreciate this
opportunity to testify on the hidden tax that regulation
represents on small business. According to our latest NFIB
Small Business Economic Trends Survey, 21 percent of small
business owners cited government regulations and red tape as
their single-most important problem. Despite the devastating
impact of regulation on small businesses, federal agencies
continue to turn out approximately 10 new regulations a day
with a stunning 3,297 federal regulations in the pipeline.
When it comes to regulations, small businesses bear a
disproportionate amount of the regulatory burden as compared to
larger businesses. This is not surprising since it is the small
business owner, not one of a team of compliance officers, who
is charged with understanding new regulations, filling out the
required paperwork, and ensuring the business is in compliance
with new federal mandates. The small business owner is the
compliance officer for her business, and every hour she spends
understanding and complying with a federal regulation is 1 less
hour she has to service customers and plan for future growth.
Today, I want to focus on a category of regulations that
does not seem to get as much attention in Washington, and that
is labor regulations. Small businesses can be found in
virtually all industries. Whether you are a manufacturer, a
baker, or a dry cleaner, the one thing you are going to have in
common is employees. For the small business NFIB represents,
who on average have 10 employees or less, these regulations can
be some of the most challenging. The small metal fabricator,
for example, goes into business knowing how to finish metal
products. He has a good sense of where he goes to get the
supplies he needs and what kind of skills he is going to be
needing in his workforce. But what he likely is not going to
know is the best practices regarding wage and overtime
calculation, compliance with various state and federal
discrimination laws, and hiring.
On July 6, 2015, the Department of Labor published a
proposed rule that would more than double the minimum salary a
worker must receive to $970 per week, or $50,440 annually, in
order to be considered exempt from overtime requirements. The
nearly $750 million DOL's initial regulatory flexibility
analysis estimates small businesses would face in new costs
during the rule's first rule underestimates the true compliance
costs for a small business. For example, DOL estimates it is
going to take 1 hour for businesses to become familiar with the
rule, but this assumption disregards a basic reality of
regulatory compliance. It is the small business owner that will
be wading through the rule's regulatory text, not compliance
specialists like those working for large corporations. This
rule will not require just a simple look at a salaried
employee's weekly wages. If an employee is currently salaried
and makes greater than the current threshold of $455 per week
but less than the proposed $970 per week, the small business
owner would spend a considerable amount of time calculating
various scenarios.
NFIB member Robert Mayfield owns five Dairy Queens in and
around Austin, Texas, and he believes this rule would be bad
news for employers and employees. Currently, Mr. Mayfield
employs exempt managers at all five of his locations, and these
individuals earn, on average, about $30,000 per year, and work
between 40 to 50 hours per week. The managers also receive
bonuses, more flexible work arrangements including paid
vacations and sick time, training opportunities, and promotions
that Mayfield's hourly employees do not get. Under DOL's
proposal, Mayfield predicted that he will need to move the
managers back to hourly positions as there is simply no way he
can afford to pay over 10 managers $50,000 each. Mayfield noted
that rather than giving managers overtime, he is likely to hire
a few more part-time employees. He says, ``I feel most sorry
for the many enthusiastic people who work for me, who have
worked hard to advance into their dream of a salaried
management position.'' He continues, ``How can you be a manager
and punch a time clock? The idea is to do a job, not to keep
track of your hours. This is the antithesis of building a
management mentality or in training someone to be a manager. It
would also disrupt the workplace and lead to fewer management
opportunities. It would hurt, not help, the people we claim
that we want to help.''
As I detail in my written statement, DOL's overtime rule is
just one of many labor regulations, like OSHA's silica rule and
the persuader rule out of Department of Labor, that are
imposing a hidden tax on small business, and these hidden taxes
are in addition to those found in significant environmental
regulations, like the ``waters of the U.S.'' rule and EPA's
Power Plan rule.
Small businesses are the engine of our economy.
Unfortunately, they also bear a disproportionate weight of
government regulation. Complying with these and other
regulations prevents small business owners from creating and
growing new jobs.
Thank you so much for holding this important hearing on
regulations as a hidden tax on small business, and we look
forward to working with you on these important issues going
forward.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Knapp, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FRANK EARNEST KNAPP, JR.

Mr. KNAPP. Thank you, and I apologize in advance. I have a
cold.
Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
members of the Committee. My name is Frank Knapp. I am the
president and CEO of the South Carolina Small Business Chamber
of Commerce. I am also the board co-chair of the American
Sustainable Business Council, which through its network
represents about 200,000 businesses. The American Sustainable
Business Council advocates for policy change at the federal
level and at the state level that supports a more sustainable
economy.
Today's hearing topic is important for small business and
the vitality of our economy. Good regulations tend to stimulate
innovative and entrepreneurship in addition to limiting or
preventing destructive forms of economic activity. Bad
regulations, whether because they are not designed properly or
simply not needed, will be a burden on small businesses, and
thus, harm our economy. Everyone here would prefer the former
and not the latter.
One example of what is working is the Regulatory
Flexibility Act. In 2004, my South Carolina organization worked
with our South Carolina Chamber and the NFIB to pass our Small
Business Regulatory Flexibility Act modeled after the Federal
law. Several years later, the then-chairman of the South
Carolina Regulatory Review Committee told me that over the
previous 7 years, his Committee had reviewed about 300 proposed
regulations and identified only 10 that raised their concern.
His Committee worked with the State agencies promulgating these
new regulations and satisfactorily resolved the issues. The
Regulatory Flexibility Act has created an effective process to
protect small businesses even if the process itself needs some
attention from time to time.
While some inside the Beltway claim that regulations are
holding back our economic growth, the American Sustainable
Business Council has a different view. Along with the other
small business organizations, we released a poll of small
business owners in February of 2012, which found that small
businesses do not see regulations as a major concern. Our
polling confirmed that small business owners value regulations
if they are well constructed and fairly enforced. Eighty-six
percent believe some regulation is necessary for a modern
economy, and 93 percent of respondents believe their business
can live with some regulation if it is fair and manageable.
Seventy-eight percent of small employers agree regulations are
important in protecting small businesses from unfair
competition and to level the playing field with big business.
Seventy-nine percent of small business owners support having
clean air and water in their community in order to keep the
families, employees, and customers healthy. Sixty-one percent
support standards that move our country towards energy
efficiency and clean energy.
Recently, Republican pollster Frank Luntz surveyed CEOs and
found similar results as the American Sustainable Business
Council polled. Regulations were identified as the seventh
concern behind more pressing issues like creating economic
opportunity, keeping taxes affordable, raising the minimum
wage, and reducing income inequality. So if small businesses
are not self-identifying regulations as their top impediment to
growth, and businesses in general are not citing regulations as
a significant problem, who are pushing the anti-regulation
bills really representing?
The answer is clear. Most of the complaints we hear in
Washington are from only two industries. Those that are
impacted by the Wall Street reform, Dodd-Frank, and new
Environmental Protection Agency regulations. K Street lobbyists
regaled Congress and the public about the dire economic
consequences to small businesses of regulations that will
prevent another Great Recession or protect the health and
safety of our citizens or restrain the future wrath of
uncontrolled climate change. In reality, the financial giants
who drove our economy off a cliff and the powerful fossil fuel
industry are driving the anti-regulation train using the name
of small business to garner sympathetic ears.
In conclusion, the regulation promulgating process can
produce good results and good rules while protecting small
businesses from unnecessary burdens if we provide the resources
for agencies to expeditiously carry out the requirements.
Congress has already put in place those requirements, but the
federal government's responsibility to impact small businesses
should not stop there. Some small businesses will find
compliance with federal regulations difficult. The answer is
not to throw the baby out with the bathwater and invalidate
existing rules. Instead, we believe the solution lies in
expanding the capacity of the federal government to provide
regulatory compliance assistance to small businesses.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak before you today,
and I welcome any questions the Committee might have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Palmieri, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROSARIO PALMIERI

Mr. PALMIERI. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee, it is an honor to
testify before you today about the impact of regulation on
small business.
The U.S. is still the world's largest manufacturing
economy, producing more than $2 trillion in value each year and
directly employing nearly 12 million Americans and indirectly
supporting 18 million jobs. Manufacturers provide good high-
paying jobs. Unfortunately, manufacturers lost 2.3 million jobs
during the most recent recession, and since then we have
generated over 802,000 net new jobs. But to regain
manufacturing momentum and to return to net manufacturing job
gains, we need improved economic conditions and improved
government policies.
The business community is often misunderstood about their
views on regulation. Manufacturers believe regulation is
critical to the protection of workers' safety, public health,
and our environment. We believe some critical objectives of
government can only be achieved through regulation, but that
does not mean that our regulatory system is not in need of
considerable improvement and reform. Regulations are often
unnecessarily complex, duplicative, and ineffectively achieve
their benefits. Excessive regulatory changes and uncertainty
impose high costs, especially on small businesses. Small
businesses, as we know, bear a disproportionate burden of
regulation because of the often high fixed cost of compliance
not subject to economies of scale. That is why the work of this
Committee and the implementation of the Regulatory Flexibility
Act are so important.
Unfortunately, agencies are not anxious to analyze the
impact of their regulations on small business. A recent study
showed that between 1996 and 2012, fewer than 8 percent of
rules were subject to the RFA's analytical requirements.
Although we had hoped that was because agencies made excellent
decisions about which rules had those impacts, let me share a
quick list of some of the most expensive EPA rules. EPA's
greenhouse gas limits on power plants, National Ambient Air
Quality Standards for Ozone, Boiler MACT, the NESHAP 6X and the
``Waters of the U.S.'' rule. EPA certified that each of them
would not have a significant impact on a substantial number of
small entities. I think most of us would find that hard to
believe.
The reason it matters that these rules and thousands of
others were not subject to the law is that the real businesses
and real jobs are lost when small businesses are not
considered. Last year, SBA's Office of Advocacy saved small
businesses $1.6 billion in first-year regulatory cost savings,
and as Ranking Member Velazquez noted, saved $130 billion since
1998. Imagine what could have been accomplished if fewer rules
could evade these analytic requirements, and that is why a
reform of the RFA is so urgent and why Chairman Chabot and this
Committee's leadership in proposing H.R. 527 would help address
these concerns.
Additionally, there are a number of powerful and
potentially bipartisan regulatory reforms to choose from. One
would be for Congress to confirm the authority of OMB's Office
of Information and Regulatory Affairs to review the regulations
issued by independent regulatory agencies and ensure their
adherence to strong analytic requirements. Congress plays an
important role within the regulatory process but does not have
a group of analysts who develop their own cost estimates of
proposed or final rules. Just like Congress has an independent
CBO to check OMB budget assumptions, Congress should have a
parallel office to OIRA and the agencies to review regulations
and their impacts.
While we have appreciated the Administration's good efforts
on retrospective review of regulations, they have not resulted
in significant cost savings for our members or a change in
culture in the federal agencies. To truly build a culture of
continuous improvement and thoughtful retrospective review of
regulations, different incentives are needed. To incentivize
high quality reviews, existing regulations should automatically
sunset unless they are affirmatively shown to have a strong
continued justification. While the overwhelming majority of
those regulations would be continued, a cleanup of outdated or
unnecessary regulatory accumulation would occur. The complexity
of rulemaking and its reliance on highly technical scientific
information has only increased since the passage of the
Administrative Procedure Act. The APA is 70 years old, and it
should be reformed by incorporating modern principles for sound
rulemaking best embodied by President Clinton's executive order
into the DNA of every rule.
In my written statement, I have included additional
regulatory reform proposals for your consideration. I have
outlined a number of challenging rules for small manufacturers.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony today on
behalf of manufacturers across the country. I applaud you for
holding today's hearing, and I am happy to respond to any
questions. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sullivan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS M. SULLIVAN

Mr. SULLIVAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Congresswoman
Velazquez, members of the Committee. I am pleased to present my
views on how small businesses are impacted by federal
regulation. The bulk of my testimony will actually cover how
small businesses can impact federal rules, or at least how the
Regulatory Flexibility Act is designed to ensure that small
business has a voice in the process.
My testimony this morning is drawn from my two decades of
work on small business regulatory issues and my overall desire
to bolster the voice of small business in that process. I was
confirmed to head the Office of Advocacy in 2002, and as you
know, that office is responsible for overseeing the Regulatory
Flexibility Act. I served until October 2008, and during my
tenure, the Office of Advocacy issued approximately 300 public
comment letters to 60 agencies, averaging about 38 per year. I
have remained deeply interested in how small businesses are
impacted by regulation and how small business involvement can
benefit regulatory policy.
I would like to share just briefly some good news and bad
news. The good news is that federal agencies work with SBA's
Office of Advocacy, and EPA, and OSHA, and the CFPB, and they
utilize SBREFA panels to explore how each agency can sensitize
its regulatory approach to small business. The bad news is that
there are still times when agency deadlines, whether they are
judicial, statutory, or political, push folks at the agencies
to approach the Reg Flex Act as a set of procedural hurdles.
That concern is of utmost concern during this stage of the
Administration when the clock is ticking down on when federal
regulations will be finalized under President Obama. The end of
administration phenomenon to cement its legacy through
regulation is not unique to this presidency. There is plenty of
data, research, and testimony on the subject of midnight
regulations. One recent publication estimates 4,000 rules
making their way through this Administration at a cost of more
than $100 million.
Unfortunately, I have more bad news. The most obvious
example of an agency purposely, in my opinion, of an agency
purposely avoiding the Regulatory Flexibility Act was EPA's
recent promulgation of the ``waters of the U.S.'' rule. The EPA
and the Corps certified that the proposed rule would not have a
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
businesses.
More good news. A set of policies that is good news is that
states continue to experiment with ways to make their
regulatory climate more hospitable to small business. Frank
Knapp already mentioned South Carolina, and in my home state,
Governor Charlie Baker led an initiative to review all of the
Commonwealth's rules in a ``spring cleaning'' exercise last
year designed to help small business. This is akin to my work
as chief counsel when the Office of Advocacy worked with South
Carolina, Massachusetts, and several other states to encourage
state adoption of the Regulatory Flexibility Act at a state
level, and it is good news that that effort continues.
Unfortunately, the bad news is that States and their
experiments also stumble into situations where they want to
help but unintentionally harm small businesses.
The coalition that I run, the Coalition of Responsible
Business Finance, is monitoring a situation in Illinois and a
situation in New York, up in Albany, where those legislators
are considering small business lending provisions. It seems as
though the goals of transparency and disclosure are good, but
the other prescriptive underwriting standards and excessive
regulatory mandates' civil and criminal penalties,
unfortunately, could do more harm than good. I am hopeful that
in Springfield, Albany, and other state capitals, as I am
optimistic here in Washington, D.C., that legislators and
regulators can, and should, incorporate the views of small
business before moving forward. That is the same principle of
the Regulatory Flexibility Act.
I am troubled by what happened with EPA's ``waters of the
U.S.'' rule and how its avoidance of the Regulatory Flexibility
Act could not be challenged until the rulemaking was finalized,
a year after they certified that it would not hurt small
business. That certification part of the Reg Flex Act is truly
the ``fork in the road'' when it comes to whether EPA should
listen to small business and tailor its regulatory approach to
accommodate small firms. H.R. 527, passed by this Committee,
solves that problem, and I am hopeful that the Senate will look
towards a similiar solution.
I commend this Committee's attention to the plight of small
businesses that are trying to keep up with the flood of
mandates emanating from our nation's capital. Agencies need to
continually hear from you, from the Office of Advocacy, from
small business stakeholders like my fellow panelists, and from
small business owners themselves in order to affect positive
regulatory change. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. We appreciate the
testimony of all the witnesses. Now the members on both sides
will have an opportunity to ask a few questions, and I will
begin with myself.
Ms. Harned, let me start with you, if I can. Mr. Palmieri
and Mr. Sullivan and you all believe and testified, and we
obviously read your statements, that the Regulatory Flexibility
Act needs to be strengthened and that loopholes need to be
closed. I agree, and many of the members of the Committee do,
and I have introduced legislation to do so. This Committee has
held numerous hearings where we have heard about agencies
bypassing the Regulatory Flexibility Act requirements or merely
treating it as a ``check the box'' exercise. When agencies
ignore the RFA's procedural requirements, the only option left
is litigation. Are RFA compliance disputes being resolved
favorably for small businesses in the courts? And if not, why
not, in your opinion?
Ms. HARNED. Actually, in many instances they are being
resolved favorably because, for example, the certification
questions that even the ``waters of the U.S.'' rule presents.
You either complied with the law or you did not. Right? We have
won in past cases on those issues. The problem is they are
Pyrrhic victories, because that win is going to take place
years after the rule has taken effect. That is why the
legislation that you supported, that the House has passed and,
that the Senate needs to pass, is so critical, because it will
allow for judicial review in that critical process where the
agency has decided not to certify a rule or has failed to
properly comply with doing an appropriate RFA analysis as the
rule requires.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Palmieri, let me turn to you next. Notice and comment
rulemaking is a critical process and ensures affected parties
and other members of the public have input on regulations as
they are developed. In the notice and comment, is it working
well, or are there problems, such as short comment periods for
complex rules? Do those types of things prevent small
businesses from participating in the rulemaking process? What
are your thoughts in that area?
Mr. PALMIERI. Absolutely. When a rulemaking extends to
hundreds of pages of extraordinarily complex and dense material
that cannot be read by the average person, and then an agency,
as in the case of the Department of Labor, gives a 30-day
comment period, as they just did recently on a rule for federal
contractors, it absolutely undermines the entire purpose of
notice and comment. When asked for an extension of the comment
period so that businesses could absorb the true impact of the
rule and weigh in in a thoughtful way, they extended it for an
additional 10 days. They could have just as easily refused if
they had chosen to. There is really no excuse in the rulemaking
process for agencies not to give sufficient time, especially if
they have not done an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking or
given an opportunity for early stakeholder input, like
President Obama's executive order recommends to agencies.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sullivan, you mentioned the ``waters of the United
States'' rule as an example of agencies deliberately avoiding
compliance with the RFA. By certifying the rule, EPA avoided
conducting a small business advocacy review panel and doing an
analysis of the rule's impacts. What can be done to address
this kind of egregious behavior? Is the answer legislation or
litigation or presidential leadership or some combination of
those things?
Mr. SULLIVAN. I think it is some combination of those
things, honestly, Mr. Chairman. I think that H.R. 527 really
fixes this problem, and that is the certification problem.
Really what we are getting at is process versus result. Small
businesses just do not want to be shut out of the process. They
want clean water, they want clean air, but they do not want to
be shut out of the process. At that critical decision point,
when EPA or any other agency says it does or does not affect
small business, I think there needs to be an independent
assessment of that decision that happens before 7, 8, 12 years
later when it makes it to the Supreme Court, because small
businesses need regulatory certainty.
Chairman CHABOT. Let me squeeze in one quick question here,
Mr. Palmieri. Ms. Harned had mentioned the silica rule in the
$5.5 billion annual compliance cost as one of the top issues. I
know you had it in your written testimony as well. Would you
discuss that briefly, the compliance challenges that small
manufacturers are facing when it comes to the silica rule?
Mr. PALMIERI. Sure. Manufacturers care deeply about the
health of their employees and they are constantly, with or
without the rules, able to address them. The real challenge of
the silica rule is that OSHA will not allow businesses to
prioritize personal protective equipment above costly
engineering controls. Even in situations like in a foundry
where it may not be feasible to implement the kinds of
engineering controls OSHA has suggested, they are looking at
extraordinarily costly measures when there are more efficient
measures that will be just as protective. That is the real
tragedy of this rule.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
I would like to now recognize the gentlelady from North
Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the Ranking Member of the
Investigations, Oversight, and Regulations Subcommittee, for 5
minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Ranking
Member Velazquez, for holding these hearings on tax
implications for small businesses. It is of critical concern.
Ms. Harned, you note that regulations are extremely onerous
for businesses. How burdensome are regulations here in the U.S.
compared to regulations in other countries, particularly those
with similar economic structures?
Ms. HARNED. Honestly, I would probably not be your person
to answer that question. Our members really do primarily
operate in the United States. They do not do much
internationally.
Ms. ADAMS. Would other members of the panel like to
respond?
Mr. PALMIERI. Sure, Ms. Adams. Part of the challenge for
U.S. businesses is that often our compliance regimes are very
different than in say some of our European allies and others
where they may set a rulemaking standard but it is a goal as
opposed to a floor or a threshold. Oftentimes you may even find
similar regulatory standards internationally, and yet, their
enforcement regimes have a different philosophy, and as a
result, are far less costly to implement or they have a more
cooperative relationship between businesses and regulators.
What we certainly say, although they are not fantastic
international quantitative comparisons, is that the U.S., when
are business leaders operating in multiple jurisdictions
surveyed, the U.S. is one of the most costly regulatory
countries.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Harned, many businesses are worried about duplicative
regulations at both the federal and state levels. Can you
discuss the extent to which firms face duplicative regulations?
Ms. HARNED. Thank you for that question, because that is a
very important issue that I have seen in my 14 years at NFIB. A
state will tell somebody to do one thing. You will see it with
building codes, all sorts of things. The federal government
will come in, or an inspector will come in and say, oh, no, you
need to do it that way. Really what I think all regulators need
to do, and we need to come up with a system to meet the small
business owner where they are, they need to know once I have
gone through this one inspection, whether it is a state
inspection, a federal inspection, even an inspection by a
workers' comp insurer, they have hit the marks that they need
to hit, that they are good, because they want to meet the
requirements that are asked of them. But, if the requirements
are different for different people that are coming in at
different times, it gets very confusing and challenging, and
quite frankly, frustrating.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you.
I have a concern about minority-owned businesses, and I
wanted to ask if you had any thoughts on how red tape impacts
minority-owned firms or disadvantaged businesses, and how the
agencies can work with these firms specifically to provide
technical assistance around compliance issues.
Ms. HARNED. I actually think all small business owners,
regardless whether minority-owned or not, are in it together on
this issue, if I may, because I think that is the biggest
issue. None of them are able to really find out what is
required. I talked to colleagues, friends, members in different
industries, and they really are relying on the trade
association newsletter to alert them to things. Really, the
outreach that can come to all communities, minority included,
to the small businesses, there cannot be enough communication,
enough channels of communication, in my opinion, because I
still think so much of this comes as a shock. ``Oh, wait. We
need to be doing that? I had no idea.'' I think that is
particularly problematic if you are in a more insulated
community or not as familiar with business, if, you are just
new to business.
Ms. ADAMS. So what is the solution then?
Ms. HARNED. I have suggested to agencies before, partnering
with small trades, getting the information, working with them
to disseminate the information, get the information out. The
same can be done with the minority communities. Bringing those
organizations in to help them find their people, meet them, let
them know what the rules are, and then also help them with
compliance. Compliance assistance is key for everyone.
Ms. ADAMS. Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is the
Vice Chairman of this Committee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to
all the panelists today.
Ms. Harned, I serve on the Financial Services Committee as
well and do a lot of work with regards to financial services
issues, Dodd-Frank regulations, CFPB and, overreach. In fact, I
am the author of the bill to stop Operation Chokepoint which
affects lots and lots of small businesses. It is not based on
whether they are doing something illegal, but based on the
political bent and/or value system of the agencies, DOJ and
FDIC in particular, with regards to certain individual
industries. What is your experience with your members with
regards to Operation Chokepoint, and have you seen a decline
since FDIC has changed their policy?
Ms. HARNED. We definitely are hearing more from members on
this issue, and this was actually one of the regulatory, rules
that has given us great concern. My Legal Center issued an
underground regulation report last fall that highlighted the
Operation Chokepoint and other mandates that have been coming
out of agencies that have not gone through the process, have
not had the benefit of Reg Flex. As a result, it seems it is
targeted in different areas of the country, and so we are just
seeing these complaints, if you will, come up through different
industries, different parts of the country. But all of this is
something that could have been foreseen had the agency gone
through the requirements of the regulatory process instead of
doing this through some DOJ memo or however this program
unfolded.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. According to their own emails, their own
internal emails, there is a concerted effort and a culture
within these agencies that allows this to happen. So my
question also, is have you seen as a result of this a decrease
in the access to capital for your members?
Ms. HARNED. Honestly, I cannot speak to that. I feel like
that would be something for our research team, but I could get
back to you.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Sure.
Mr. Sullivan, as an advocate for small businesses, I am
sure you deal with a lot of different regulatory agencies. Have
you seen the willingness of the agencies to work with you with
regards to--I know a number of the panelists have made comments
about concerns when rules are issued, nobody really does their
analysis. I think it was 8 percent of the rules have basically
a cost-benefit analysis done on it or any sort of other
analysis, which is 92 percent short of the goal of what it
should be. When you go back and talk to the bureaucracies, do
they recognize this? Are they willing to work with you?
Mr. SULLIVAN. This is another one of the good news, bad
news kind of responses to your question, Congressman. The good
news is yes, there are pockets of really good practices. You
are familiar, certainly, with your work on Financial Services
with CFPB. The good news with CFPB is they let you and the
small business stakeholders know right at the beginning of a
rulemaking that they are going to do a SBREFA panel. I wish EPA
would tell everybody that they were going to do it. The
challenge then is that when CFPB does it, it does not seem as
though they are really incorporating those views into how they
approach the regulation. That is kind of a sole agency good
news, bad news.
The Department of Transportation has a long history of
working very well with SBA's Office of Advocacy. OSHA actually
releases its interaction with small business in a report prior
to----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. My question, sir, they are working with
you but do they listen? Because I can tell you from talking
with folks who have gone to some of these agencies, the
fiduciary rule is a recent example. The QM rule with regards to
qualified mortgages in CFPB, they ignored the discussion and
the visits, because I had a group come to my office, and they
said for the 42nd--we were the 42nd group to go in and talk to
CFPB about the problems with QM and they said, well, we still
know better than you what to do. It appears to me that even
though you go talk to them, there is this attitude that we know
better than you. Do you see that as prevalent, yes or no?
Mr. SULLIVAN. Congressman, yes, I do see that continue to
be a prevalent attitude, unfortunately.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. This is my concern because as I go home
every week and I talk to my small business folks at home and I
ask them, if you had one rule or regulation that you could get
rid of, what would it be? They will tell me, you know what? It
is not one particular one. It is this combination of all of
them. It is the straw that finally breaks the camel's back. It
is not knowing what is coming to us next that is a concern to
us, and as a result, we are sitting on our cash. I have small
businesses that are sitting on tons of cash. They want to
expand, hire people, put a new line in their manufacturing
plant, and cannot because they do not know what is coming down
the pike next. It is this uncertainty that causes us to not
have, I believe, the kind of economy we could have. When you
look at creating fewer businesses in the last 7 years than we
have lost, that is a problem, and I know it affects you, Ms.
Harned.
I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
expired.
The Ranking Member, Ms. Velazquez, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Knapp, a lack of regulation or regulatory enforcement
can often lead to catastrophic results. Environmental
disasters, such as those in West Virginia recently, or the BP
oil spill, have been devastating to local small businesses.
What do you think happened there? Was it lack of regulations or
lack of enforcement?
Mr. KNAPP. Thank you. In West Virginia, you are talking
about the Elk River Spill. That was actually because, and I
know this firsthand. As soon as that spill happened, I was in
contact with the businesses there, which cost them, by the way,
$19 million a day because they had to shut down their only
source of clean drinking water. It was a matter that was not on
the radar of anybody. You had this tank and nobody knew what
was in it. Nobody was paying attention to it. It did not fall
under any guidelines, any rules about how it had to be
maintained. After that, the West Virginia legislature actually
passed some very strict rules regarding aboveground storage and
chemical storage. Unfortunately, the following year they turned
around and gutted a lot of it. It is important. Regulations are
important. They keep us safe. They protect our environment.
They protect small businesses so that they do not have to be
shut down when the drinking water is shut down, and they are
important. I think everybody here recognizes that regulations
do serve a purpose when they are done appropriately and are not
too onerous.
I will go back to my statement. If we are talking about
everybody thinks it is a good thing that agencies or the SBREFA
process or everybody else has better outreach, we better fund
it, because if we do not fund it, we are not going to be any
better off than we are today. There is no sense in passing
something and saying you will do this and then they go, ``well,
okay, we do not have time so we are going to still try to not
do it''. That is what I think goes on in these agencies with
limited resources. It is funny. I was here nearly four years
ago testifying before the same Committee, talking about the
same thing.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yeah, well, I guess budgets have
consequences.
Mr. KNAPP. Yes, they do.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Sullivan, I see in your testimony that
you are leading the Coalition for Responsible Business Finance,
a group of nontraditional small business lenders. As you know,
I also serve on the Financial Services Committee, and I have
pushed Director Cordray to issue regulations under Section 1071
of Dodd-Frank that will help us determine whether women-owned
and minority-owned businesses are being discriminated against
when they are trying to get loans. I will continue to push the
director to do what we told him to do when we passed the Dodd-
Frank. However, I am curious, from your standpoint, about how
the CFPB can get this information without harming small
lenders. Do you have an opinion on that?
Mr. SULLIVAN. Thank you, Congresswoman, and thank you for
being one of the first members of Congress to meet with the
small businesses who are trying to provide capital to small
businesses outside of the depository bank arena.
Grady Hedgespeth was just appointed as the head of Small
Business at CFPB. He comes from a career at SBA. He is a good
guy, and he approaches these issues very thoughtfully and
carefully. CFPB has a good start and a good man to hire to do
this, but he has a tough challenge ahead. The answer to your
question is: CFPB can get it right if it truly meets, listens
to, and reacts to small businesses in this space, and that is
the principle of the Reg Flex Act. If they do it right, then
they will come out with a good regulation.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. We will be watching for sure. Thank you.
Mr. Knapp, when agencies publish a proposed rule, the Reg
Flex Act requires them to describe, and where feasible,
estimate the number of small entities to which the proposed
rule applies. Agencies often underestimate the number of small
businesses impacted by proposed regulations, or simply say that
the data is unavailable. Is it your experience that the burden
is on small businesses to demonstrate that they will be
affected? Mr. Sullivan, I would like to hear your comments on
that.
Mr. KNAPP. I do not know how much outreach the EPA did
regarding developing the ``waters of the U.S.'' I have been
told it was pretty extensive even though they did not go
through the SBREFA process. Here is the problem. The problem
is, when we even have advocacy and they have the panels, they
are usually done in places where most small businesses are not.
Okay? They are done in Washington, and that means trade
associations are representing them, and trade associations are
not necessarily representing the rank and file out there. I do
not remember any of them coming to South Carolina to hold
anything.
I do not want to say it is the small businesses'
responsibility to tell an agency that yes, we will be impacted.
I think that if we are going to be doing this type of outreach,
they need to have the resources to go out to the small
businesses. Instead of putting the burden on small businesses
to say they are going to be impacted, let's bring the two of
them and let's educate them. Let's take them to where they are
and then have those types of conversations.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Sullivan?
Mr. SULLIVAN. Thank you, Congresswoman Velazquez.
First of all, I disagree vehemently with Mr. Knapp's
statement that trade associations do not represent their small
businesses. I think that is absolutely false, and I think my
tenure as chief counsel, my interaction with the trade
associations was tremendously helpful to gauge where small
businesses come from. They are busy running their businesses,
and if they can afford $100 extra to join a trade association,
they want the trade association to interact with the agencies
so that they can put the lights on and turn the lights off at
the end of the day to run their business.
Now, as far as whether or not agencies underestimate or
overestimate or who is responsible for the data, agencies have
the resources to do the type of economic analysis. They know
when they can get help from small businesses through their
trade associations. I think the burden under the law is on the
agencies to get it right, and I think that should continue to
be where the emphasis is for producing analysis that you can
benefit from, as well as small business owners in the process.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
has expired.
The chair would just note for the record that whereas
private companies can screw up as they did in the chemical
spill in West Virginia, that the government can screw up
royally as it did out in Colorado some time ago in the Animas
River when the EPA allowed huge amounts to go into the river
there. That was the EPA.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Knight, for 5 minutes.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My question is for Mr. Palmieri. Mr. Hardy and I recently
wrote a letter to Secretary Perez expressing similar concerns
to the testimonies today. As you may know, Mr. Hardy and I are
from two very different states--me from California, Mr. Hardy
from Nevada--and we approach things quite differently in both
of those states. Do your members bring up issues on how these
proposed rules would affect them on top of the state
regulations in different states?
Mr. PALMIERI. Absolutely. We often have deep sympathy with
our members in certain states that have a very challenging
regulatory philosophy. Some of our members live in states where
the regulatory philosophy is to accomplish the objective but to
also remain the most competitive state in the country to
attract businesses and invest. Obviously, we also suffer the
challenges of, as Ms. Harned mentioned, differing enforcement
regimes where a business that might have a facility on two
sides of a border, in the Midwest or otherwise, where one of
their facilities is in compliance with State inspectors in the
program and the other is not, despite doing the same thing and
meeting federal standards. There are any number of challenges
that they face, and obviously, for some, they have made
decisions to leave certain states because of their regulatory
regimes or decided not to invest that next dollar or that next
job in states that are not as welcoming.
Mr. KNIGHT. Well put. Our job is to kind of get out of our
way in California. I think Mr. Hardy's job is to then take our
jobs. I asked this because California just passed a minimum
wage of $15 an hour, and unfortunately, California sometimes
leads, many times in the wrong direction. How do we see this
$15 an hour minimum wage? Because it could be moving across the
country. I know other states are talking about it and other
states are considering this. How will this affect small
business? This is for all four panelists. How much will this
make the changes? I know that we had a good story about the
five Dairy Queens and the change that will happen with the
managers and now putting them back to salaried employees. Just
the change in flexibility of not being able to allow your
employees to have maybe a life instead of the things that the
small business is going to have to go through with these huge
changes from $8, $9, and $10 an hour, to now $15 an hour.
Ms. HARNED. If I may, this has been something that NFIB has
really been on the front lines of in the various states
fighting because of the Robert Mayfields of the world. The
concern is what it does for the entire workforce because it is
not just getting that first employee up to $15 an hour, an
employee that you may be training that will eventually be
making and truly producing that value for the business. It also
means what do you do about Joe that prior to the increase was
making $17 an hour or $16 an hour? You are not just raising the
labor cost, it is not just the lowest person on the ladder; it
is going to impact everyone. When you have the small business
owners that we represent that are really sometimes netting
$100,000 a year if they are lucky, there is not a lot of money
to play with there. The pie is just not getting any bigger.
Mr. KNIGHT. I will use my last couple seconds here. We did
a couple roundtables and one of them was with small restaurant
owners, and that is the exact issue that they brought up. Look,
our cooks do not make $15 an hour. They are making more than
that. Now we hire somebody at $15 an hour and somebody is
making $18 an hour. Are they going to just say, well, ``that is
fine by me; I will just continue to make $18 an hour''? Or are
they going to say, ``we would like a bump, too''. It does have
that ripple effect throughout the whole business that it is not
just the $15 an hour basement, everyone is going to be bumped
up. That comes off the bottom line of a small business. It
makes it so there are less jobs. Not more jobs, less jobs.
I appreciate the time and I appreciate the panel here
today. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
is expired. The chair would just note that like California, the
city of Cincinnati--and I happen to be a resident of the city
of Cincinnati--they are also now considering enacting a $15
minimum wage, and I can assure you that they did not consult
with the chairman of the House Small Business Committee before
considering such action.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Hardy, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
throughout this meeting and bring out some of these issues that
are out there. As a former small business owner myself, I might
disagree with many on the impact of regulations; I have seen
the impact of what regulations do to small businesses. We talk
a lot about the small business, but we also have to understand
that through the regulation process, small businesses also hurt
probably more than anybody else when it impacts big business. I
just heard at a hearing this morning about the impact of the
steel industry, the regulations on the steel industry and how
we cannot compete, or how we have governments backing up
things, but the government side does not have anything to do
with regulations. It has something to do with what our
responsibility is here.
The reason I bring this up, through regulations like
``waters of the U.S.,'' the Clean Water Act, the sick leave
rules, all these other little rules that get at it, too, we, as
small businesses, feed off many of the big businesses. When it
impacts big business, it devastates our market too, and they
start to collapse or they start to decline. Things like
``waters of the U.S.'' in Nevada. Really? Clean waters of the
U.S. and Clean Water Act in Nevada? You literally could go for
hundreds of miles and never find a stream. But because of
mining impacts and the costs, it also costs maybe steel
products, precious or other metals that help make good quality
steel. When that impacts there, it drives costs up and drives
the business out of business, so to speak, so we have problems
on that end, too. We cannot ever leave out the big business
impact. I would like to thank Mr. Knight for signing onto the
letter with me for the overtime rule.
Ms. Harned, I would like you to address maybe a little
further on what impact this overtime rule has had on small
business. You brought it up a little bit but can you go into
manufacturing costs of jobs or maybe what other issues might be
harmed by this overtime rule?
Ms. HARNED. Right. I think the issue is the jobs. I think
that Mr. Mayfield's story really demonstrates that. The other
thing that I think is so important to focus on with regard to
this rule, we live in a very expensive area, and $50,000 is not
what it is in rural Texas. That is one of our biggest
complaints with this rule, and we really were asking that the
Department look at the fact that you have different markets all
over the country. One size definitely does not fit all when it
comes to this, and you are, as Mr. Mayfield suggests, punishing
people that you are trying to build as managers; making them
think as an hourly employee as opposed to doing what is good
for the business. I really think, for the small business owners
we represent, this rule is very much one of a job loss leader.
Lack of sales may definitely come from that, too, because as
people lose jobs, they have less money to spend. Our most
recent report that was just issued on Tuesday shows now that
lack of sales is coming back up as a big factor as to why small
businesses are not expanding and doing poorly in this economy
still today.
Mr. HARDY. You talk about the impact of the overtime rule,
but we have many other impacts--the sick leave rule--that are
coming forward. This joint employer rule, which is going to
cause a major impact on industries because of the explanation
that needs to be understood of where it is really going to stay
with the smaller businesses that actually help build up that
franchise, so to speak.
A question I can ask of Mr. Palmieri, last year there was
82,035 pages of regulations drafted from January 1 to December
30. Who has to read those pages? How many pages a day is that,
by the way? How many employees do we have to have to take care
of just to make sure we are not violating regulations?
Mr. PALMIERI. Absolutely. For some of our smallest
businesses, it is absolutely impossible. They have to rely on
outside expertise, they will pay consultants. They will join
trade associations. They will join other groups to help figure
out what is coming at them, both what to expect in the future
and what is hitting them right now. But you point to a critical
piece that is so often missed and that no agency does a good
job of, which is to say, in what environment am I adding this
new regulatory cost? What is the cumulative burden of the
regulations from this agency and all others that have been
imposed recently on this industry, this sector, or in the past,
that they are still following? That they are still investing in
capital equipment to comply with? That cumulative burden, even
though this administration has asked agencies to look at it, is
never analyzed, is never reviewed, and often is what makes a
relatively small rule still very costly at the margin and
critical for whether a business remains a profitable concern or
not.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Thank you. The
gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Kelly, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this
hearing, and I thank all of you witnesses for being here. I
thank you for your testimony today.
It is frustrating to me. I am new here, and so I still have
friends back home that do not know anything about the
legislative process, and quite frankly do not want to know
anything about the legislative process, and I may join them one
day. It is frustrating when you have agency after agency after
agency that in the name of trying to help people are continuing
to hurt not only the small businesses but also the end user,
the customer, the consumer whose prices continue to go up.
Whether we are talking about the CFPB or EPA or OSHA or NLRB,
they continue to pile on regulations, quite frankly, even to
the point that recently there are lobbying groups to support
their rules on the front end, which is illegal in some cases.
Even when you tell them it is illegal, and I have actually had
this in the Ag hearing where they say, ``well, I think they
misinterpreted the law''. I think the courts are wrong. The
courts did not really mean that. They are wrong in the ruling
that they have. We are going to ignore that. We have agencies
that are out of control. We need good regulation in government.
I think everyone in the panel would agree with that. We need
reasonable regulation, and we need regulation that prevents
cheaters, but we do not need burdens on our backs. Fifty
thousand dollars a year is a lot of money in Mississippi, where
I live. We cannot afford $15 an hour, especially when it is a
graduated scale where you are punishing your hard workers,
people like my wife who works, who does not make New York
wages, it is difficult. So how do we stop them? Because they
put up comment periods. They pay groups to go and comment what
they want to say what a great rule it is, either legally or
illegally. Groups do that. The number of comments does not
equal the number of people it affects, and quite frankly, most
small businesses cannot read it, do not have the time to read
it, or are not articulate enough to organize to put those right
messages on there. How do we stop it in Congress? How do we
stop the ridiculous regulations that keep coming? I will just
start with you, Ms. Harned, and see, what can we do?
Ms. HARNED. That is the million-dollar question. I think
one thing that can happen that would be helpful is, as we have
seen with these big comprehensive bills, whether it is
Obamacare or Dodd-Frank or whatever, there is way too much left
unsaid in the statutory language, which means that the agencies
get a clear path to fill in the blanks, if you will. Then you
have years of jurisprudence in the courts that only give them
the green light for that, saying we are going to defer to you,
we are not going to second guess you. We have created, as an
old professor Jonathan Turley said, the fourth branch of
government now with these agencies. I really feel like starting
in Congress, write clear, small, very direct legislation, and
then aggressive oversight is also critical.
Mr. KELLY. That is one of the things that is really
frustrating to me, if I vote wrong and I do things that are
stupid, my folks will send me home. I am accountable. If I make
too many of the wrong votes or do things the wrong way, I am
accountable. I go home. The President is accountable to the
people. He is elected by the people, and if he makes the wrong
decisions, whoever our next president is, he/she, it does not
matter. If they make enough of the wrong decisions, the people
will send them home. The same with our Senate. The problem is,
these regulatory agencies, they do not even go to jail for
breaking the law. There is no accountability whatsoever. They
are not elected, they do not care what the people think, and
they do not care what the voters think because they do not
answer to the voters. They do not answer to the President. They
do not answer to the Congress. They do not answer to the
courts. They think that they are untouchable, and we have to
figure out a way. I do not think any rule or regulation, if it
was up to me, none of them, unless they were approved by
Congress, would ever be acted into regulation. I do not care
the cost because I think we owe a duty, and I think we have to
get away from regulators running this country. The fourth
branch of government, which I would argue right now until we do
something, is the most powerful branch of government in spite
of that is not the best thing for this nation. I think there
are some really good people who work there. I do not think they
are all bad people, and I think people have really good
motives. But at the end of the day, I think we have to rule on
the amount of excessive regulation. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The chair was considering going into a second round and
asking another question, but I cannot improve on what the
gentleman from Mississippi just said. So I am going to end it
there.
We want to thank all the witnesses for being here today.
Today's hearing highlighted how regulations that are often
created without assessing the real world consequences for small
businesses can result in unnecessary and excessive regulatory
burdens, especially on small businesses. At the core of this
problem, I think to some degree, is the agency's failure to
comply with the Regulatory Flexibility Act. This Committee will
continue to closely monitor agencies' regulatory activities and
work on solutions that will ensure full compliance with the
law.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. If there is no further business to come before
the Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
