- SUPPORTING SUCCESS: EMPOWERING SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCATES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SUPPORTING SUCCESS: EMPOWERING SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCATES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
DECEMBER 9, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-033
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-973 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Emily Murphy, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Richard Hanna...............................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Hon. Angela B. Styles, Chair and Partner, Crowell & Moring LLP,
Washington, DC, testifying on behalf of the Defense Industry
Initiative on Business Ethics and Conduct......................     4
Mr. Davy G. Leghorn, Assistant Director, National Veterans
Employment and Education Division, The American Legion,
Washington, DC.................................................     6
Ms. ML Mackey, Chief Executive Officer, Beacon Interactive
Systems, Cambridge, MA, testifying on behalf of the National
Defense Industrial Association.................................     7
Ms. Tracy Balazs, Founder, President and Chief Executive Officer,
FSR, Annapolis, MD, testifying on behalf of US Pan Asian
American Chamber of Commerce...................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Hon. Angela B. Styles, Chair and Partner, Crowell & Moring
LLP, Washington, DC, testifying on behalf of the Defense
Industry Initiative on Business Ethics and Conduct.........    20
Mr. Davy G. Leghorn, Assistant Director, National Veterans
Employment and Education Division, The American Legion,
Washington, DC.............................................    46
Ms. ML Mackey, Chief Executive Officer, Beacon Interactive
Systems, Cambridge, MA, testifying on behalf of the
National Defense Industrial Association....................    51
Ms. Tracy Balazs, Founder, President and Chief Executive
Officer, FSR, Annapolis, MD, testifying on behalf of US Pan
Asian American Chamber of Commerce.........................    55
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

SUPPORTING SUCCESS: EMPOWERING SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCATES

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 9, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Richard Hanna
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hanna, Knight, Kelly, Velazquez,
and Chu.
Chairman HANNA. This hearing will come to order.
It has been four years since this Subcommittee held a
hearing on the role of small business advocates, although we
have spent a lot of effort strengthening these offices. During
those four years, we have worked with the Minority to create
minimum requirements for each of the small business advocates.
We have added clarity and precision to the roles of the
Procurement Center Representatives, PCRs, and the Offices of
Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, OSDBUs. We have
worked to improve the data and systems upon which they rely,
and to give them new tools to assist small businesses competing
for prime contracts and subcontracts. However, there is still
much work to be done.
Unfortunately, the regulations and standard operating
procedures in places across the Government have not kept pace
with the Small Business Act or the reality of Federal
contracting.
What does that mean? First, job descriptions for the
business opportunity specialists and commercial market
representatives are woefully out of date. Second, PCRs are
regulatorily prohibited from looking at many consolidated
contracts. Third, OSDBUs are not able to catch agency personnel
evading the Small Business Act. Fourth, small contractors are
losing opportunities to compete.
Finally, it means that we are not explaining to new
contractors that winning an award is only the first hurdle,
next, you have to comply with obscure, confusing compliance
regulations.
Today, we are here to learn from small businesses and those
that work with them how we can ensure that the small business
advocates created by the Small Business Act can be more
effective.
I especially what to hear suggestions on what Congress can
do to alleviate these burdens. I think it is appropriate that
we periodically review the efficiency of these programs and
make improvements so that the reality of the programs remains
true to the spirit of the Act. I think we have an opportunity
to work on these issues in a bipartisan manner.
As we have discussed numerous times this year, we know that
we are losing small contractors, and it will be difficult if
not impossible to replace these sectors of our technological
and industrial base. Supporting the advocates who support small
businesses is a crucial element of small business success.
I now yield to the ranking member for her opening
statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure
to be filling in for Mr. Takai.
Each year, the federal government spends approximately $440
billion on a variety of goods and services needed for its daily
operations. It has been the mission of this committee to ensure
that small businesses receive their fair share of dollars
generated by these contracting opportunities.
As such, we have provided small businesses with tools to
assist them in entering and competing in the federal
marketplace as either prime contractors or subcontractors.
While their effects were not immediate, these tools have slowly
proven the effectiveness in getting results.
Through small business set-aside programs, the dollars
awarded to small businesses increased to $91 billion in 2014,
accounting for 25 percent of contracting dollars. In fact,
there were also increases in the awards to small business
subgroups.
For example, service disabled veteran owned businesses
received $13 billion, and small disadvantaged businesses were
awarded $34 billion.
However, more work is needed to get all small businesses
their fair share as the government has failed to meet its goal
for women owned small businesses.
Additionally, the mindset of contracting officials needs to
be changed so that they see these goals as floor rather than
ceiling. It is to that end we must have strong small business
advocates placed throughout the acquisition process.
The amount of resources dedicated to these officials would
seem to indicate that the Small Business Administration places
no importance on the role they play for small businesses.
Procurement center representatives are the first line of
advocacy. These officials are tasked with overseeing contracts
to determine if it should have been set aside for small
businesses or whether it was improperly bundled.
Despite their important function, there are only 49 of
these advocates overseeing more than 50 million contracting
actions; 49.
What I would like to say, Mr. Chairman, to the committee is
the fact that sequestration and budget cuts have consequences.
We are here to make sure that we provide a level playing field
for small businesses to be able to access the marketplace, the
federal marketplace, but in order for the staff at the Small
Business Administration to do their job, they need resources.
As a result of the short staffing, PCRs are no longer
reviewing actions if there is any kind of set-aside on the
contracts. These officials are allowing the bare minimum small
business representation, and that is just unacceptable.
Commercial market representatives face staff shortages with
only 27 advocates to monitor the subcontracting plans of large
prime contractors. Their effectiveness is further diluted as
many of them have other responsibilities to perform, taking
them away from the CMR role.
The same can be said for business opportunity specialists,
who are often pulled by their district offices to help with
other small business programs rather than overseeing the 8(a)
participants as intended.
Many of the problems with the CMR and BOS advocates are
compounded by the fact that neither of these positions are laid
out in the statute. Instead, they have been left to develop
with SOPs and common practices. This begs one critical
question. How can small businesses know what these advocates
can do for them if their roles have not been clearly defined?
With 100,000 fewer small business contractors registered to
do business with the government than in 2012, and the average
contract size increasing because of more bundling, it is more
important than ever that actions are taken to reinforce the
importance of small business advocates.
I hope that today's hearing will help us gain some insight
as to how we can strengthen the role these advocates play in
not only assisting small businesses navigate the marketplace
but also ensuring these businesses receive their fair share of
contracting dollars.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. If additional members have
opening statements prepared, I ask that they submit them for
the record.
Thank you all for being here. In a moment I will introduce
you individually, but so you understand the timing, you have
five minutes. When it turns red, you have one, but we want to
hear what you have to say, so do not sweat the program too
much.
We have one panel today. Our first witness is Angela
Styles, Chair and Partner at Crowell & Moring. She is
testifying on behalf of the Defense Industry Initiative on
Business Ethics and Conduct, a non-profit organization
dedicated to a culture and practice of ethics and integrity in
all business dealings with the Department of Defense.
Our second witness is Davy Leghorn, the Assistant Director
of the National Veterans Employment and Education Division at
the American Legion. The Legion is the largest wartime veterans
service organization. Thank you.
Our third witness is Ms. ML Mackey, CEO of Beacon
Interactive Systems, a successful SBIR contractor. She is
testifying on behalf of the National Defense Industrial
Association.
I now yield to the ranking member to introduce our last
witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure
to introduce Ms. Tracy Balazs, the Founder, President, and CEO
of Federal Staffing Resources. FSR is a woman-owned minority
business located in Annapolis, Maryland, with over 11 years of
experience, the business also successfully graduated from SBA's
8(a) business development program, and now serves as a mentor
in the program.
Ms. Balazs is also here testifying on behalf of the US Pan
Asian American Chamber of Commerce, whose goal is to open doors
for Asian American minority businesses and their business
partners in corporate America, in federal, state, and local
governments. Welcome.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. Ms. Styles?

STATEMENTS OF ANGELA B. STYLES, CHAIR AND PARTNER, CROWELL &
MORING; DAVY G. LEGHORN, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, NATIONAL VETERANS
EMPLOYMENT AND EDUCATION DIVISION, THE AMERICAN LEGION; ML
MACKEY, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, BEACON INTERACTIVE SYSTEMS;
TRACY BALAZS, FOUNDER, PRESIDENT, AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
OF FEDERAL STAFFING RESOURCES

STATEMENT OF ANGELA B. STYLES

Ms. STYLES. Thank you very much, Chairman Hanna,
Congresswoman Velazquez, and members of the Subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today as the
coordinator of the Defense Industry Initiative on Business
Ethics and Conduct, or DII, to discuss ways to empower small
businesses to comply with the many, many requirements of the
Federal marketplace.
DII is a non-partisan and non-profit 501(c)(3) association
of U.S. defense companies who are committed to a culture and
practice of ethics and integrity.
In 1986, the chief executive officers and senior officials
of 18 defense contractors, who were led by Jack Welch from
General Electric, voluntarily met and created DII and drafted
self governance principles. Today, 76 defense contractors
including both small and large businesses, are signatories to
the DII self governance principles.
As part of its mission, DII provides the resources and
assistance to help train hundreds of thousands of defense
industry employees in ethics and compliance.
In an ideal world, all businesses that participate in the
Federal marketplace would have the wherewithal to understand
and comply with all of the obligations that go hand in hand
with Federal contracting. Unfortunately, this is not an ideal
world.
The scope and complexity of the regulations faced by
contractors challenge are enough to regularly challenge even
the largest companies with robust ethics and compliance
programs. With less resources, measured by both money and
manpower, and less experience with Government contracting, the
hurdles faced by small businesses are monumental.
As a result, the Federal Government is undoubtedly
contracting with small businesses that do not know the full
extent of the laws, regulations, or provisions required for
Federal contracting. Some are not monitoring their compliance
with these requirements, and some have no process to
voluntarily disclose violations to appropriate authorities.
Although there are numerous Federal agencies, centers, and
offices that work with small businesses engaged in Federal
contracting, DII has extensively searched--when I say
extensively, we have done web searches, we have made phone
calls, we have had meetings with all different levels of
Government officials, we have not found Federal Government
resources that provide guidance to small businesses to aid in
the adoption of codes of conduct or the establishment of
broader compliance in ethics programs for small businesses.
Because the Federal resources for small businesses seem to
be woefully lacking in the Federal Government, DII itself
recently undertook several significant initiatives to provide
ethics and compliance resources to small business contractors.
In 2014, we published a model Code of Conduct for
suppliers, and I have provided that as Attachment C to the
Committee. We also have on our website a supplier toolkit that
is available for small businesses and all businesses as well.
Following the publication of both our Supplier Code of
Conduct and our toolkit, we were making our way around to
different suspension and debarment officials at the Department
of Defense, and they kept telling us it really was not enough,
that they really wanted to see if the private sector could help
with ethics and compliance programming for small businesses.
One thing they do not want to do is suspend or debar small
businesses because they did not have the resources or the
ability to understand how to comply with the laws and the
regulations.
As a result of those meetings, DII has committed to provide
additional resources to small businesses that are Federal
contractors, both prime and subcontractors.
To that end, at the specific request of the Army Suspension
and Debarment Office, we actually put up training for small
businesses on our website, but that is just the first step. We
have a webinar available. I have provided the slides of that
webinar. Even you can get on and take a look at what we
provided.
They told us how important it was to have some basic
training about small business programs up and available, so we
put together that training, we put it up on our website, but we
are not stopping there.
This spring, we are going to launch a very robust small
business toolkit, which includes structure and organization of
a compliance program, some materials so they can build their
own compliance program.
We are going to have specific codes of conduct, policies
and procedures for small businesses to be able to literally
lift out of our website and use at their companies.
We are making sample training videos for them to be able to
train their employees on critical ethics and compliance issues
in Federal contracting, and we are also going to provide them
with templates on how to monitor and audit your own compliance
program.
We are very hopeful that these with a mentor-protege
program that we are putting together for a list of mentors that
are available within DII to assist, take phone calls, answer
questions from small businesses. We hope this will actually
help.
I will tell you this cannot just be the private sector
alone. While DII and many of the defense contractors are very
committed to making resources available, we really want this
effort, this education and training effort, to be done in
coordination with the Department of Defense and with our Small
Business Administration colleagues.
It takes both the public and private sectors, I think, to
ensure that small businesses have the resources and tools to
wisely, legally, and ethically perform Federal contracts.
This concludes my prepared response, but I do want to thank
one of my colleagues for assisting me with this testimony. She
is here today, Olivia Lynch, with my office.
There are very few, aside from your counsel that have here
on the Committee, people that actually understand small
business statutes and regulations and how difficult this is,
but I can tell you Ms. Lynch, who helped me with the testimony,
and certainly the counsel you have on your Committee, are
certainly some of the leading experts around.
Thank you very much.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. Mr. Leghorn?

STATEMENT OF DAVY G. LEGHORN

Mr. LEGHORN. Good morning, Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Subcommittee. On behalf of our
National Commander, Dale Barnett, and 2.3 million members of
the American Legion, we thank you for this opportunity to
testify at this hearing.
In the midst of obstacles for veteran entrepreneurs seeking
Federal contracts and the VA purchase card scandal, the
American Legion recognizes the need to empower the Small
Business Administration and the offices of small and
disadvantaged business utilization to hold the Federal agencies
accountable.
Our Government has a fiduciary responsibility to not
circumvent the procurement process with questionable shortcuts.
The American Legion can appreciate that VA misused purchase
cards in fulfilling their duties to provide adequate care to
veterans, but we are concerned that this deliberate undermining
of the procurement process is putting our veterans at risk.
This issue is paramount to the American Legion as it
directly affects the care of a vulnerable segment of the
veterans' population. Federal contracts protect veteran
patients with terms and conditions and hold medical suppliers
or health care administrators accountable.
None of these protections are in place when equipment and
services are acquired outside of the procurement process. Never
mind that VA is likely being overcharged or that the abuse of
purchase cards is unfair to small businesses. This is foremost
a safety concern that needs to be addressed.
The American Legion believes that VA contracting officials
misused purchase cards because of short staffing and bad
training. We would like to believe that the perpetuated culture
of foiling the procurement process is unintentional. With that
in mind, there are measures that VA can implement to ensure
that our veteran patients are safe and all purchases that are
set aside for small businesses remain reserved for small
businesses.
VA OSDBU must train and re-train contracting employees. VA
should hire additional staff to write and oversee contracts in
order to decrease the existing workload. VA must account for
purchase card expenditures and they must start recording it in
a database like that of the FTPS.
Another issue harmful to veteran small businesses is the
Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative. The American Legion has
never thought that the FSSI was good for small business. While
this initiative streamlines Government procurements, it is
flawed in that it drastically reduces competition for
Government spending.
As we mention in our written testimony, with the latest
generation of FSSI, the bidding process is burdensome and cost
prohibitive to small businesses. Further, it is equally
frustrating to sell to an agency despite having been identified
as a small business prime under the FSSI.
We have come to terms that this generation of FSSI is here
to stay, so the American Legion would like to make a few
recommendations to ensure that at least a few of our veteran
small businesses can benefit.
Procurement center representatives are supposed to be our
advocates. They ensure a fair portion of contracts and
subcontracts are allocated to small business. Unfortunately,
there are simply not enough PCRs to review every contract for
compliance, and PCRs do not review outgoing FSSI delivery
orders.
The contracts under the FSSI are so large that the American
Legion believes that it will be of benefit to the small
business community if PCRs are required to review outgoing FSSI
contracts.
The American Legion goes a step further and recommends an
SBA budget increase for the hiring of more PCRs.
Over the years, procurement initiatives and tools like the
FSSI reverse auctions and large IDIQ contracts were all
partially aimed at alleviating the workload of contracting
employees. A case can be made that these initiatives and tools
are not working because contracting employees are still looking
for shortcuts.
There is a need for additional competent Federal personnel
to write, oversee, and monitor contracts because much of the
frustrations our veteran entrepreneurs have stem from a lack of
well trained procurement staff.
The American Legion does not believe that Federal employees
intentionally put veteran patients in danger or are maliciously
suppressing the veteran small business industrial base with bad
policy. They just need the requisite training and manpower to
do the job correctly and be the advocates for small business
that they were intended to be.
In closing, the American Legion thanks this Committee for
the opportunity to testify today, and we look forward to any
questions you may have.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. Ms. Mackey?

STATEMENT OF ML MACKEY

Ms. MACKEY. Good morning, Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is ML
Mackey, and I am the CEO of Beacon Interactive Systems, a small
business with offices located in Waltham, Massachusetts and in
Norfolk, Virginia.
I am also the Legislative Affairs and Policy Committee
Chair for the Small Business Division of the National Defense
Industrial Association, NDIA.
In each of those roles, my motivation is the same, to
utilize small business effectively to increase innovation, cost
savings, and competition in the Federal acquisition ecosystem.
Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Velazquez, I appreciate your
leadership and the efforts of your Subcommittee taking the form
of your obvious interest in and commitment to leveling the
playing field for small businesses to compete in the Federal
marketplace and the many pieces of legislation you have
authored and passed to that end.
My role at NDIA places me in regular discussions of small
business legislation. The overwhelming response of my
colleagues to your efforts and your Committee's efforts is
sincere appreciation, so please let me begin by saying thank
you.
As I said, this Subcommittee has demonstrated a deep
commitment to leveling the playing field for small business.
This concept is important to today's discussion because if one
accepts that small business has a lot to offer and that in many
cases small business is where innovation occurs, what we are
all fighting for makes sense, this level playing field. Your
efforts make it possible for the best, not just the biggest to
rise to the top.
The goal of your efforts is not to make it easy on small
business, and it is not, but rather to ensure that we have a
diverse industry that supplies the Government with the very
best goods and services possible at the best possible price.
Unfortunately, the level playing field is as difficult to
create as it is important to maintain for the well being of the
Government contracting ecosystem.
Fortunately for those of us that advocate for small
business interests, we have strong advocates like this
Committee. Your efforts in the recent legislation regarding
small business Federal contracting in the fiscal year 2016 NDAA
demonstrate once again that small business can depend on
Congress to work for a fair and healthy acquisition system.
Of course, new legislation is just the beginning of this
process. Each one of your provisions must be written into clear
regulations and policies that each agency can implement. Next,
the Congress, the Small Business Administration, and each
agency must oversee the implementation of these regulations and
policies to be sure they are followed.
With that in mind, what I can offer today is some feedback
from my experience in my own company as well as some of my NDIA
colleagues' experiences with their small businesses.
I make five recommendations in my prepared testimony, but
in the interest of time, I will read only two of them here
today and submit the others for the record.
The first one I want to discuss with you is the lack of PCR
involvement in consolidated contracts. This limits small
business participation. We suggest that PCRs should actively
advise on consolidated contracts, inviting PCRs to advise on a
consolidated acquisition strategy will help better identify
those requirements where small businesses can best perform, and
help structure the solicitation such that more small businesses
can compete.
Over the recent decade, the Federal Government has seen
widespread and far reaching changes in the way it procures
services and technology. There has been significant growth of
consolidated contracts. Although this has helped the Government
cope with the reduction on the acquisition workforce through
fewer contracts, it tends to bundle requirements that are out
of reach of most small businesses.
For example, technology contracts are generally the result
of consolidating multiple discipline requirements into a single
solicitation for large business team competition. Empowering
PCRs to advise on consolidated contracts will help to ensure
that the requirements are within the reach of small business.
The impact will be increase small business participation
and competition resulting in more cost effective and innovative
solutions for our warfighter.
The second problem I will speak to is post-award
compliance. The Government has created barriers to entry in the
Federal market and thus, is not getting all the companies
participating that it would like to have. Many entrepreneurial
small business owners do not want to deal with the compliance
headache and risk of engaging with the Federal Government.
To be clear, Beacon became a Federal Government contractor
when after 10 years of running a successful private sector
software company and in the wake of the tech bubble burst, our
market dried up. We engaged with the Navy's SBIR program to
accomplish a pivot into the Federal market.
Once we got through the initial burden of understanding
some of the Federal contracting compliance issues, it has wound
up being a net positive experience both for our company and our
Federal customers, but overcoming the barriers was really hard
at first. Honestly, it still is at times.
I suggest we develop paths and provide resources for non-
traditional entrepreneurial small businesses to drive the
innovation, cost effectiveness, and improve competition so
desperately needed in Federal procurement.
The impact would be increased small business participation
and improved quality across the board, not just on the high
quality of what these entrepreneurial small businesses will
directly provide, but also by the competition they will incite
across the Government supplier base.
Mr. Chairman, on behalf of both the National Defense
Industrial Association and myself, I hope that these
suggestions will be useful in your ongoing work.
I would like to thank you and the Committee for your
leadership, and I would be pleased to respond to any of your
questions.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. Ms. Balazs?

STATEMENT OF TRACY BALAZS

Ms. BALAZS. Good morning, Chairman Hanna, and Ranking
Member Velazquez, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you
for this opportunity to provide testimony regarding my personal
experiences as a woman owned small business owner who has
graduated from the SBA 8(a) program, and is now an approved SBA
mentor.
My name is Tracy Balazs. I am the Founder, President, and
Chief Executive Officer of Federal Staffing Resources, also
known as FSR. I am also a retired registered nurse.
I am testifying today on behalf of FSR regarding the
advocacy and support of small business representatives from the
following departments that I have had experience: 8(a) Business
Development Program--Business Opportunity Specialists, BOS, the
Procurement Center Representatives, PCRs, and the Office of
Small and Disadvantaged Small Business Utilization, OSDBU.
As a member of the US Pan Asian American Chamber of
Commerce, an organization whose mission is to be the gateway to
corporate and Government contracts, while opening doors and
making connections for the Asian American minority businesses
and their partners, I am grateful for their recommendation that
FSR should provide testimony today.
Federal Staffing Resources is a successful business with
250 employees, in large part due to the programs, the guidance,
and the support provided by the SBA.
FSR has been a Federal contractor since its inception in
February 2004. Our core competency has been in support of those
who have sacrificed for our freedoms--the active duty men and
women and the veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces, by providing
the best in class health care personnel and program management
expertise to the Department of Defense and the Veterans Health
Administration.
We strongly believe that the SBA has given FSR the
opportunity to provide these services to the best of our
ability by giving us support we needed.
The 8(a) program was crucial to our early survival in
business. My experiences have been extremely positive, and FSR
has benefitted greatly from the 8(a) certification. It has not
been without challenges, however, since the compliance
requirements of 8(a) certified companies are rigorous.
The Government contracting process is complex and
confusing. Most small businesses do not have the time or the
money it takes to fully understand how to succeed as a
Government contractor. The SBA provides essential guidance to
business owners.
One issue that I had encountered while I was working with
the SBA is the interpretation and implementation of
standardized policies and procedures. They are handed down from
headquarters to the regional offices, the district offices, and
finally to the individual SBA representatives.
Even within the same office but mostly across state lines
and districts, interpretations of policies may differ. I have
had conflicting experiences regarding how the SBA reviews its
financial eligibility and size standards and how it applies
this criteria to award or to deny contracts.
Some guidance is misleading, conflicting, and
misinterpreted, which can result in inappropriate action, such
as improper awards.
Increased training for the representatives as well as
inviting industry to offer their experiences may help mitigate
confusion, and ensure uniform compliance. Non-compliance and
lack of attention to the rules may be potentially fatal for a
small business.
Even from the beginning, I knew that the relevant statutes
and regulations must be respected and never ignored. We take
compliance very seriously, and so much so that FSR has a
Director of Compliance.
Since the 8(a) program is highly regimented, certified 8(a)
contractors are under greater scrutiny for compliance than any
other small businesses that do not have a certifying body
mandating an annual update of their business or financials.
FSR is a mentor in the 8(a) Mentor-Protege program. It is
part of our duty to educate our protege and make them aware of
the pitfalls of non-compliance.
The SBA helped us grow our business pipeline and our
business network. The OSDBUs and the PCRs were essential in
creating opportunities for the past decade. The OSDBUs work
closely with the SBA and small businesses to ensure that we are
aware of Federal opportunities and that we are aware of the
growing statutes and regulations.
The two areas that the PCRs may have a direct impact on
small businesses is to make recommendation for small business
set-asides and to review the subcontracting plans and goals of
large businesses.
The monitoring of the small business subcontracting plans
may merit review. The concern is that large businesses are not
being fully assessed for compliance in the percentage of small
business utilization, as specified in their contract.
I understand from speaking to several OSDBUs and PCRs that
the large businesses are expected to meet their small business
subcontracting goals. However, due to insufficient numbers of
Government personnel, they are unable to police all the plans.
Therefore, these percentages are reported only by large
businesses, and without verification from the subcontractor
small businesses.
The Government receiving a report on subcontracting revenue
directly from small businesses so may themselves verify this
objective has been met.
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the SBA program and
their personnel for assistance in helping me achieve business
success.
Chairman Hanna and Ranking Member Velazquez, members of the
Subcommittee, thank you very much for this opportunity. FSR
hopes that our contributions and personal experiences may
impact the way the SBA interacts with small businesses in
monitoring and educating to ensure more compliance.
Thank you very much. I am available for questions.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. There is a theme here, and that
is that the SBA is shorthanded, which makes me wonder, they
offered a buyout program last year to PCRs and CMRs, and 15
people retired.
Ms. Styles, a couple of things. How does DII develop
training on issues like limitations on subcontracting when the
SBA and the FAR have not issued its own final rules, and could
you give me some examples of the types of ethical issues that
people are confronting that might not seem obvious?
Ms. STYLES. The rules, as you know, are quite complicated.
The statutes governing Federal contracting and the regulations
governing Federal contracting are complicated even for the
largest of defense contractors in our country.
I can tell you what makes it even worse is when a new
statute comes out and the regulations are not updated to
reflect the new statute, so the regulations are incorporated
into the contractor's contract, so you sign on the bottom line
and it becomes part of your contract, so you have to comply
with the regulation that says one thing for limitation on
subcontracting, but then there is also a statute out there that
you also must comply with that says something else on the
limitation on subcontracting. The best that we can advise our
clients is that they have to figure out how to follow both.
Chairman HANNA. They may not be in the same document. They
could be completely separate and maybe even unavailable at the
time?
Ms. STYLES. Are we really anticipating small businesses to
read legislation, statutes that pass? They rely on the
contract. They rely on the Federal acquisition regulations. It
is really hard to also expect them to go scour through the
statutes to figure out what they are supposed to be doing in
particular instances. It is very, very difficult.
I will say even some of the simplest issues are hard to
understand. Federal contracting is not commercial contracting.
You cannot take Government employees out to lunch. You have to
follow the specific terms and conditions of your contract. You
cannot sell products that are made in China.
There are things that are just really, really different
that are easy to get tripped up on, and we see it every day. We
see it every day with small businesses.
Chairman HANNA. To anybody, what kind of implications does
this have on bundling? Obviously, there is an incentive to do
that. I had asked you what kind of ethical issues you might be
confronted with that might not seem obvious. You said you had
made a couple of examples.
Ms. STYLES. Well, even the simplest things like pricing,
certified cost and pricing information, where products have to
be manufactured that are supplied to the U.S. Government.
Simple gifts and gratuity rules. There are like pages and pages
of gift and gratuity rules, not just for Federal employees, but
also in terms of what would constitute what you can do with
your suppliers as well.
It is easy to get tripped up on----
Chairman HANNA. Would you say that it is almost impossible
to follow, that anybody can make a mistake, and it depends on
who is watching when that mistake is made?
Ms. STYLES. Yes, even the largest companies make mistakes,
and they have a lot of resources to comply and to put ethics
and compliance programs in place.
Chairman HANNA. Anyone else want to speak on that?
Ms. BALAZS. I think it is easy to make a mistake. However,
it is on the onus of the small business who is going to be
working in the Federal space to be updated on the regulations.
This is required on the 8(a) certification.
You have to make sure that you comply with the terms of
your contract. Therefore, you as a business owner has to do
some homework. You have to be aware of what is going on and
what you have to do while working in the Federal space.
If the opportunity were there to be able to have our
representatives to be able to support us and educate us and
remind us that we have compliances to meet, I think that would
help us, instead of just allowing the small businesses to
figure it out for themselves.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. Ms. Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Ms. Styles, one of the main
factors in staying active in the marketplace is to remain
compliant. Can you help me understand why there is so little
emphasis put into that?
Ms. STYLES. I do not know why. I think a lot of the
emphasis has been put on getting the contracts to the small
businesses, which is great, right. We want our small businesses
to get a good share of Federal contracts.
I think the emphasis was put there to the exclusion of what
happens once you get the contract, how you perform, how you
follow the laws and regulations.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. How is it that DII does not find any
government source that provides guidance on small business
compliance?
Ms. STYLES. We were really surprised when we started
looking and realized what a big problem it was starting to
become, at least from what we were hearing from our Government
colleagues in terms of their concerns about whether the small
business suppliers they were relying on, that provided good
products and services, did not have a compliance program.
We were getting tripped up in different areas, so that is
why we started looking.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Ms. Balazs, you noted in your
testimony that you have a Director of Compliance. This is not a
step that has been taken by small businesses. Why do you choose
to make this investment, and what kind of assistance did you
seek when creating your program?
Ms. BALAZS. So, I chose to make this investment because we
wanted to be 100 percent compliant, and we did not want to risk
being disbarred or suspended. The 8(a) certification is
precious. You work hard to get it. You work hard to maintain
it. Although there are many companies that feel they will not
get caught, it is a risk that you take if you are not in
compliance.
We chose to be able to assign someone in our organization
to be Director of Compliance. She is self taught. She has years
of Government experience, and has had a great deal of resources
that she has obtained through classes or seminars provided by
the SBA and other agencies, et cetera.
It really keeps our feet to the fire, to be able to make
sure that if we are going to be working and competing in the
Government space that we are going to do exactly what the
Government tells us to do.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Would something like the tools that Ms.
Styles mentioned have been helpful to you?
Ms. BALAZS. Absolutely. If we had those resources at hand,
we certainly would not have had to go and find them and seek
them out. We did not get the assistance from the SBA. When we
got our 8(a) certification, it was just an understood thing
that we would be compliant, although there was nothing that we
were given in terms of a handbook on how to do it, what is the
FAR, how do we read the FAR. Your toolkit would be absolutely
great for any business but essentially those are going into the
Federal space.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. It is great that now you provide compliance
assistance to your protege. Did you find that other entities
were lacking in terms of providing counseling to small
businesses?
Ms. BALAZS. I believe so. I think it is really focused on
getting contracts, networking who you meet, who are the buyers,
who are the acquisition teams. It is not really focused on
after award and what is expected of the small business or the
large business.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Ms. Balazs. Ms. Styles, other
than money and manpower, what have you found to be the biggest
obstacle in creating a compliance program?
Ms. STYLES. It is the culture of the company. It has
everything to do with the people who are leading the company.
They have to embrace it and they have to understand it, and
just like Ms. Balazs over here, that is exactly what you want.
You want a company that says if I am taking Federal dollars and
I am performing a service, I am going to do it right.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Do you have an estimate on how much a basic
compliance program would cost?
Ms. STYLES. It is not inexpensive. You have to have a
person at least partially committed to it. I would say at least
$100,000 to put the very, very basics in place.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. I have other questions for the other two
witnesses on the second round, because we have other members
here.
Mr. Leghorn, earlier this year we held a hearing on the
alleged fraud and abuse of government purchase cards by the
Department of Veterans Affairs. You spoke at that hearing, but
yet veterans' groups have yet to testify before the committee
on this issue.
Can you discuss further how this type of fraud has affected
the veteran small business community?
Mr. LEGHORN. Thank you for your question, ma'am. So, the
way it affects veteran owned small businesses is that first of
all, the small business goal and percentages that are reported
by VA OSDBU come from--are taken from data from FDPS.
Since purchase card expenditures are not reported in FDPS,
the percentage that they actually report to the SBA is false.
We do not think this is something that is completely just
only relegated to VA, we think other agencies have violated the
purchase card rules as well.
Overall, it could be that more than one agency is reporting
false small business percentages to the SBA, and the SBA does
not really have any teeth to go after the agencies when
discrepancies are found.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. How can we get acquisition officials to stop
trying to shortcut the contracting process?
Mr. LEGHORN. I think the best thing we could do is to
leverage the OSDBUs within all the agencies and rely on them to
really train their contracting employees to use regular
procurement vehicles or if things need to be expedited, to use
maybe their sole source authority, but most importantly, they
have to start reporting their purchase card expenditures.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Ms. Mackey, the committee often
hears from small businesses that they do not know the role of
certain advocates or know how to properly utilize them as
resources. In some cases, they do not even know the advocate
exists.
What can be done to clarify these roles and ensure that
small businesses know about both the advocates and resources
available to them?
Ms. MACKEY. I would tell you that when I first found out
about PCRs, I thought oh, wow, what a great role. I was really
excited to have them get engaged in some of the contracting
discussions we were having, and then I realized how few there
were and how stretched thin they were, and how they did not
know the particulars, specifically of the SBI contracting we
were doing. It was like this promise that just went passing by.
I am very encouraged that we are talking about increasing
those resources. I also would suggest that you reach out
through the industry associations. What keeps striking me about
the answers that I hear from my fellow panelists is this
ability to initiate or do training.
Ms. Styles, you talked about changing it from the top down.
I think if you really want to change behavior, you want to have
this kind of compliance, you need a continuous maintenance of
your operational procedures and how you act, and so many of us
as small business owners find education in our industry
associations. I would recommend to you that you reach out
through the industry associations.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. Mr. Kelly?
Mr. KELLY. Yes. Mr. Leghorn, first, I want to thank you for
your service in the American Legion and obviously before that.
As a member of the American Legion, that is very important to
me.
You know that the procurement center representatives, PCRs,
are supposed to be the small businesses' advocates, ensuring a
fair proportion of purchases, contracts and subcontracts that
are allocated to small businesses.
Can you explain why the SBA would have a regulation that
keeps its procurement center representatives from reviewing
some of the largest contracting opportunities for small
businesses? By this, I mean contracts awarded as part of the
FSSI and other consolidated multiple award contracts.
Mr. LEGHORN. Thank you for your question, sir. PCRs only
look at contracts that are above a certain dollar amount,
because there simply are not enough of them to look at every
outgoing contract. With some of the contracts that go out, the
orders that go out under the FSSI, they already have a small
business component built into them.
For example, if you had seven primes that are designated,
three of them could be small businesses, and four of them could
be large businesses, and they are not obligated to look at them
because small business is already built in.
Mr. KELLY. Ms. Mackey, you are welcome to comment as well.
Ms. MACKEY. I am not sure that I could comment too much
more than that except to add in that it is really important to
articulate and discretely break up the kind of work that needs
to be done, and make sure we keep all the opportunities open. I
really appreciate what you had to say on that.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Leghorn, you know from your view there are
not enough PCRs to keep up with the expedient review of every
contract for compliance. In an ever increasingly difficult
budget environment, outside of hiring additional PCRs, are
there other steps that could be taken to modernize or create
effectiveness within the PCR role?
Mr. LEGHORN. Sir, I think a really good start, if we are
not going to hire any more PCRs, is to just have PCRs start
looking at FSSI contracts, because those contracts that are
going out are so large, there are actually very few small
businesses attached to these contracts.
I am pretty sure if any competent PCR looks at them, they
could find other small businesses to break out contracts for.
Mr. KELLY. Is there any other member of the panel that
would like to comment on that?
Ms. BALAZS. Would it be okay if I added something to that?
When I think about PCRs reviewing the consolidated contracts,
the thing I think I can offer is a perspective on what the
small business owner experiences, perhaps we both can offer
that.
If you think about how long it takes to prepare, if you can
qualify, to propose on one of those, some of our colleagues
have told us that it takes half a man year to write one of
those proposals.
If you have a small business, it is 20 people, and they are
writing one of these proposals, where they might get work and
they might not, that is half a year, that is five percent of my
workforce, let's say I am a 20 person company. Often, the
profit, the fee, that I can charge on a contract is five or six
percent.
It becomes unreasonable to think even when there are these
kinds of contracts that small business can go after, that most
of your small businesses will not. I think I am again
emphasizing your points, but I did want to give that context.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. It is worth noting that Mr.
Kelly will be introducing a bill to ensure PCRs can review
consolidated contracts, so this bill was written with the
ranking member's staff.
Ms. Styles, how unusual is it that a company would have
what Ms. Balazs has? Clearly, you have reached a critical mass
to do what you have done. Is it unusual?
Ms. STYLES. Very unusual for a company that size or a small
business to have a chief compliance officer or head of
compliance.
Chairman HANNA. It makes a big difference?
Ms. STYLES. Huge difference.
Chairman HANNA. But extremely rare?
Ms. STYLES. Very rare because it is a person, and you have
to pay.
Chairman HANNA. It is expensive?
Ms. STYLES. Yes.
Chairman HANNA. That only emphasizes again what you do, the
importance of what you do, and the importance of PCRs in
general. Amazing.
How much of an impetus do you think this has towards moving
to bundling and more consolidation, hence, as Ms. Mackey said,
the difficulties associated with getting contracts in general?
To anybody who would like to comment.
We have seen the loss of 100,000 businesses; right? That is
pretty severe.
Ms. BALAZS. If I may, bundling creates a situation where
the cost and the volume of all the contracts are so large that
small businesses generally are not able to support that volume.
However, I have heard through speaking with some OSDBUs and
understanding through small businesses that there could be a
tiered system in which when you look at the size for small
businesses, the largest size standard currently is $38 million.
That is a three year average.
Anybody who is within that could be considered a small
business, but that is a hospital standard size, for those who
are in health care, this is a size that we bid under.
I believe the largest size for research and development is
500 person. We are at 250, but we are still a small business.
As we continue, we will outgrow that size, but could still be a
small business depending on the types of personnel we support.
I believe the largest size for temporary services is $27.5
million, and the IT services is like $25 million.
If there were an opportunity to look at these contracts
that are coming out as a bundled contract, to be able to say
okay, if there are small businesses in the mid-tier area that
may be above these sizes, that they can come together possibly
and be able to work on some of these contracts if it was
offered to them. Right now, it is even full and open for
billion dollar companies or small.
If you do not have enough small's that can say they can do
it, along with their teaming partners, it will always go full
and open for these bundled contracts.
Chairman HANNA. Do you agree with that?
Ms. STYLES. Yes, I definitely agree with that. I would say
just on the bundling piece, I am seeing some recognition at the
Department of Defense that at least on the compliance side, it
does not really solve the problem, because the small
businesses, if you bundle, many of these small businesses end
up being in the supply chain, right.
Whether they are a prime and bidding or whether they are in
the supply chain, we have to fix these problems with
compliance.
I do think at least in some sense, there is a recognition
at the Department of Defense that it is not the solution that
maybe they thought it was, not that it does not make their life
easier, right, to bundle things and just have one company.
Chairman HANNA. One tends to think of bundling from the top
down, but what Ms. Balazs is suggesting is from the bottom up,
which is different than frankly I had thought about it before.
Ms. Velazquez?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes, I have another question. Ms. Balazs, in
your testimony, you talked about the lack of standardization of
SBA policies that could lead to inappropriate actions on the
part of small businesses.
I would like to hear from your own experience, do small
businesses usually rely on the business opportunity specialists
to steer them in the right direction?
Ms. BALAZS. The business opportunity specialists, ma'am,
are really assigned to those certified companies that are in
the 8(a) program. They are very specialized in supporting those
8(a) contractors.
I have two examples of misinterpretation of some of the
statutes and some of the policies. It comes down to the
financial eligibility of small businesses on sole source. This
is just an experience that I have had, and in talking with my
contemporaries, that they may not have realized the same
experience.
When a sole source opportunity is approved and granted to
an 8(a) company, the contracting officer must double check with
the BOS to make sure that person, that company, is viable, that
they are eligible, and they are able to support.
There is a financial aspect of that where they will ask the
8(a) company to present their tax returns to make sure they are
within the size standards to receive that sole source award.
Usually, it is based on the tax returns.
Unfortunately, from my experience, and this is where I am
saying interpretation is different amongst the BOSs--my BOS was
extremely dedicated to her job, she was extremely by the book.
I am not sure if this particular rationale is part of policy,
but she asked for interim financials, a moment in time of what
my financials are today before I can be awarded a sole source.
If we are a growing company, that is ever changing, and
hopefully it is growing. It is not based on the tax returns of
the previous year. Therefore, I have been denied sole source
contracts because we have reached a threshold during that
growth period.
Other SBA BOSs have not asked for interim. It is a surprise
to them that we would be asked for interim financials.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Let me ask you, do you see the fact that
there is a lack of direct BOS oversight from headquarters a
contributing factor to the lack of standardization, for
example?
Ms. BALAZS. I do not believe that is 100 percent true. I
think it is just understanding the statutes and the policies
and the rules and how they interpret them and express it to
their 8(a) organizations.
I think what is there is a statute, and maybe they are just
misrepresenting in the way they are explaining that to an
organization, and I am seeing that it happens within the same
organization, same office, as well as across state lines where
other businesses are.
As a mentor, I am working with a BOS that is in another
state. My protege is in another state. Therefore, some of the
things they have said to us is a little bit different than the
instructions and guidance I had received as an 8(a) certified
company.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you. Implicit in that is there is
some arbitrary and capricious opportunities because of the
complexity, and the lady you talked to who wanted you to do
interim financials, that is a lot of work and a lot of expense,
and you thought it was not required, but you had no choice.
Ms. BALAZS. I had no choice. I had to provide--the one
other aspect, if I may, is audited financials. The 8(a)
requires a company who is over $10 million and is a certified
8(a) to have audited financials. Audited financials are
extremely expensive. That is mandatory for you to sustain your
8(a) certification.
Most small businesses do not have that requirement to have
audited financials, but it is important to make sure that
company is sustainable. I have spoken with 8(a) companies that
have never been requested to have audited financials, and in
the entire nine years of my term in the 8(a) program, it cost
me about $30,000 a year to have audited financials, and then I
am working against other organizations who do not have audited
financials.
Chairman HANNA. If someone says to you you need it as of
yesterday, then basically that $30,000 you spent for year-end
does not even help you.
Ms. BALAZS. Correct. It was not an issue that we had to
provide audited financials because we are compliant, we do what
we are told. There was no issue with that, although I found it
rather expensive, but it was the fact that it was not
standardized across all the BOS offices.
Chairman HANNA. Thank you very much. Those FSSI contracts
displaced 500 plus small businesses in exchange for a handful
of small businesses. In one case, we went from 1,000 small
businesses regularly competing to only 30. This is something
that the PCRs should review.
If there are no further questions, I want to thank
everybody for being here today, and for your ideas for solving
some of these problems and potential solutions.
It seems that some common sense reforms to PCR, OSDBU, BOS,
and CMR programs would go a long way to helping our small
businesses compete. I look forward to working with my
colleagues, and there are a number of ideas on this Committee,
along with one we have heard from Mr. Kelly.
I ask unanimous consent that the members have five
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record, without objection.
I want to thank you all again. This hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:02 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

STATEMENT OF ANGELA B. STYLES

TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENSE INDUSTRY INITIATIVE ON
BUSINESS ETHICS AND CONDUCT

BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE

DECEMBER 9, 2015

Chairman Hanna, Congressman Takai, and Members of the
Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you
today as the Coordinator of the Defense Industry Initiative on
Business Ethics and Conduct (``DII'') to discuss ways to
empower small businesses to comply with the multitude of
requirements they are required to follow as contractors in the
federal marketplace.

DII is a nonpartisan, non-profit 501(c)(3) association of
U.S. defense companies who are committed to a culture and
practice of ethics and integrity in all business dealings with
the United States Department of Defense. In 1986, the Chief
Executive Officers and senior officials of 18 defense
contractors (please see Attachment A for a list of founding
Signatories) led by Jack Welch from General Electric
voluntarily met to create DII and draft self-governance
principles. Mr. Welch and the other pioneering defense
contractors were guided by the ``The President's Blue Ribbon
Commission on Defense Management'' for defense contractors to
improve the defense acquisition process through greater self-
governance. By July 1986, 32 major defense contractors had
pledged to adopt DII's core principles. Today, 76 defense
contractors--including both small and large businesses--are
Signatories to the DII principles (see current list of DII
Signatories at Attachment B):

We, the members of the Defense Industry Initiative on
Business Ethics & Conduct (DII), affirm our commitment
to uphold the highest ethical standards in all our
business dealings with the government, as expressed
through the following principles:

(1) We shall act honestly in all business dealings
with the U.S. government, protect taxpayer resources,
and provide high-quality products and services for the
men and women of the U.S. Armed Forces.

(2) We shall promote the highest ethical values as
expressed in our written codes of business conduct,
nurture an ethical culture through communications,
training, and other means, and comply withy and honor
all governing laws and regulations.

(3) We shall establish and sustain effective business
ethics and compliance programs that reflect our
commitment to self-governance, and shall encourage
employees to report suspected misconduct, forbid
retaliation for such reporting, and ensure the
existence of a process for mandatory and voluntary
disclosures of violations of relevant laws and
regulations.

(4) We shall share best practices with respect to
business ethics and compliance, and participate in the
annual DII Best Practices Forum.

(5) We shall be accountable to the public, through
regular sharing and reporting of Signatory activities
in public fora, including www.dii.org. These reports
will describe members' efforts to build and sustain a
strong culture of business ethics and compliance.

As part of its mission, DII provides resources and
assistance to help train hundreds of thousands of defense-
industry employees in ethics and compliance, with DII's website
providing free access to ethics training, instructional videos,
and webinars on emerging ethics issues for defense-industry
companies. DII also holds regular meetings and conferences to
share best practices. As well, DII mentors suppliers and new
firms in how to comply with the laws and regulations that
govern U.S. defense companies.

Small Businesses in the Federal Marketplace Lack Resources to Develop
Compliance Programs

In an ideal world, all businesses that participate in the
federal marketplace would have the wherewithal to understand
and comply with all of the obligations that go hand-in-hand
with federal contracting. This is not an ideal world. The scope
and complexity of regulations faced by contractors are enough
to regularly challenge even the largest federal contractors
with robust compliance and ethics programs.

With less resources (measured both by money and manpower)
and less experience with government contracting, the hurdles
faced by small businesses in even setting up compliance
programs are monumental. As a result, the federal government is
undoubtedly contracting with small businesses that do not know
the full extent of the laws, regulations, or provisions with
which they are supposed to comply (let alone understand them),
are not monitoring their compliance against these requirements,
and have no process to voluntarily disclose violations to the
appropriate authorities.

Although there are numerous federal government agencies,
centers, and offices that work with small businesses engaged in
federal contracting, DII has extensively searched and has not
found government sources that provide guidance to small
businesses to aid in the adoption of codes of conduct or the
establishment of broader compliance and ethics programs. Some
offices, like small business development centers, which are
administered by the Small Business Administration, provide
management assistance to current and prospective small business
owners, but have been statutorily tasked only in general terms
with providing counseling and technology development for
complying with environmental, energy, health, safety, and other
federal, state, and local regulations. 15 U.S.C.
Sec. 648(c)(3)(H).\1\ The statutes underlying other similar
programs, like the Procurement Technical Assistance Centers and
the Department of Defense ``DoD'' Office of Small Disadvantaged
Business Utilization (also known as the DoD Office of Small
Business Programs), do not speak to helping ensure small
business compliance with laws at a high-level like this, let
alone the establishment of ethics and compliance programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Small Business Act provides that ``Services provided by
small business development centers shall include, but shall not be
limited to--(h) maintaining current information concerning Federal,
State, and local regulations that affect small businesses and counsel
small businesses on methods of compliance. Counseling and technology
development shall be provided when necessary to help small businesses
find solutions for complying with environmental, energy, health,
safety, and other Federal, State, and local regulations.'' 15 U.S.C.
Sec. 648(c)(3).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DII's Past and Current Outreach to Small Businesses

Because federal resources for assisting small business with
ethics and compliance programing appears to be woefully
lacking, DII recently undertook several significant initiatives
to provide ethics and compliance resources to small business
contractors. In 2014, DII published a Model Code of Conduct for
suppliers, which I have provided to the Subcommittee as
Attachment C. DII learned from a 2013 survey of its Signatories
that such a code would be a helpful resource when dealing with
supply chain integrity issues. DII's Model Code of Conduct
includes such topics as compliance with laws, human rights,
employment practices, anti-corruption, conflicts of interest,
and information protection. For those already with a supplier
code, this Code is a benchmarking tool. For Signatories as well
as small suppliers without a code of conduct, the Code is
capable of being adopted for use as-is or as a foundation to
the creation of a new supplier code of conduct. Ideally, this
Code will come to serve as common core code with company
specific addenda and achieve the ultimate objective of limiting
the number of codes flowed to common suppliers.

DII also undertook in 2014 to provide a Supplier Toolkit.
The Toolkit's purpose is to provide helpful tips and guidance
on how to put together an effective ethics and compliance
program, support suppliers in becoming compliant with Federal
Acquisition Regulation 52.203-13 Contractor Code of Business
Ethics and Conduct requirements, engage the supplier community
in the ethics discussion, and strengthen the defense industry.
The Supplier Toolkit can be found on our website at
www.dii.org.

Following the publication of DII's Model Code of Conduct
and Supplier Toolkit, multiple suspension and debarment offices
from agencies across the federal government invited DII to
discuss difficulties faced by small businesses in understanding
and complying with their obligations as federal contractors. As
a result of these meetings, DII has committed to provide
additional resources specifically developed with small
businesses in mind. To that ed, DII has recently published a
webinar on small business issues on its website; I have also
provided today as Attachment D to my testimony the slides for
this webinar.

Finally this spring, DII plans to launch a robust Small
Business Toolkit, which will touch upon the following four
features of a compliance program:

Structure and organization of a compliance
program--DII will provide examples of various models
that can be used in building a compliance program;

Code of conduct, policies & procedures--DII
will develop models of the types of policies that small
businesses which contract with the government should
consider implementing;

Training and communications--DII will
publish sample training videos and other
communications;

Monitoring and auditing--DII will provide
templates for small businesses to use to monitor the
effectiveness of their compliance programs.

DII is also developing a mentor-protege program for ethics
and compliance issues that will provide names of companies and
individuals that small contractors can contact as a resource.
DII is taking these steps in furtherance of its mission to help
improve the defense acquisition process through greater self-
governance and will be analyzing how best to conduct outreach
to make these resources more broadly available to non-Signatory
small businesses.

In Conclusion

Given the scarcity of federal government resources
dedicated to helping small businesses establish ethics and
compliance programs, DII has committed to creating and making
available resources to help small businesses understand and
comply with federal contracting requirements. We are certainly
hopeful that these education and training efforts can be done
in coordination with our Department of Defense and Small
Business Administration colleagues. The small business
advocates can play an important role in helping to ensure that
small businesses have ethics and compliance programs and
provide guidance on the resources available to develop them.
Together, the public and private sectors should ensure that
small businesses have the resources and tools to wisely,
legally and ethically perform contracts for the federal
government. This concludes my prepared remarks. I am happy to
answer any questions you may have.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT OF

DAVY LEGHORN, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR

NATIONAL VETERANS EMPLOYMENT AND EDUCATION DIVISION

THE AMERICAN LEGION

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE

OF THE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ON

``SUPPORTING SUCCESS: EMPOWERING SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCATES''

December 9, 2015

Good morning Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Velazquez and
members of the subcommittee. On behalf of our National
Commander, Dale Barnett, and over 2 million members of The
American Legion, we thank you for this opportunity to testify
at this hearing on the challenges facing veteran owned small
businesses seeking federal contracts.

The American Legion identifies three issues that pose
obstacles for veteran owned small businesses and service-
disabled veterans seeking federal contracts:

1) The Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative;

2) The Differences between Small Business
Administration and Department of Veterans Affairs
procurement policy standards; and

3) The abuse and lack of accountability in purchase
card.

Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative:

The American Legion has never thought that the Federal
Strategic Sourcing Initiative (FSSI) was good for small
business. While this initiative was crafted around assisting
federal agencies meet their small business goals faster, it is
flawed, in that it drastically reduces competition for
government spending. To a certain extent, we've internalized
that the current generation of FSSI is here to stay. So rather
than fight it, perhaps it's time to see if we can work with
this Committee to ensure that veterans small businesses can
actually benefit.

Starting with the procurement process itself, it takes two
years and thousands of man hours to successfully submit a
responsive proposal which does not guarantee an award. This
expenditure of company resources will only position a firm as a
potential prime under the FSSI. The process of just getting in
position to bid is a huge gamble, overly burdensome and cost
prohibitive to the majority of small businesses.

Another issue is that the agencies that committed to use
this procurement vehicle prior to issuing the solicitation have
failed to utilize the FSSI contract vehicle; therefore the few
dozen small businesses that invested in the contract process
have lost more money in comparison to firms that did not bother
to bid and firms that bid, but did not receive awards. This is
on account of the drastic measures a firm has to take to lower
their prices in order to compete for an award, but after the
award, not receiving the increase in volume the firm was
promised prior to the bid.

Nearly two years ago, the General Services Administration
(GSA) promised to buy an estimated $20 million of their
janitorial supplies through the FSSI. To the dismay of many
small supply retailers that have positioned themselves to be
primes under the FSSI, GSA has bought very little through their
own FSSI contracting vehicle. Anecdotally, this is not an
occurrence relegated to just the GSA and that this is happening
within other agencies as well, because the agencies habitually
use their preferred and trusted suppliers.

Procurement Center Representatives:

Procurement Center Representatives are supposed to be the
small businesses' advocates, they ensure a fair proportion of
purchases, contracts & subcontracts are allocated to small
business. With SBA being underfunded, there are not enough
Procurement Center Representatives (PCRs). In order to work
expediently, they are not able to review every contract for
compliance. Currently, PCRs do not review outgoing FSSI
delivery orders with small business options already built in.
However, the contracts that go out in the FSSI are so large
that The American Legion believes that it will be to the small
business community's advantage if PCRs are required to review
outward-bound FSSI contracts.

The American Legion Recommends:

1) Making FSSI bidding process easier and shorter for
small business.

2) Larger number of awards under FSSI.

3) Restrict FSSI to small businesses.

4) Increasing SBA budget for training and hiring more
PCRs.

5) PCRs to start reviewing FSSI contracts.

Purchase Card Abuse:

The American Legion believes VA, when they tell us that the
money spent on the purchase cards were used to provide adequate
medical care and services to veterans. We don't' question why
VA spent the money, we are concerned with the problems that
result from the way they decided to spend the money.

This issue is of the utmost importance to The American
Legion as it directly effects the care of our most vulnerable
constituents. Federal contracts protect veteran patients with
terms and conditions; contracts also hold the supplier or
healthcare administrator accountable for defective equipment
and mal-practice. None of these protections are in place when
medical equipment and services are purchased on the fly without
contracts. So never mind the fact that VA is probably being
overcharged, because no effort has been made to compete for
best prices, or that the abuse of purchase cards is unfair to
small business, this is foremost a safety issue that absolutely
has to be addressed.

All purchases below the simplified acquisition threshold of
$150,000 but not below $3500, are exclusively reserved for
small businesses. VA's use of the purchase card for medical
services and devices took away money that should have been
considered for small businesses. Furthermore, VA's procurements
made by the purchase cards were not factored into what was
reported to the SBA for small business goal purposes. The
percentage of the dollar amount that was reported set-aside for
small business is flawed because an estimated $6 billion per
year was not reported in Federal Procurement Data System
according to the Jan Frye's memorandum to Secretary
McDonald.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Jan Frye's memorandum to Robert McDonald, Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Veteran Affairs, March 2015, accessed December 3, 2015,
http://files.ctctcdn.com/8daee019001/1db6a9ca-27ae-4bcc-ab00-
9ef060d9d2c2.pdf

In the past, VA mentioned that they needed additional
contracting staff to write and oversee contracts. According to
the Frye Memo, the Bronx VA Medical Center spent $54 million on
prosthetics paid with $24,999 increments on the purchase cards.
The American Legion believes that VA contracting officials rely
on purchase cards as procurement shortcuts like they did in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
this instance because of short staffing and a high workload.

The American Legion also believes that purchase card abuse
likely stems from bad training. Contracting personnel are
trained and taught the same way, they know the small business
rules and regulations. But anecdotally, when they get to the
VAMCs, they are taught to take shortcuts because this is the
way their supervisors have done it and their supervisors are
sometimes unknowingly perpetuating an established culture of
shortcuts. Which is why many employees who are abusing the
purchase cards don't even know that they are breaking the law
or realize that there might not be a need to get around regular
contracting vehicles. Sometimes, the shortcuts created are not
any faster than expediting purchases through VA's sole source
authority under Title 38.

Further, The American Legion believes that VA is not the
only party that keeps purchase card expenses off of Federal
Procurement Data System (FPDS). We're confident other agencies
are doing the same thing. A March 2008 GAO Report \2\, lists
several other agencies' cardholders who were bypassing Federal
Acquisition Regulations and making noncompetitive procurements
with purchase cards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, Governmentwide Purchase
Cards: Actions Needed to Strengthen Internal Controls to Reduce
Fraudulent, Improper, and Abusive Purchases, by Gregory D. Kutz, GAO-
08-333. 2008

There seems to be a recurring theme with the need for
additional personnel to write, oversee and monitor contracts.
Whether they are contracting specialists, contracting officers
or PCRs, much of the problems our constituents have had with
FSSI and purchase card abuse all stem from a lack of well-
trained contracting employees. The contract bundling through
FSSI, reverse auctions and large Indefinite Delivery,
Indefinite Quantity contracts (IDIQs) were all aimed in part to
alleviate the workload of contracting employees, but clearly
it's not working because they are still looking for shortcuts
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and workarounds.

The American Legion Recommends:

1) Hiring more contracting staff.

2) Ensure that agencies must train and re-train
contracting employees.

3) Agency must account for purchase card expenditures
and start reporting it to FDPS.

4) GAO report on whether purchase card abuse is
agency-wide and what is so onerous about small business
rules that they seek shortcuts or why there is such an
appeal for cardholders to make noncompetitive
procurements with purchase cards.

Department of Veterans Affairs Verification:

Recently, the Center for Veterans Verification and
Evaluation (CVE) has implemented a pilot verification process,
which includes the assignment of a case manager to each case
and provides counseling to the applicant prior to adjudication.
The American Legion applauds VA efforts in engaging the
applicant prior to the final adjudication. In 2013, The
American Legion testified that there needs to be a human
element in the pre-verification process to help an applicant
understand why more documentation was warranted as opposed to
just denying an application based off of insufficient evidence
to establish ownership and/or control. In providing pre-
adjudication emails regarding missing information and now
incorporating counseling services to applicants, we see that VA
has been responsive to our previous testimony.

Over the last two years, VA has made tremendous steps in
improving the verification process. The American Legion would
be remiss if we did not mention that CVE has significantly cut
down the time it takes for a small business owner to receive an
initial decision to less than 30 days. This is a stark contrast
to 2012, when it took approximately 85 days for CVE to make a
determination on an initial application.

However, there are several items left that CVE cannot
address without legislative action and The American Legion
believes that HR 3945, Improving Opportunities for Service-
Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses Act of 2015 introduced
by Representative Mike Coffman, a veteran himself, would tie up
the remaining loose ends with this program.

HR 3945 would align the definitions of VOSB and SDVOSB,
ensuring that differences between the Small Business Act and
the Vets First Program are consistent. Furthermore, this bill
requires the VA to follow the Small Business Administration
regulations when verifying size and control standards of an
applicant's company. Last and most importantly, this bill
creates an independent appeals process for SDVOSBs to challenge
the agency's denials.

Aside from the fact that SBA's Office of Hearings and
Appeals has the legal expertise in determining size and
control, the intention of this move is to incentivize VA to
improve their verification process in order to minimize the
cases that are appealed. Under the proposed funding mechanism,
VA would pay SBA by the case load; therefore, VA could
potentially stop paying when VOSB and SDVOSB firms no longer
have reasons to appeal.

The American Legion impresses upon the Committee that (1)
including SBA in the appellate process would ensure more
consistency in the final decisions being made and ensure
impartiality in not having the agency of original adjudication
review their previously denied claim and (2) the intention of
moving appeals to SBA has nothing to do with an attempt to
create a new preference group within the existing federal small
business set-aside programs.

The American Legion believes that Rep. Coffman's bill
addresses some of the shortcomings brought to light by GAO's
November 2015 testimony before the Committee on Small Business'
Subcommittee on Contracting and the Workforce and the Committee
on Veterans' Affairs' Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, Veteran-Owned Small
Businesses: Preliminary Observations on Verification Program Progress
and Challenges, by William B. Shear GAO-16-179T, 2015. http://
www.gao.gov/assets/680/;673511.pdf (accessed December 3, 2015).

This bill addresses the three major concerns the veterans'
community had regarding the verification process as outlined by
our previous testimony in 2013. Compared to issues elsewhere in
VA, CVE and the verification process has been a low hanging
fruit for improvement. With this legislative change, this is an
instance, when the stakeholders can potentially claim VA's
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
improvements since 2013 as a marked victory.

American Legion Recommends:

Support for H.R. 3945 Improving Opportunities for Service-
Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses Act of 2015 and
establish the formal appeals process under SBA OHA.

Conclusion:

As always, The American Legion thanks this committee for
the opportunity to explain the position of the over 2 million
members of this organization. Questions concerning this
testimony can be directed to Matthew J. Shuman, Assistant
Director in The American Legion's Legislative Division at (202)
861-2700, or
[emailprotected]

TESTIMONY FOR THE HOUSE SMALL BUSINESS COMMITTEE

``Supporting Success: Empowering Small Business Advocates''

Wednesday, December 9, 2015

ML Mackey, CEO & Co-Founder, Beacon Interactive Systems
Legislative Affairs & Policy Committee Chair, NDIA Small
Business Division

Good morning Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Velazquez and
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is ML Mackey. I am the CEO
of Beacon Interactive Systems, a Small Business with offices
located in Waltham, MA and Norfolk, VA. I am also the
Legislative Affairs & Policy Committee Chair for the Small
Business Division of the National Defense Industrial
Association, NDIA. With each of these roles, my motivation is
the same; to utilize Small Business effectively to increase
innovation, cost savings, and competition in the Federal
acquisition ecosystem.

NDIA membership is composed of nearly 90,000 individuals
and more than 1,600 companies, over half of which are Small
Businesses. Beacon Interactive Systems is one of those Small
Businesses. For the past 11 years Beacon has delivered
innovative, cost effective, and highly competitive systems to
improve the U.S. Navy's situational awareness and operator
performance.

Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Takai, I appreciate your
leadership and the efforts of your Subcommittee, taking the
form of your obvious interest in and commitment to leveling the
playing field for Small Businesses to compete in the Federal
marketplace, and the many pieces of legislation you have
authored and passed to that end. My role at NDIA places me in
regular discussions of Small Business legislation. The
overwhelming response of my colleagues to your efforts and your
Committee's efforts is sincere appreciation. So please let me
begin by saying thank you.

As I said, this Subcommittee has demonstrated a deep
commitment to leveling the playing field for Small Business.
This concept is important to today's discussion because if one
accepts that Small Businesses have a lot to offer, and that in
many cases Small Businesses are where innovation occurs, what
we are all fighting for makes sense--this level playing field.
Your efforts make it possible for the best--not just the
biggest--to rise to the top.

The goal of your efforts is not to make it easy on Small
Business--and it's not--but rather to ensure that we have a
diverse industry that supplies the government with the very
best goods and services possible at the best possible price.
Unfortunately, the level playing field is as difficult to
create as it is important to maintain for the well-being of the
government contracting ecosystem.

Fortunately for those of us that advocate for Small
Business interests, we have strong advocates like this
Committee. Your efforts in the recent legislation regarding
Small Business Federal Contracting in the Fiscal Year 2016
National Defense Authorization Act demonstrates once again that
Small Businesses can depend on Congress to work for a fair and
healthy acquisition system.

Of course, new legislation is just the beginning of the
process. Each one of your provisions must be written into clear
regulations and policies that each Agency can implement. Next,
the Congress, the Small Business Administration, and each
Agency must oversee the implementation of those regulations and
policies to be sure they are being followed.

With that in mind, what I can offer today is some feedback
from experience with my own company as well as some of my NDIA
colleagues' experiences with their Small Businesses.

I make five recommendations in my prepared testimony, but
the interest of time, I will read two of them today and submit
the others for the record.

Lack of PCR involvement on Consolidated Contracts

Problem: Lack of PCR review on consolidated contracts
limits Small Business participation.

Suggestion: Clarify that PCRs should actively advise on
consolidated contracts. Inviting PCRs to advise on the
consolidated acquisition strategy will help better identify
those requirements where small businesses can best perform and
help structure the solicitation such that more small businesses
can compete. Over the recent decade, the federal government has
seen widespread and far-reaching changes in the way it procures
services and technology. There has been significant growth of
consolidated contracts. Although this has helped the government
cope with the reduction in the acquisition workforce through
fewer contracts, it tends to bundle requirements that are out
of reach of most small businesses. For example, technology
contracts are generally the result of consolidating multiple
disciplines and requirements into a single solicitation for
large business team competition. Empowering PCRs to advise on
consolidated contracts will help to ensure that the
requirements are within the reach of small business.

Impact: Increased Small Business participation and
competition resulting in more cost-effective and innovative
solutions for our warfighters.

Post Award Compliance

Problem: The government has created barriers to entry into
the Federal market and thus is not getting all the companies
participating that it would like to have. Many entrepreneurial
Small Business owners do not want to deal with the compliance,
headache and risk of engaging with the Federal government. To
be clear, Beacon became a Federal government contractor when,
after ten years of running a successful private sector software
company, and in the wake of the tech bubble burst, our market
dried up. We engaged with the Navy SBIR's Program to accomplish
this pivot into the Federal market. Once we got through the
initial burden of understanding some of the Federal contracting
compliance issues it has wound up being a net positive
experience for both our company and our Federal customers. But
overcoming the barriers was really hard at first. Honestly, it
still is at times now.

Suggestion: Develop paths and provide resources for non-
traditional, entrepreneurial Small Businesses to drive the
innovation, cost-effectiveness, and improved competition so
desperately needed in Federal procurement.

Impact: Increased Small Business participation and improved
quality across the board; not just in the high quality of what
these entrepreneurial Small Businesses will directly provide
but also by the competition they will incite across the
government supplier base.

Job Descriptions

Problem: Small Business advocates in government may not
always understand the specific challenges that Small Business
contractors are facing at any given time, and how to
effectively advocate in the Agencies to overcome those
challenges.

Suggestion: I would encourage the SBA and Small Business
liaisons in the Agencies to continue to meet with Industry
Associations like NDIA to get real world feedback about the
current challenges and issues surrounding Small Business
Federal Contracting. Solicit input from those of us in the
trenches about how to bet address these challenges. One of the
things I find fascinating about my conversations at the NDIA
Small Business Division meetings is the breadth of experience
across our Small Business, Large Business and Government
members. I find that outcome of these discussions usually quite
practical as they are informed with more than one stakeholder
perspective. But I would also offer this word of caution from
my experience of managing employees: please legislate rather
than regulate the content of the job descriptions--give SBA the
parameters but let them fill in the details. While we should
encourage a common understanding of the role and
responsibilities of these Small Business Advocates in
government, each advocate will do best when he or she is
allowed to determine how best to specifically achieve a
commonly understood set of objectives and goals. We need to
create and protect a nimble and responsive SBA workforce.

Impact: Stakeholders in Federal Acquisition processes will
more effectively cross-communicate to resolve challenges. This
will increase both Small Business participation and the
efficiency of Small Business contracting; something that can be
a painful, long and drawn out process.

SBIR Transitions

Problem: Lack of understanding and low willingness to fully
utilize SBIR authorities for Small Businesses during the
acquisition process, especially due to concerns around
legislated preference and sole source contract awards.

Suggestion: Train Procurement Center Representatives, PCRs,
on the SBIR contracting provisions as well as Congressional
intent of the SBIR Program, and create a system to refresh
their knowledge and remain current on any changes in
legislation and regulation. Ensure that PCRs understand the
capability and importance for using sole source contracts for
follow-on work begun with SBIR investments. As Small Businesses
that have won SBIR awards have already met a highly competitive
threshold in the initial phases of the SBIR Program, PCRs
should strongly encourage follow-on work, or closely related
work, for the same Small Business that initiated the work.
Train the PCRs to explain the relevant provisions of the FAR to
Program Managers and Contracting Officers to reduce their fears
and concerns over using the authority, which might seem risky
but is really an innovative acquisition approach. Address the
fact that follow-on work to the SBIR companies is not risky and
actually meets congressional intent.

Impact: Increased Small business participation and
insertion of cost-effective, competitively successful,
innovative capabilities for our warfighters as well as
increased ROI of Federal SBIR investments.

Lack of Regulatory Action

Problem: Some regulation has been slow in coming to
implement new laws authored by this Committee. The uncertainty
of what the rules actually guide the market to do can cause
businesses to stagnate, hire and fire personnel in a haphazard
fashion in anticipation of or reaction to unpredictable rule-
makings, and can limit which companies will participate. While
no business likes uncertainty, it is especially onerous for
Small Businesses that typically do not have the deep pockets to
hold up through uncertain market fluctuations.

Suggestion: Provide a level of resources to Agencies that
can accommodate the writing of regulation at the same rate as
new legislative changes are made. Congress must match the
resources it provides to Agencies to the requirements it places
on those Agencies.

Impact: A more stable, predictable business environment
enables better planning and a more efficient, cost-effective
federal acquisition ecosystem.

Mr. Chairman, on behalf of both the National Defense
Industrial Association and myself, I hope that these
suggestions will be useful in your ongoing work. I would like
to thank you and the Committee for your leadership. We
appreciate your efforts to increase the utilization of Small
Business to drive innovation, cost savings and increased
competition within Federal Procurement.

Thank you for your tine and attention to these matters. And
I would be pleased to respond to any of your questions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Good Morning Chairman Hanna, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
members of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce of the
Committee on Small Business. Thank you for this opportunity to
provide testimony regarding my personal experiences as a woman-
owned small business owner who has graduated from the SBA 8(a)
program and is now an approved SBA Mentor.

My name is Tracy Balazs. I am the Founder, President and
Chief Executive Officer of Federal Staffing Resources, LLC,
also known as FSR. I am also a retired Registered Nurse. I am
testifying today on behalf of FSR regarding the advocacy and
support from the Small Business Representatives from the
following departments in which I have had experience: 8(a)
Business Development Program- Business Opportunity Specialists
(BOS), the Procurement Center Representatives (PCRs), and the
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Small Business Utilization
(OSDBU).

As a member of US Pan Asian American Chamber of Commerce
(USPAACC), an organization whose mission is to be the gateway
to corporate and government contracts, while opening doors and
making connections for Asian Americans, minority businesses and
their partners on all levels, I am grateful for their
recommendation that FSR should provide testimony today.

Federal Staffing Resources is a successful business with
250 employees due in large part to the programs, guidance, and
support provided by the SBA.

FSR has been a federal contractor since its inception in
February 2004. Our core competency has been in support of those
who have sacrificed for our freedoms: the active duty men and
women and veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces, by providing the
best in class healthcare personnel and program management
expertise to the Department of Defense and the Veterans Health
Administration. We strongly believe that the SBA has given FSR
the opportunity to provide these services to the best of our
ability by giving us the support we needed.

The 8(a) program was crucial to our early survival as a
business. Within the first 6 months of starting FSR, I engaged
in extensive research on the SBA 8(a) program for government
contractors. I immediately applied for this program and was
granted certification through a waiver in October of that same
year. My experiences have been extremely positive, and FSR has
benefited greatly from the 8(a) certification. It has not been
without challenges however, since the compliance requirements
of 8(a) certified companies are rigorous.

The government contracting process is complex and
confusing. Most small businesses do not have the time or the
money it takes to fully understand how to succeed as a
government contractor. The SBA provides essential guidance for
business owners. To better understand the complexities of
government contracting, resources available to those who seek
them out. Hard work and focus is required of the leadership and
their team. To be fortunate enough to have been a certified
8(a) company and to do work under the aegis of a federal
agency, FSR recognizes that as a federal contractor and as a
mentor to other small businesses, a duty is impressed upon us
to respect the terms of our contracts and adhere to their
terms. This duty has required substantial time and investments
on the part of leadership and its team to ensure such
compliance. My relationship with by BOS when I was in the 8(a)
program was based on trust that FSR could and would be able to
do the work that we were granted through a sole source
contract. The SBA acts a guarantor. They must approve the award
and are essentially confirming that the contractor is capable
of doing work as awarded. Our BOS was our greatest advocate
during the 9 year certification term.

One issue that I encountered when I was working with the
SBA is the interpretation and implementation of the
standardized policies and procedures. They are handed down from
Headquarters to the regional offices and in turn, to the local
district offices, and finally, to the individual SBA
representative. Even within the same office, but mostly across
state lines and districts, interpretations of the policies may
differ. I have had conflicting experiences regarding how the
SBA reviews financial eligibility and size standards and how it
applies these criteria to award or deny contracts. Some
guidance are misleading, conflicting, or misinterpreted which
can result in inappropriate actions, such as improper awards.
Increased training for the representatives as well inviting
industry to offer their experiences may help mitigate the
confusion and ensure uniform compliance. Since the number SBA
representatives is limited and the workload is increasing, the
SBA has done an excellent job in updating their website. The
website is much more robust than it was during the early years
of my 8(a) term, and I use the site often as a resource.

Non-compliance and lack of attention to the rules may be
potentially fatal for a small business. Even from the
beginning, I knew that the relevant statutes and regulations
must be respected and never ignored. We take compliance very
seriously, so much so that FSR has a Director of Compliance. I
have met many leaders of small organizations with a laissez-
faire attitude regarding compliance. The choice to ignore can
result in suspension or disbarment. Since the 8(a) program is
highly regimented, certified 8(a) contractors are under greater
scrutiny for compliance than any other small businesses that do
not have a certifying body mandating an annual update of their
business or financials. FSR is a Mentor in the 8(a) Mentor-
Protege program. Part of our duties is to educate our Protege
and make them aware of the pitfalls of non-compliance. We work
with our Protege-leadership and team to ensure that they
understand the relevant statutes, as an example, the Service
Contract Act, and regulations thereunder; know the available
resources to answer their questions; and to be available for
guidance.

The SBA helped us grow our business pipeline and our
business network. The OSDBUs and PCRs were essential to
creating opportunities over the past decade. The OSDBUs work
closely with the SBA and small businesses to ensure that they
are aware of the federal opportunities and know the governing
statutes and regulations. As a small business, we make it a
point to meet with as many OSDBUs as we can to let them know of
our capabilities as a prime or a potential subcontractor. The
PCRs work with the federal agencies and contracting officials
in many areas. Two areas that the PCR would have direct impact
for small businesses is to make recommendations for small
business set-asides and also to review the small business
subcontracting plans and goals of large businesses for full and
open requirements.

The monitoring of the small business subcontracting plans
may merit review. The concern is that large businesses are not
being fully assessed for compliance in their percentage of
small business utilization as specified in their contract. I
understand from speaking with both the OSDBUs and PCRs, that
large businesses are expected to meet their small business
subcontracting goals, however, due to insufficient number of
government personnel, they are unable to ``police'' all of the
plans. Therefore, these percentages are reported only by the
large businesses without verification from the subcontractor
small businesses. The government's receiving the report of
subcontracting revenue directly from the small businesses
themselves may verify that this objective has been met.

In closing, I would like to acknowledge the SBA programs
and their personnel for their assistance in helping me achieve
business success and on behalf of thousands of other small
business owners say--keep up the good work.

Chairman Hanna, Ranking member Velazquez, and members of
the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce of the Committee
on Small Business, thank you for asking for testimony from
small businesses that currently work with the federal
government. FSR appreciates that our contributions and personal
experiences may impact the way the SBA interacts with small
businesses, monitor and educate to ensure more compliance. As a
minority women-owned small business, I have tremendous
gratitude for the SBA's support while I was in the 8(a)
program. FSR would not have grown as quickly had we not been
certified.

Thank you for you very much for this opportunity. I am
available for any questions.
