- TAKING FLIGHT: SMALL BUSINESS UTILIZATION OF UNMANNED AIRCRAFT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAKING FLIGHT: SMALL BUSINESS UTILIZATION OF UNMANNED AIRCRAFT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 15, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-019
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-525 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
TOM RICE, South Carolina
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Stephen Dennis, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

(II)

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Brian Wynne, President & CEO, Association for Unmanned
Vehicle Systems International, Arlington, VA...................     4
Mr. Mike Gilkey, CEO and Director of Flight Operations, 3D Aerial
Solutions LLC, Dayton, OH......................................     6
Mr. Brian Streem, CEO/Cofounder, AeroCine, Brooklyn, NY..........     7
Dr. Tim McLain, Professor of Mechanical Engineering & Director of
the Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems, Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT..........................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Brian Wynne, President & CEO, Association for Unmanned
Vehicle Systems International, Arlington, VA...............    24
Mr. Mike Gilkey, CEO and Director of Flight Operations, 3D
Aerial Solutions LLC, Dayton, OH...........................    29
Mr. Brian Streem, CEO/Cofounder, AeroCine, Brooklyn, NY......    36
Dr. Tim McLain, Professor of Mechnical Engineering & Director
of the Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems, Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT......................................    39
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
MPAA - Motion Picture Association of America.................    42
NAR - National Association of Realtors.......................    44

(III)

TAKING FLIGHT: SMALL BUSINESS UTILIZATION OF UNMANNED AIRCRAFT

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 15, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Hanna,
Huelskamp, Brat, Radewagen, Knight, Curbelo, Bost, Hardy,
Kelly, Velazquez, Meng, Lawrence, Clarke, and Moulton.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. The Committee will come to
order.
It was at a bicycle shop in Dayton, Ohio, which is just
north of my congressional district by coincidence, where two
entrepreneurs dreamed up a machine that would fly people
through the air. It took a bold spirit to think that big. And
even bolder spirit to test it. But Orville and Wilbur Wright
persevered and changed the course of history. A little more
than a half century later, we would fly to the moon, and a half
century after that, we are discussing an era when men and women
do not even need to be in the aircraft to pilot it. Dayton,
Ohio led them, and it is leading again, and one of our
witnesses here today is a testament to that.
We are here today to examine the commercial usage of
unmanned aircraft by small businesses, to look at the benefits
of this technology, and discuss some of the concerns
surrounding safe operations. Most importantly, we will have a
conversation about how America can once again lead the world in
a new era of flight.
The potential uses of unmanned aircraft systems or UAS is
limitless. They can be used by local broadcasters to gather
footage and report the news. They can be used by farmers to
better manage their crops. They can be used by engineering
firms to inspect bridges. And they can be used by first
responders to help save lives.
At the University of Cincinnati, students are working with
a fire department to develop aircraft that give real-time
information to firefighters and emergency crews about where a
fire is burning and where it is moving. Currently, the Federal
Aviation Administration is working to integrate unmanned
aircraft systems, or UAS, into the national airspace system. On
a case-by-case basis, the FAA is authorizing low-risk
commercial UAS operations. The FAA also has proposed a rule to
allow small unmanned aircraft--those weighing 55 pounds or
less--to operate in our skies. The proposed rule includes a
number of operating restrictions aimed at ensuring safe
operations.
I'm interested in learning from the small businesses and
innovators, whom we have here today, on the frontlines about
how the FAA's current process is working for them and how the
porposed rule, once finalized, may affect their operations. I
am also looking forward to hearing how their small businesses
are utilizing this new technology and planning for the day when
UAS are fully integrated into American airspace.
There are moments when we can unleash a positive force of
innovation and job creation if we don't smother it with
regulations. Most of the time, the government misses these
moments and we are left to wonder what could have been. There
is always a balance to be struck. While we must promote public
safety and proper usage of unmanned aircraft, we must ensure
that the regulations are carefully crafted so that they don't
prevent this new industry from innovating and helping grow our
economy, and most importantly, create jobs.
I am eager to hear what our witnesses have to say about
their own experiences, and I look forward to seeing how this
new industry grows, and as it does, creates new opportunities
for small businesses to capitalize on new technology.
I would now like to recognize our ranking member for her
opening statement this morning.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this important hearing.
America's entrepreneurs have long played an important role
in the development and growth of unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAV). While the evolution of these systems has been a game
changer for our military, the benefits are not limited to the
battlefield. Civilian drones can be employed for a wide range
of commercial uses, and some companies are experimenting with
this technology to deliver products to consumers. UAVs offer a
cost-effective solution for everything from agriculture, to
news coverage, to mapping and surveying terrain, to the film
industry.
For our overall economy to remain competitive, it is
important that the United States continue researching and
developing this technology. Should we wait, other countries
will likely pass us by in this emerging market. Japan has
already moved forward aggressively to address safety and
airspace regulation issues. Europe is expected to account for
15 percent of procurement of unmanned aerial vehicles, while
European companies will produce nearly 4 percent of UAVs.
As we work to ensure the United States remains on the
forefront of developing this technology, small businesses must
continue playing a critical role. The Small Business Innovation
Research Program and the Small Technology Transfer Program have
been an important public-private partnership that has harnessed
entrepreneurs' ingenuity to move UAV technology forward. This
committee can play an important oversight role in helping
ensure those initiatives operate as Congress intended and help
ensure small companies remain involved in drone development.
Beyond the small business participation in UAV research, a
number of other important policy issues must be addressed in
order for commercial drone technology to fully blossom. The
FAA's recent proposed rulemaking on licensing of drones and
regulations of speed and altitude appears to be a good step in
the right direction. It is my hope that today we can obtain a
better understanding of how small companies, both as developers
of drone technology and potential users will be impacted by the
rulemaking.
In addition, there are significant privacy concerns
associated with unmanned aerial systems. As always, the
challenge will be balancing the need to protect the public from
potential abuse, while allowing room for this new technology to
take root, grow, and help fuel commerce.
Mr. Chairman, entrepreneurs have a significant stake in how
our nation proceeds with the regulation and development of UAV
technology. It is my hope that by working together with the
industry, our nation can harness the full potential of this
nascent technology, providing an exciting new sector for small
businesses and creating opportunity for new jobs and economic
growth.
With that, let me thank the witnesses for coming here to
testify, and especially I want to welcome a small business
owner from my district, Mr. Streem. And it is a business that
is changing the face of the film industry. Welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
If Committee members have opening statements, I would ask
that they submit them for the record.
And I will take just a moment to explain our five-minute
rule, which is basically you get five minutes to speak. And
there is a lighting system there to assist you. The green light
will be on for about four minutes, the yellow light will come
on to let you know you have got about a minute to wrap up, and
the red light will come on and we would ask you to try to stay
within that as much as possible. We will give you a little
leeway but not a whole lot. So we thank you for being here.
And our first witness I will introduce now is Brian Wynne.
Mr. Wynne is the president and CEO of the Association for
Unmanned Vehicle Systems International. AUVSI is the largest
trade association representing the unmanned systems and
robotics industry. Mr. Wynne has significant transportation and
technology experience. He has served in executive positions at
the Electric Drive Transportation Association, the Intelligent
Transportation Society of America, and the Association for
Automatic Identification and Mobility. Mr. Wynne holds a
bachelor's degree from the University of Scranton, and a
master's degree from the School of Advanced International
Studies at Johns Hopkins University.
Our next witness will be Mike Gilkey, who is the CEO and
Director of Flight Operations for 3D Aerial Solutions LLC, a
Dayton, Ohio unmanned aircraft systems start-up company. Mr.
Gilkey has over 30 years of experience working on national
security programs, primarily for the Air Force Research
Laboratory at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. He has
worked on airborne sensors research and development, as well as
advanced projects for unmanned military. Or excuse me, unmanned
military aircraft. Mr. Gilkey and some colleagues from the
defense industry founded 3D Aerial Solutions in 2013. It was
the second company in Ohio to be granted a Section 333
exemption by the FAA and is now performing commercial
operations for the agriculture industry in the Midwest. Mr.
Gilkey earned both a Bachelor of Science and Master of Science
in Electrical Engineering.
Our third witness, Brian Streem, is a filmmaker and
entrepreneur as the ranking member mentioned. He is the CEO and
Cofounder of AeroCine, a commercial unmanned aircraft systems
designer, builder, and operator located in the ranking member's
district, as I mentioned, in New York. Mr. Streem has produced
five feature films, including Sundance Film Festival winner
``James White.'' He also produced television commercials for
Uber, Gatorade, Ralph Lauren, Toyota, Nokia, and Samsung. Mr.
Streem is a graduate of the NYU Tisch School of Arts, where he
studied filmmaking with a focus in art and technology. In 2013,
Mr. Streem founded AeroCine with fellow NYU Tisch graduate and
filmmaker, Jeff Brink. And AeroCine was one of the first
companies in the United States to receive permission to operate
from the FAA.
And I will now yield to Ms. Velazquez to introduce Dr.
McLain.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. It is my pleasure to introduce Dr. Tim
McLain. Professor McLain is the director of the National
Science Foundation Sponsor Center for Unmanned Aircraft System,
which in conjunction with a number of universities performs
industry-sponsored research related to unmanned aircraft
systems. He has over 15 years of research experience in this
technology and has even been a cofounder of two USA startup
companies. In addition to his duties at the Center for Unmanned
Aircraft Systems, Professor McLain also teaches in the
Mechanical Engineering Department of Brigham Young University.
Welcome. Thank you for being here today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. We thank you all for being
here.
Mr. Wynne, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF BRIAN WYNNE, PRESIDENT & CEO, ASSOCIATION FOR
UNMANNED VEHICLE SYSTEMS INTERNATIONAL; MIKE GILKEY, CEO AND
DIRECTOR OF FLIGHT OPERATIONS, 3D AERIAL SOLUTIONS LLC; BRIAN
STREEM, CEO/FOUNDER, AEROCINE; TIM MCLAIN, PROFESSOR OF
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING & DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER FOR UNMANNED
AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS, BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY

STATEMENT OF BRIAN WYNNE

Mr. WYNNE. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to be here today to talk about unmanned aerial
systems--I mean, aircraft systems, excuse me.
I am speaking on behalf of the Association for Unmanned
Vehicle Systems International, the world's largest nonprofit
organization devoted exclusively to advancing the unmanned
systems and robotics community. AUVSI has been the voice of
unmanned systems for more than 40 years, and currently, we have
more than 7,500 members, including many small businesses that
support and supply this high-tech industry.
Unmanned aircraft systems increase human potential,
allowing us to execute dangerous or difficult tasks safely and
efficiently. From inspecting pipelines and surveying bridges,
to filming movies, and crops, the applications of UAS are
virtually limitless and offer a superior way to see what needs
to be seen in less time at less expense.
For years, AUVSI has been the leading advocate for the safe
integration of UAS in the national airspace system. We were
delighted earlier this year when the Federal Aviation
Administration published its long-awaited proposed rules for
commercial and civil operations of small UAS, which are systems
that weigh 55 pounds or less. These proposed rules are a
critical milestone in the UAS integration process and bring us
closer to realizing the tremendous societal and economic
benefits of this technology.
As the FAA has worked on these rules, much has already
changed in the industry. Since Congress tasked the FAA with
creating UAS regulations in 2012, the technology has gone from
a specialized tool to a must-have business asset. The flood of
commercial exemption requests to the FAA shows that a mature
UAS commercial market is waiting to be unleashed. Of the more
than 700 exemptions--and I am given to understand 800 now--the
website is still catching up with the number of exemptions that
have been issued, the vast majority are small businesses. Just
as smartphones and tablets revolutionized our economy over the
past decade, UAS are transforming the way a number of
industries operate and are creating several new ones as well.
Let me provide some examples. North Carolina-based
Precision Hawk is a startup that manufactures UAS and Cloud-
based data collection software. Its platform is helping farmers
survey crops and assisting insurance companies with claims
following natural disasters. The company is also helping the
FAA and industry research extended visual line of sight
operations in rural areas. Precision Hawk started in 2010 with
six employees and now has more than 70 with multiple offices in
the U.S. and around the world.
Another example is California-based Aerial MOB. The film
company was one of the first to receive a commercial exemption
from the FAA. It has since performed the first-ever FAA-
approved film production project with a major Hollywood studio
and a number of promos among others. My colleagues will give
additional examples of real-world small business applications
of UAS.
The FAA continues to approve about 50 new commercial
operations a week, a process that has recently been
streamlined. However, this current system of case-by-case
approvals, whether streamlined or not, is not a long-term
solution for the many small businesses wanting to fly.
As an industry, we want to see the integration of UAS
proceed and without any further delays. It is important that
the FAA finalize the small UAS rules as quickly as possible.
Once this happens, we will have an established framework for
UAS operators that will allow anyone who follows the rules to
fly.
Equally important, Congress needs to pass, and the
president needs to sign into law an FAA reauthorization measure
before the current authorization expires on September 30, 2015.
This measure is critical in the most immediate way to achieve
the necessary steps to encourage innovation and ensure the
continued safety of the national airspace while accelerating
the commercial use of UAS.
It is not just the many uses of this technology that are at
stake, but also the 100,000 jobs and 82 billion in economic
impact that the UAS industry is expected to create in its first
decade following integration. With the right regulatory
environment, there is no question these numbers could go even
higher. But the longer we take, the more our nation risks
losing its innovation edge, along with billions in economic
impact.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today and I look
forward to answering any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gilkey, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MIKE GILKEY

Mr. GILKEY. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. It is a pleasure to be
here today to discuss an entrepreneur's perspective of the
emerging unmanned aircraft systems industry.
Unmanned systems hold the potential to truly revolutionize
our economy and way of life. Unmanned aircraft systems provide
innovative new tools for the common man, which are being
employed in uncommon ways. A new industry is being born,
resulting in the creation of many new small businesses.
Small business people like me are slugging their way
through the obstacles and bureaucracy to fulfill our dreams of
creating this new industry. We are pioneers determined to
succeed and believe the country and the world will be
beneficiaries.
I welcome the opportunity to be here today to inform the
Committee of our story and explore how Congress can foster a
more accommodating environment for small business, which
ensures safe operations and protects privacy.
My colleagues and I created 3D Aerial Solutions in 2013 to
leverage our expertise working with military unmanned aircraft
and transition advanced technology know-how to civilian
problems. We self-funded 3D Aerial through an initial round of
owner investment and began buying aircraft and equipment. We
purchased a senseFly eBee aircraft, which I have here today,
because it is highly automated, easy to use, and precise.
We are now sales agent for this product line. We began
flying under the Academy of Model Aeronautics Hobbyist rules
and became experts on the use of this equipment. 3D Aerial
became an affiliate member of the Entrepreneur Center, a
technology business incubator in Dayton, Ohio, to gain access
to business advice and meeting facilities.
3D Aerial believes we in the UAS industry have a
responsibility to reach out and educate the public, and to this
end, we started the Dayton Drone Users Group for community
outreach. Our private business was not eligible to apply for a
certificate of authorization in order to fly commercially. We
collaborated with the Ohio-Indiana UAS Center and Test Complex
and were able to fly on a COA they established.
For the most part, however, we spent a year and a half in a
holding pattern awaiting for the authority to make money flying
aircraft. 3D Aerial submitted our request for a Section 333
exemption on October 14, 2014, and was granted an exemption on
March 3, 2015. We were the second company in Ohio to be granted
this exemption. 3D Aerial received the corresponding COA on
March 23rd and completed registration of our aircraft on May
7th.
With these steps complete, we are now authorized to legally
perform commercial flying services limited only to flights of
the eBee aircraft and only for agricultural applications. The
blanket COA allows us to operate throughout the United States
but is subject to a large number of significant restrictions.
3D Aerial is now providing UAS flight services to perform
aerial imaging of crops using the eBee. We also process the
imagery into a variety of desired image products which we
provide to the farmer. We are in the process of hiring more
pilots and buying more aircraft. Small UAS, like our eBee, can
fly much lower than manned aircraft and can offer extremely
high image resolution less than one inch per pixel. They also
can be operated very inexpensively and virtually on demand.
The FAA issued its Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for
operation and certification of small UAS on February 23rd.
Implementation of final rules is not expected until mid-2016 at
the earliest. While there are still many restrictions, the
current rules as proposed will represent a step forward for the
small UAS industry.
3D Aerial's primary concerns with the new rules as a small
business operator are the cost to gain FAA operator
certification, the phase-in period for compliance with new
rules, impact of state and local rules restricting UAS
operations, and enforcement of regulations.
In closing, it is an exciting time to be in the emerging
commercial UAS industry. If fostered through a reasonable
balance of regulations to protect national airspace and
accommodating economic policy, small business will be a
significant engine of growth delivering on the promise of new
jobs and expanded tax base that will benefit our economy.
Furthermore, the advanced technology capability we offer today
will continue to improve and provide growing value to our
society.
On behalf of my colleagues at 3D Aerial Solutions, I thank
you for allowing me to speak to you today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Streem, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN STREEM

Mr. STREEM. Thank you.
Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of
the Committee, my name is Brian Streem, and I am the cofounder
and CEO of AeroCine, a drone company that uses unmanned aerial
vehicles to fly Hollywood cameras for movies, television,
advertising, and real estate, among other things. Thank you for
having me here today and for holding this critical hearing.
Ranking Member Velazquez, we are proud to be constituents of
your district. It is my honor to be here before all of you.
I wish I could tell you that I am one of the world's
foremost roboticists or rocket scientists, but for a hearing
such as this----
Chairman CHABOT. Let me interrupt you just one second.
Mr. STREEM. Sure.
Chairman CHABOT. In case anybody has not noticed, as you
see on the screen, listen but watch.
Mr. STREEM. Do more watching than listening.
I wish I was one of the world's foremost rocket scientists
or roboticists, but for a hearing such as this, my experience
as an artist and NYU film school graduate is really the story.
It also just so happens I am building my own drones and
consider this part of the new American dream.
The unmanned aerial system industry worldwide has created a
new generation of entrepreneurs who are innovating with small
businesses that will reshape the global economy. Safe and
responsible use of UAS will be ubiquitous across every sector
of the economy. Unfortunately, this worldwide phenomenon is in
jeopardy here at home in the United States due to the current
state of regulation that prohibits commercial operations absent
an exemption.
I consider myself lucky, as AeroCine was among the very
first U.S. companies and the very first New York company to
receive the FAA exemption to operate commercially, but to
continue to have to seek permission to adapt and change to a
client's need is expensive, it is time consuming, and it is
frustrating. And yet my passion for the industry has not waned.
Three years ago, witnessing a helicopter flying a miniature
camera capturing breathtaking video, I was astonished, and I
realized that this new technology would introduce the world to
a new creative frontier, in addition to hundreds, if not
thousands of additional efficient and paradigm-shifting
innovations, the implications for filmmaking were readily
apparent. Film producers make extensive use of cranes, camera
cars, helicopters, all in an elaborate effort to get the best
shot. This is sufficient and still viable in some cases, but
drones are more cost effective when operated responsibly and
can greatly reduce potential risk to human lives. A drone has
the capability to replace all of these on film sets while
reducing the risk to human life and enhancing the artistic
pursuit. What excited me about drones three years ago is the
same thing that excites me today. At their very core, drones
present a way to easily place a sensor anywhere in three-
dimensional space; what could once only be dreamed can now be
produced.
When my partner, Jeff Brink, and I started AeroCine, we
planned to simply purchase a drone to carry large cinema
cameras. Finding no suitable system on the market, we drew from
academic and aerospace circles to build a team of engineers and
set out to create an aerial-robotic system of our own. Today,
our work ranges from designing custom UAVs to operating UAVs
for big budget films, television shows, live programs, and
special events. We are proud to be bringing to consumers image
and video that has never been created.
The FAA's efforts to integrate UAVs into the national
airspace are commendable in the face of extraordinary
challenges. One notable step is the increased speed with which
the FAA is awarding Section 333 exemptions. The publication of
Proposed Rule for Small Drones is also promising, but we
understand we may be a year or more away from a final rule. And
even so, the proposed rule is in many respects too restrictive,
evidenced by many companies' move to test in Canada and
elsewhere. If we do not scramble to bring our regulations up to
speed, our innovators will be eclipsed by entrepreneurs and
other countries that have an established legal framework.
Before we conclude, we would like to invite the members of
the Committee to visit our website, AeroCine.com, to view some
of our captivating cinematography that this new technology has
allowed us to capture. We would like to also thank the small
UAV coalition for its leadership in promoting the UAV industry.
AeroCine stands ready to assist this Committee and the U.S.
Congress in bringing this exciting technology to consumers, and
we thank you for your leadership in holding this hearing.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of the
Committee, this concludes my opening statement. I look forward
to answering any questions from the Committee. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Dr. McLain, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIM MCLAIN

Mr. MCLAIN. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee, for inviting me to
speak today. I will provide the perspective of a professor who
has been involved in unmanned aircraft systems research for
over 15 years and who has interacted with small businesses in a
variety of ways.
I am a professor of mechanical engineering at Brigham Young
University and currently direct a National Science Foundation
sponsored research consortium called the Center for Unmanned
Aircraft Systems. The center brings together researchers from
industry and academia to collaborate on research challenges
facing the UAS industry. Our research universities include BYU,
the University of Colorado, and Virginia Tech.
From my perspective, small businesses have played a vital
role in the creation and growth of the UAS industry in the
United States. Without doubt, a significant portion of the
innovation in the UAS industry has come from entrepreneurial
startup companies.
During the last decade, as unmanned aircraft have had a
transformational impact on military operations, and as the
promise of regulatory change has increased their viability for
commercial applications, larger companies have taken greater
interest in small UAS. Illustrating the importance of small
business to the UAS industry, a common approach for large
companies to enter or become more competitive in the UAS
marketplace has been for them to acquire small, innovative
companies.
As regulations are put in place to allow commercial flights
of UAS, there will be a shift away from defense applications
and an acceleration of market opportunities. This is
particularly true for small UAS due to their accessibility and
relatively low costs. Applications that have been envisioned
for small UAS include agricultural monitoring, infrastructure
inspection, wildlife monitoring, package delivery, aerial
mapping, and many more. As Mr. Wynne has testified, AUVSI
projects that the 10-year economic impact of UAS in the United
States will be $82 billion, with over 100,000 new high-tech
jobs created.
Because many UAS application markets are undeveloped and
high risk, it is likely that small, innovative businesses will
be the first to enter these markets, to build them, and to
prove their viability and value. More than ever, small business
is essential to the growth and maturation of the UAS industry.
These businesses will include both developers of UAS products
and providers of UAS services.
Current UAS market estimates are based on specific
applications that have already been identified. From my
perspective, even more exciting than these known applications
are those that have not yet been conceived. Much like the
Internet of the 1990s, the potential of unmanned aircraft to
enhance our lives is in its infancy and we do not yet have a
full sense of the impact of this technology.
To enable and accelerate growth in the UAS industry and
facilitate the participation of small businesses, the
regulatory barriers to entry must be kept low. If the cost of
obtaining authorization to fly are too high, then these UAS
markets of opportunity will be closed to all but larger
companies that are well capitalized. Smaller companies will not
be able to participate and bring their creative products to
market. Costs for UAS technologies and services will remain
high, innovation and progress will be hampered, and the U.S.
will lose its competitive leadership position in an industry
that it pioneered.
The progress of UAS research and commercialization in the
United States has been inhibited by the lack of a regulatory
framework that allows unmanned aircraft flights to take place.
The FAA's small UAS Notice of Proposed Rulemaking is a good
step forward that will help accelerate growth in many UAS
application areas and allow viable UAS businesses to be
established. The small UAS rule, however, only allows flight
within visual line of sight of the operator. For many important
applications, such as oil pipeline monitoring and package
delivery, beyond line-of-sight capabilities are essential.
Regulations permitting safe beyond line-of-sight flight are
needed to allow the benefits of UAS technology to be fully
realized.
In summary, small businesses have played a vital role in
the development of the U.S. unmanned aircraft industry by way
of their vision, innovation, and willingness to take risks in
emerging technology markets. As we move into the future of
commercial UAS applications, small businesses will continue to
make critical contributions to the success of this important
industry.
Thank you again for the opportunity to address the
Committee. I look forward to any questions that you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And to be fair, we apply the same five-minute rule to
ourselves that we applied to you, so we will all stay within
five minutes ourselves. And I will recognize myself for that
purpose at this time.
Mr. Wynne, I will begin with you. Aging infrastructure, as
I am sure you know, is a significant issue all across the
United States. In my own district, we have the Brent Spence
Bridge, which we are struggling with trying to find a way to
replace it. It is considered functionally obsolete. What are
the benefits of using UAS to inspect aging infrastructure
around the country? And if you want to give examples, that is
fine.
Mr. WYNNE. I think they are very significant, Mr. Chairman.
Typically, when you are inspecting a bridge, you have to close
that bridge. People have to potentially hang off the bridge in
harnesses and look. We have enormously sophisticated sensors
today that can be mounted on these platforms that can actually
do that job, in some instances better than the ``mark one
eyeball.'' So being able to actually fly a UAS under a bridge,
rather than putting a human under it, can actually not only
increase the safety of that operation but also increase the
effectiveness of it.
Chairman CHABOT. And obviously, I mean, UAS can have
different forms. This one is a fixed wing. Now, if you were
inspecting a bridge, I assume it would be more of a helicopter?
Mr. WYNNE. Rotary based.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
All right. Mr. Gilkey, let me turn to you, if I can. And it
is great to have an Ohio company that is a trailblazer for this
new industry appear before the Committee. You have described
the challenge of the evolving regulatory environment for a
small business like 3D Aerial Solutions. What are some of the
other challenges that you have encountered or are currently
encountering?
Mr. GILKEY. One of the biggest challenges we have is with
public perception. People are afraid of drones who are not
educated on what they can do and the safety aspects of it. That
is something that challenges us and that is why we feel a
responsibility to do community outreach, which we are doing
with the Dayton Drone Users Group. That is one of the biggest.
And state economic development funding is flowing in the state
to support work in this area. It is not coming to companies
like ours. It is disproportionately going to public
institutions and research institutions that do not provide
benefit to companies like 3D Aerial.
Chairman CHABOT. When you say some people are afraid of
drones, what are they afraid of?
Mr. GILKEY. Privacy rights violations is the primary
concern, and then safety is a second.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Streem, I will turn to you now. In your testimony, you
noted that the proposed rule for UAS, I believe, is too
restrictive. What are your concerns with the operating
restrictions that the FAA has proposed?
Mr. STREEM. One of them is the ability to fly at night.
There have been several instances where on closed set
filmmaking, we have been asked by Hollywood productions to use
a drone at night and we were unable to do the operation. We
believe we can do it safely, and not being able to do it, it
means, quite frankly, we did not get the job.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. McLain, I will turn to you now. In your testimony you
stated that ``to enable and accelerate growth in UAS industry
and facilitate the participation of small business, the
regulatory barriers to entry must be kept low.'' And I tend to
agree with you. Does the FAA's proposed rule for small UAS, in
your belief, strike the right balance between ensuring safe
operations and permitting small businesses to participate in
the development of industry?
Mr. MCLAIN. I believe that the proposed rule is a good step
forward in the right direction, but there are some limitations
to it that have been mentioned--the beyond line-of-sight
restrictions, as well as the restrictions that Mr. Streem
mentioned that do not allow nighttime flight. Those are a
couple of restrictions that I believe could be carried out
safely with the implementation of proper technology and proper
regulations. Like I said, I think the small UAS rule is a good
step forward, but I think many of the most promising
applications for small UAS, or even larger UAS, are not
encompassed by that rule.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you. My time is about expired.
I think this is a very interesting topic that we are on
here today, and I have heard the same concerns, Mr. Gilkey,
that you have heard, and have seen some of the programs, 60
Minutes and some of the others that you have people afraid you
are going to have somebody flying one of these up to your
window and looking in or they are going to be doing something
they should not be doing, or even terrorists, or who knows. And
it was not particularly helpful when this knucklehead in the
copter came up here on Capitol Hill. Now, that was not an
unmanned vehicle, obviously, because he was in it, but there is
always potential abuse in anything but I think this is
something that could be tremendous for our country and job
creation if we do it right. And you are all here helping us to
make sure that we do get it right. So thank you for being here.
And I will now yield to the gentlelady from New York.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wynne, one survey found that many companies are unclear
of the current FAA regulations; yet, they continue to operate
commercial drones anyway. This arbitrary rule-following is
troublesome and could present a risk to the public safety. What
can be done to avert a recurrence of this behavior and increase
the level of public adherence to the regulations?
Mr. WYNNE. I am going to answer that with one word and that
is education. There are a lot of people that are coming into
this community, into the unmanned systems and robotics
community that are not aviators, and they are operating in
aviation space, in the national airspace system. And it is not
a particularly complex system in some respects, but in other
respects it really is. If we looked at the number of instances,
I think what we would find is that many of them might be real
estate agents who want to take a picture of a house from a
different angle that have not bothered to get a Section 333. I
am opposed to that. People need to obviously respect the law,
and until we have the proposed rules finalized which would
allow such operations, they need to get a Section 333.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So you do not feel that any enforcement
mechanism should be put in place?
Mr. WYNNE. I think it would be very appropriate for the FAA
to enforce the rules, and if you are flying for money illegally
without a 333 exemption, enforcement should be carried out. It
is very difficult to do that at this stage of the game, which
is why we were encouraging the FAA to finalize those rules very
quickly.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Professor McLain, there are some countries
that have already solved some of the airspace integration
problems the FAA is addressing in these rules. Have the current
regulations in this area prevented us from solving these issues
at the same pace as other countries?
Mr. MCLAIN. So the regulations in other countries are in
many respects similar to the small UAS rule. There are some
countries where they have beyond-line-of-sight flight
capabilities. But the FAA, I think the biggest problem with
their approach thus far is just the pace at which they moved
forward. The regulations that were in place prior to 2007 are
essentially the same regulations that the FAA is proposing to
enact this year. So the question would be, why has it taken
nine years to bring about the current UAS rule proposal? In the
course of these nine years, small businesses have come and gone
because of the lack of a regulatory framework.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So you do not see any steps that other
countries have taken that could be implemented here by the FAA
to expedite the process?
Mr. MCLAIN. Well, I think the small UAS rule is a good step
forward, and I think if they could get that in place, that
would close the gap between the regulations in other parts of
the world and what we have currently in the United States,
which is very, very limiting.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Streem, your business holds a certificate of
authorization from the FAA that allows it to commercially fly
drones for close-range aerial imaging. How difficult was it for
your firm to obtain the certificate?
Mr. STREEM. It was incredibly difficult, in particular,
because we were one of the first to file for it. There was no
roadmap to really go by.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. But my question is, today, are you aware if
it is complex and difficult?
Mr. STREEM. I am not because I am not going through the
process. I would expect it is simpler.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Okay.
I have a question about insurance and liability. I
understand that not too many carriers are providing insurance,
and so what risk does it pose to the public and to those who
have drones at this point?
Mr. STREEM. Yes. We have insurance. It is expensive.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. One study found that two-thirds of
businesses operate without commercial liability.
Mr. STREEM. Right. It is an expensive cost for small
businesses that many avoid until they have to. We just got our
insurance recently when we just began to fly, and we have
collision and liability insurance for our operations.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. And with two-thirds, what is happening when
accidents occur and the operator does not have insurance?
Mr. STREEM. I do not know.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. They will be taken to court?
Mr. STREEM. Yes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady's time is expired. Thank
you.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Knight, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the Wright Brothers' history there. I always
appreciate that, and I appreciate seeing all these new
companies here since the Wright Brothers beat out government
contract over 100 years ago, and I think that that is kind of
the story.
My questions are, and I think either Mr. Gilkey, maybe Mr.
Wynne, talked about privacy. We have had some recent problems
in firefighting in California where folks have flown UAS into
the firefighting scene trying to get some pictures or put
something on the Internet. They have interfered with
firefighting operations. In fact, at one point they had to stop
drops into the area because of the UAS actions by civilians.
How does your industry feel about that? Should there be some
talk about that in Congress? Should there be some restrictions
on that? How do you feel?
Mr. WYNNE. I am happy to field that one. My son is a
firefighter, so I feel very strongly.
In all of these instances, a temporary flight restriction
(TFR) was put up around the operation, and the airboss for that
TFR, whoever was actually handling the operations was having to
divert his traffic because there were things flying around in
there that did not belong and they were not under positive
control. That is a bad thing. That is a bad thing in any
temporary flight restriction, whether it is over a sporting
event or any other place.
I think education is, again, key. We have people flying
right now who are not aviators. They do not understand exactly
what a TFR is. They are violating FAA regulations and those
regulations need to be enforced because there are lives and
property at stake. So the community feels very strongly that
this is our responsibility to educate our operators and make
certain.
We have a difficult situation right now because in those
instances, they might actually be people who are flying that
are not commercial operators, and anyone can go and buy a UAS
from a local electronics store. Again, we have a ``Know before
you fly'' campaign that we have stood up with other
organizations, such as the Small UAV Coalition, the Academy of
Model Aeronautics, and the FAA is cooperating. We have
tremendous support from across the general aviation community
to get the word out that here is where the TFR is; stay out of
the way. If there are firefighting operations going on, you
cannot fly.
Mr. KNIGHT. Right. And I think we have seen that. You know,
we have had this type of activity for 50-plus years. It is just
somebody put a camera on one and turned it from a RC to a UAS.
And that is kind of the systems we are working on today.
Recently, or in the last year and a half, they have
released seven testing sites for UAS all over the country. My
state did not get one, but they are in the works to get these
new sites, these Excellence sites. Do you think that these
testing sites are something that UAS need, or can we just test
these things in all 50 states and we could probably flourish
more? And the reason I say that is because California did not
get a testing site, although we do most of the testing in
California.
Mr. WYNNE. I would like to see better utilization of the
test sites but I think it depends on what we are trying to get
done. I think the challenge that we have got today is that we
have only been talking about things essentially that are pretty
low complexity types of operations. There are lots of things
that can be done with this technology that are highly complex
and we are sort of in a walk, jog, run situation. What we are
encouraging the FAA, while they are finishing and finalizing
the rules that are very low risk for under 500 feet, visual
line of sight, daytime operations, et cetera, that they start
looking at things beyond visual line of sight, extended line of
sight. Operating under a bridge could actually be a beyond
visual line-of-sight operation. That would require safety
standards, if you will, that can only be set and can only be
agreed to if they have been researched to the FAA's
satisfaction. I think the test sites are an opportunity to do
that.
Mr. KNIGHT. And Mr. Wynne, I am going to ask you my final
question because it seems like you are a pilot.
On the larger UAS--and most of the UAS are under 40 or 50
pounds. I think that is probably 80 percent of the UAS in
America are about that size--but the larger ones that are in
the military, do you see that we need to change our kind of
see-and-avoid process under 18,000 feet with chase planes,
things like that? Do you think that we have gotten to a point
that we can do those things and be in a safe arena for the rest
of the air traffic?
Mr. WYNNE. That is being determined now, and that is a good
example of what I am talking about. The military has figured
out how to safely operate manned and unmanned systems in
theater together without incident, and in some cases, very
cooperatively. So we can learn from them. They have real clear
standards that can be adopted for the national airspace system.
There are organizations that are working on that, including
NASA. The FAA is participating in that process, and those are
good examples of how we need to test things to everyone's
satisfaction, set those rules, and go forward from there.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. KNIGHT. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
If Ms. Clarke would not mind, before I call on her, the
Wright Brothers were mentioned again, so I will just tell
something I think is kind of interesting. Every state has two
statues that are in the Capitol Building, most of them in the
statutory hall. Ohio has President James Garfield and a fellow
named Allen, who was a congressman, a senator, and a governor,
and he was also a racist. It was during slavery times, and so
he is being removed, and there was a contest. People in Ohio
were asked who we wanted to replace him with, and the people
who came in second were the Wright Brothers. And the one who
won was Thomas Edison. So in the very near future you will see
Thomas Edison's statue over there. Was that not interesting?
The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. CLARKE. A bit of trivia, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our ranking member. I
thank our panelists for taking the time to share your expertise
with us today, and I would like to also welcome my fellow
Brooklynite, Mr. Streem. Thank you for attending today's
hearing.
I am fascinated by the advancements in UAS technology. The
fact that we have entered the age of technologically advanced
use of unmanned aircraft is very encouraging. Unmanned systems
hold the potential to truly revolutionize our economy and way
of life in this country in such areas as agriculture, news
coverage, inspections, surveillance, data collection, mapping,
and surveying photo, video, film production, and many other
services.
However, I also believe that we must address unanswered
questions that this new technology brings to the forefront of
safety in America's skies. We must address the issues of
authority, privacy, accountability, and transparency. It was
interesting to hear how this technology has developed over the
years and its potential as a growth industry and what we can do
to assure that we can facilitate drone use in American airspace
while keeping all forms of air travel and ensure privacy for
all people.
Having said that, Dr. McLain, when you speak of being able
to go beyond line of sight for certain industries, my question
is, how do we control and stabilize the aircraft beyond what
our eyes can see, and what technology would need to be in place
to ensure that we have control of the aircraft at all times
given the challenges of cybersecurity and the liability
inherent in commercial use?
Mr. MCLAIN. So that is a good question.
I think there are several technologies that can be brought
to bear to enable beyond-line-of-sight flight. The control of
the aircraft, or the stability of the aircraft, technology
exists to do that. Current autopilot technology makes that
possible, and of course, it is used in military applications
all the time.
You bring up the security of communications links. I think
it is fair to say that most of the communication links used in
commercial UAS applications, and even in some military
applications, are not as secure as they could be. So there
might need to be technology applied to make those communication
links as they extend, especially beyond line of sight, secure.
Other technology that could be brought to bear is sense-
and-avoid or detect-and-avoid technology, which would allow the
aircraft to detect other aircraft in the airspace and to take
appropriate measures to avoid other aircraft as they were
encroaching. There is a variety of ways to do that. The NextGen
system that is being proposed by the FAA utilizes ADSB to
communicate the locations of all the aircraft in the airspace
and that could be used for unmanned aircraft. Certainly, most
robust would be to have the capability of each aircraft to
detect the other aircraft in the air what we call
noncooperatively. So they can do it without the cooperation of
any network system or something like that. And in that case
they would be probably using radar or machine vision sorts of
techniques to detect the other aircraft.
Ms. CLARKE. And the issue of liability, I raise that
because baking in cybersecurity measures and liability now
increases the cost of actually operating for a small business
owner. Do you see this as being sort of undercutting the
industry or just a necessity?
Mr. WYNNE. I think for certain applications, the
cybersecurity or the security of the communications link might
be vital. There might be other applications where, whether it
is due to the location of the flight and the lack of populated
areas and so forth where it may not be necessary.
Ms. CLARKE. Very well.
Mr. Streem, what measures are your company taking
specifically to ensure safety of not only your UAS, but
aircraft in the skies that might be flying in the spaces where
you are filming?
Mr. STREEM. Sure. I mean, we have operating procedures that
have been approved by the FAA. We cannot go above 400 feet. We
have to file a COA. We have to file a NOTAM that pretty much
notifies any other aircraft where we are, what we are doing.
When it comes to a film shoot, the people on the ground are
very well aware. There is typically a director and then there
is a first AD, which is an assistant director. And that AD is
in charge of saying, ``Okay, there is going to be a car that is
going to go over a ramp and it is going to explode. Everybody
look out for the explosion.'' In this case it is, ``There is
going to be a drone flying in the sky. It is going to do this.
Know about that.''
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady's time
is expired.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Hanna, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you. I am also a pilot. I am on the FAA
Subcommittee, and I have the privilege to represent Griffiss
Air Park, which is one of the six sites, so I would invite you
all to come and visit and look around. It is a great place.
Thirteen thousand feet of runway and a solid four seasons.
Mr. Wynne, and everyone, one of the problems I have with
all of this is UAVs are not new. They have been around the
world for 20 years. Japan has been using in agriculture for at
least that long. Other countries have. This is a known
quantity, and yet the FAA, as you pointed out, nine years
behind on their rulemaking. So my feeling is a lot of this is
we are blaming the victim because in this case all of you are
so far ahead of the FAA in your development, in your needs,
your usage, your opportunities to grow your businesses which
you have all explained so beautifully. So the kind of
underlying statement I hear is that a common--maybe with the
exception is Mr. Wynne--complaint about the FAA in the process.
And things like line of sight, which frankly do not work are
practical. Licensing. You know, they backed away from wanting
to use people with not just VFR but IFR licenses, all those
kinds of silly things.
And I guess I would like to ask your opinion about the
process. I know there have been lawsuits the FAA lost. And the
loss, was it against you, Mr. Streem? You remember that. It
went to the court. The FAA lost jurisdiction because they
abrogated the opportunity to make rules, and so they said this
is not for you.
I want, anybody, talk about the FAA and the urgency that,
apparently their desire to keep things safe is overwhelming
their ability to get their work done. What do you think of
that?
Mr. STREEM. Yeah. I would like to say a few words on that.
We feel that the FAA, really it needs to take a risk-based
approach to the regulations, and we are a big advocate of a
concept that has been discussed, which is a micro UAS rule. So
for small aircraft like ours under 4.4 pounds. We are in a
different risk category entirely in terms of operations, and we
are being held to the same standard now as these bigger,
larger, more risky aircraft. And so it is a big challenge to us
to get through the red tape and the extra cost and to live with
some of the limitations that we do not feel are warranted for
our class of operation.
Mr. HANNA. The 174th flies predator drones between
Syracuse, New York and Griffiss. They are going to start, I
think, this month, with a manned plane following. Do you want
to talk about this, Mr. Wynne? I mean, you seem more supportive
of the FAA than the others, but maybe I am just imagining that.
Mr. WYNNE. You are imagining it, Congressman.
Mr. HANNA. Good, good.
Mr. WYNNE. No, I do not mean to be disrespectful to you. We
are the FAA. The bottom line is that I have promoted
technologies that meet regulations my entire career and I have
never seen a bureaucracy keep up with technology. It just does
not happen.
Mr. HANNA. It does not happen here. Apparently, it happens
other places.
Mr. WYNNE. Well, I think----
Mr. HANNA. We talk about next generation aviation. There
are 20 other countries that have it.
Mr. WYNNE. You are right. And I think, you know, as long as
we are focusing on the risk associated with the operation, we
will be fine. I mean, the idea of an instrument-rated pilot
having to keep up those kinds of requirements in order to fly
under a bridge, even in a beyond visual line-of-sight
circumstance, the risk there is actually very low, so we want
to be focusing on the risk rather than the platform. If we are
flying in Class A airspace above 18,000 feet, that is a
different matter. That requires understanding commercial rules,
et cetera, et cetera. So I think it really is a function of
getting the FAA to understand this is not a system--you cannot
apply a platform-based system.
Mr. HANNA. So you would agree with Mr. Gilkey then that
they are just not using a risk approach that is practical in
our world?
Mr. WYNNE. I think we are moving in that direction. I see
elements of that in removing--in basically saying under 500
feet, visual line of sight, you are basically able to fly with
a knowledge-based test. That was a step forward. Not
necessarily a great step forward, but now we need to know what
knowledge-based means. And it gets back to some of the
challenges that we have had where we do have people flying that
do not have any knowledge. And so I think somehow we need to
find a way to meet them in the middle.
Mr. HANNA. My time is expired. Thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Hardy, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I kind of want to continue down some of the same lines that
my colleague, Mr. Hanna, was going. We talk about how long this
has taken, this process. We talk about education here today.
But it seems like in this place here on the Hill that we have a
way of--we want somehow a ``one size fits all'' unless it comes
to something new. Then we want to make sure that you get some
new regulations, you get some new oversight.
In the industry that I am in, and I have been all my life,
insurance aspects. You know what? In order to have something or
do something in my business, sell it even, you have to have
liability insurance before you can get it.
Why are we reinventing the wheel? Does that seem like a
logical thing that we just--if we are going to buy something,
purchase something, you should have to be in the same aspects
as all other business people utilizing it, not because you
cannot afford it and the risk.
The other question I would ask is does it seem like things
like the knowledge part of this, you know, in my industry,
there is a lot out there nationally. ``Call before you dig.''
You know, in my business, ignorance is not a sign of innocence.
You go to jail, you get paid, you pay your fines. Somebody out
there flying around in restricted airspace or doing things
without that--does anybody care to comment on that thought
process and why it takes us so long to get things done in this
place every time we turn around? I will take anybody's----
Mr. MCLAIN. Initially, I think part of the problem is that
the FAA pursued a ``one size fits all'' solution to aircraft in
the airspace, and while that makes sense for manned aircraft, I
think, it does not make sense for unmanned aircraft where the
spectrum of sizes and relative risk from the micro UAVs that we
are seeing here or to the Predators or Global Hawks, there is
such a broad spectrum that it does not make sense to regulate
them all with the same rule.
Mr. WYNNE. AUVSI is standing up an insurance program for
UAS operators, so we are getting into that business. We are
encouraging underwriters to come in and understand what is
going on. Fundamentally, we are just at the cusp of this, and
although Mr. Hanna pointed out that the technology has been
around for some time, in some ways the insurance world is just
understanding how. What is the risk associated with flying as a
real estate agent versus flying as a construction person, et
cetera, et cetera? There are a lot of different applications. I
personally think that normal business rules are ultimately
going to apply here. The insurance companies require certain
things for flying an airplane that the FAA does not require.
You know single engine land is single engine land. I could fly
an airplane as a pilot but, you know, if the airplane has
retractable gear, the insurance company is going to require you
to do dual time with an instructor because they do not want you
to land with the gear up kind of thing.
So the insurance companies will actually come along, I
think, in this instance, and we are hearing that from the
underwriters as we stand up this program. And they will
basically come up with solutions and understand, what are the
additional requirements that we need to put in place so that we
can insure you at an appropriate premium?
Mr. HARDY. I would like to take a little bit different
direction.
My district, I represent--Nellis Air Force Base is in my
district and the Nellis test range. I have talked to the folks
out at the base. Today, they are not worried too much about it,
but as progression goes on and we are one of those sites
selected, and they worry. There is top secret information out
there, that as things are able to go higher, they get more
ability, that maybe some of that secrecy may not be available.
Is there anything we can do to stop--assure that will never
happen as being one of our testing areas? Not really. We will
just say not really. But it is a question that needs to be
answered.
Is my time over?
Anyway, one of the other issues that is big for our area
and I want to confirm it again that the science is there, as
you may or may not know, the Creech Air Force Base is in the
test range. Most of those drone strikes that we have that we
read about are from Creech on sites over 11,000 miles away. So
the technology is there to fly that unmanned vehicle without
somebody being able to see it because I do not think anybody
can see from 11,000 miles away. But does the private sector
have the ability to have that same technology today?
Mr. MCLAIN. Absolutely. It is not military grade perhaps
but the fundamental technology of flying beyond line of sight
exists and it is not--it is well within reach of small
business.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you. I believe my time is expired.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
expired.
The gentlelady from American Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, is
recognized. She is the Subcommittee chairman on Health and
Technology.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gilkey, in your written testimony, you noted that state
and local governments are establishing an inconsistent
patchwork of operating restrictions that will be difficult for
small businesses to navigate. Can you elaborate on why state
and local operating restrictions are a challenge for small UAS
operators?
Mr. GILKEY. Certainly. Again, we feel a number of these
cases are motivated by reactionary public sentiment and not
necessarily well founded on risk-based analysis, but to a small
business, it is a real challenge financially and in terms of
resources to get educated at every potential location that we
might want to operate, what the local rules are. We are very
much interested in uniform rules that we can apply nationwide.
Now, that said, there are instances, like in the national
capital region, where that is a no fly zone for drones,
understandably. So there are site-specific exemptions that have
to be implemented. We would like to see those vetted at a
federal level to make sure that proper standards are applied
and that the communication of those restrictions is easy to
access. So annotations on aeronautical charts, for example, or
NOTAM filings, or things that are readily accessible that we
could educate ourselves quickly on what those regulations are,
those restrictions.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Let me follow up.
What sort of issues do you foresee in developing a standard
across all states, including the outlying territories, who
often have their own rules and regulations in regards to flight
operations?
Mr. Gilkey, follow-up question to you, sir.
Mr. GILKEY. Well, as a small business, we have to make
decisions every day on how to deploy our capital and our
equipment and resources. So we will gravitate to areas where it
is easier and more accommodating for us to do business. And my
fear with the state and local restrictions is that it is going
to create a situation of haves and have-nots as far as folks
who can reap the benefits of the technology that we have to
offer and my colleagues and those who cannot.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
And for Dr. McLain, you mentioned that the FAA's Pathfinder
Program, which is a collaborative effort between FAA and
industry partners to research different types of operations
including extended visual line-of-sight operations in rural
areas, what is the benefit of this type of collaborative
research-type program?
Mr. MCLAIN. Well, it is an opportunity to test and try out
applications under, I guess, more restrictive test conditions
in the sense that, for example, in surveying the railroad track
in New Mexico, one of the applications I believe that is being
considered here is it is done where the airspace is restricted
and there is not any probability of having accidents or the
probabilities are certainly lowered by restricting the airspace
and access to that airspace. So these are experimental
demonstrations of the technology proving out that they can be
done safely.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Dr. McLain, does this research program
extend to the United States territories as well?
Mr. MCLAIN. I am not aware of any activities in the
territories outside of the United States.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Why not?
Mr. MCLAIN. Oh, I do not think there is any reason that it
could not.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
The gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Lawrence, is recognized
for five minutes.
Ms. LAWRENCE. Thank you, Chairman.
First of all, being from Michigan, I wanted to recognize
Aerius Flight LLC which was the first company in my state to
get FAA approval of commercial application for drone
photography and video graphics.
Mr. Wynne, according to an industry survey, videography and
cinema is expected to comprise 41 percent of the market by the
use of drones by small businesses. What other types of small
businesses do you anticipate using the unmanned aircraft in the
next five to 10 years?
Mr. WYNNE. That list would take us most of the afternoon.
Ms. LAWRENCE. Oh, okay.
Mr. WYNNE. Happily. I think what we are seeing, we are in
the process of looking and analyzing the Section 333
applications to date, and a very, very large percentage are
small business, beginning with real estate, insurance folks.
Obviously, wedding photographers across the board to the kind
of services that Mr. Streem offers, because you can again use
these platforms to put lots of different things on them,
cameras being the most obvious for all of us.
So I think there is almost an unlimited number of small
business that can take advantage of this. Agriculture is a big
chunk of what we see going forward as well. And of course,
agriculture, there is large agriculture, but the vast majority
of farmers are small business people, and in many instances,
that is a good example of a low-risk operation that might even
be beyond visual line of sight where a farmer is surveying
their crops over a hill, again, over their own property, and
very safely with various procedures in place if say a
helicopter came into the area, things like that.
Hopefully that answers your question, ma'am.
Ms. LAWRENCE. Yes. You went into my next question, which is
regarding the farmers and restrictions. As we look at all the
industries or small businesses that can spin off from this
industry, there are some real concerns about--you talked about
a challenge, which was line of sight, but there also has been a
lot of issues, and I serve on Oversight, about regulation. What
type of restrictions should I put as a government on this
industry based on my privacy rights, based on my opting out of
maybe a delivery? There is a big issue about package delivery.
Maybe I do not want you to come drop a box on my porch. What
are some of the restrictions that you are hearing as these
small businesses are looking at implementing this that we
should have on our radar as an oversight government that will
be sensitive to businesses growing in this industry?
Mr. WYNNE. I guess my overall context would be let us not
have solutions looking for problems. All of the laws that
pertain to nuisance or privacy pertain to these platforms. So I
think that is, you know, Fourth Amendment rights are Fourth
Amendment rights no matter what the platform is, whether it is
a manned helicopter or UAS. So I think that would be my first
point.
The second point is that as an industry, we are permitted
to safe and responsible use of the technology. We are not going
to be able to optimize this opportunity for the country without
a sustained growth in utilization of the systems. And you have
some small businesses here. We have many, many industries that
are coming to us saying our constituents would like to use this
technology both for small business and large to optimize and to
increase the profitability of our operations. I think we should
see how that goes before we start trying to anticipate every
single problem that comes along, recognizing that the industry
will be committed to addressing these problems as they emerge,
otherwise, we will not have a sustainable business going
forward.
Ms. LAWRENCE. Thank you so much, and I yield back my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And we want to thank the panel for their very interesting
and timely testimony here this morning and then now into this
afternoon. I think the potential uses of commercial unmanned
aircraft systems is virtually limitless and there obviously is
a role for government to play in this, and that is going to
slow things down. It always does. And so we will certainly
encourage the FAA to get off the dime here to protect the
rights of the public, but at the same time not be an
obstruction to what could create potentially a huge number of
jobs, and we certainly need to move in that direction in this
country.
So again, thank you very much. We appreciate your
testimony.
I would ask unanimous consent that members have five
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez and members of
the committee, thank you very much for the opportunity to
participate in today's hearing on unmanned aircraft systems. I
am speaking on behalf of the Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International (AUVSI), the world's largest non-profit
organization devoted exclusively to advancing the unmanned
systems and robotics community. AUVSI has been the voice of
unmanned systems for more than 40 years, and currently we have
more than 7,500 members, including many small business members
that support and supply this high-tech industry.

UAS increase human potential, allowing us to execute
dangerous or difficult tasks safely and efficiency. From
inspecting pipelines and surveying bridges to filming movies
and providing farmers with aerial views of their crops, the
applications of UAS are virtually limitless and offer a
superior way to see what needs to be seen, in less time and at
less expense. It's no wonder businesses--small and large--are
clamoring to use this technology.

For years, AUVSI has been a leading advocate for the safe
integration of unmanned aircraft into the U.S. National
Airspace System (NAS). We were delighted earlier this year when
the Federal Aviation Administration published its long awaited
proposed rules for the commercial and civil operations of small
UAS (systems that weigh 55 pounds or less).\1\ These proposed
rules are a critical milestone in the UAS integration process
and bring us closer to realizing the tremendous societal and
economic benefits this technology offers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.faa.gov/uas/nprm/

Indeed, as the FAA has worked on these rules, much has
already changed in the industry. Since Congress tasked the FAA
with creating UAS regulations in 2012, the technology has gone
from a specialized tool to a must-have business asset. The
flood of commercial exemption requests to the FAA, in
particular, shows that a mature UAS commercial market is
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
waiting to be unleashed.

In May 2014, the agency announced it would consider
granting exemptions for certain low-risk commercial UAS
applications under Section 333 of the FAA Modernization and
Reform Act of 2012. Since then, the FAA has received more than
2,000 requests \2\ and granted more than 700 \3\ exemptions to
businesses looking to use UAS for precision agriculture;
inspecting infrastructure; mapping and surveying; film, photo
and video production; public safety or emergency response; and
environmental inspection and regulation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.regulations.gov/
#lsearchResults;rpp=25;po=0;s=%2522section%2528333%2522%252BFAA;fp=true;
ns=true
\3\ https://www.faa.gov/uas/legislative
--
programs/
section
--
333/

Many of these exemptions illustrate the sweeping impact the
industry is having on small businesses. AUVSI has looked at the
first several hundred exemptions that have been granted; and
according to our analysis, the vast majority of businesses
receiving exemptions are small businesses. Just as smartphones
and tablets revolutionized our economy over the past decade,
UAS are transforming the way a number of industries operate,
and are creating several new ones as well--from startups
focused on developing new UAS platforms and components to
entrepreneurs creating new business models that offer specific
UAS services. Other small businesses are eager to use UAS to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
improve their existing services and extend their capabilities.

Let me provide just a few examples:

North Carolina-based PrecisionHawk is a
startup that manufactures UAS and cloud-based data
collection software. Its UAS platform, the Lancaster,
is helping farmers survey crops and assisting insurance
companies with claims following natural disasters. The
company received a Section 333 exemption to fly its
platform commercially in the U.S., and a number of its
clients have also received exemptions, including AIG
and USAA. PrecisionHawk was also one of three companies
selected to kickoff the FAA's Pathfinder Program.\4\
The company will help the FAA and industry research
extended visual line-of-sight operations in rural
areas. Founded in 2010, PrecisionHawk started with six
employees and has now grown to more than 70 employees,
with multiple offices in the U.S. plus offices in
Canada, India and the United Kingdom.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ http://www.faa.gov/news/press
--
releases/
news
--
story.cfm?newsld=18756
\5\ http://www.precisionhawk.com/

Another example is Southern California-based
Aerial Mob. The company was one of the first to receive
a commercial exemption from the FAA.\6\ An innovator in
UAS cinematography and technology, Aerial Mob is
considered a pioneer in the development of UAS safety
standards by the Motion Picture Association of America
and the FAA. It performed the first ever FAA approved
film production project with a major studio, Warner
Brothers, on the set of the CBS TV show ``The
Mentalist.'' \7\ The company has since filmed Super
Bowl promos for NBC, a promo for a new show on Amazon
Prime, and even helped Apple film a commercial.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ http://www.faa/gov/news/press
--
releases/
news
--
story.cfm?cid=TW251&newsld=17194
\7\ http://finance.yahoo.com/news/warner-bros-uses-drone-on--the-
mentalist--set--a-hollywood-first-144435648.html

Then there is Douglas Trudeau. Based in
Tucson, Arizona, Mr. Trudeau was the first Realtor to
apply for, and receive, a Section 333 waiver from the
FAA to use UAS in his real estate business.\8\ A
Realtor for 15 years, Mr. Trudeau saw an opportunity to
capture unique aerial perspectives for his listings--
images that he couldn't obtain from the ground. Mr.
Trudeau now offers a how-to guide on his website for
other real estate agents interested in applying for
exemptions, and he is also a sought-after speaker.\9\
Since Mr. Trudeau received his exemption in January
this year, the FAA has issued waivers to more than 200
real estate-related companies, according to the
National Association of Realtors.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ http://www.nwitimes.com/lifestyles/hone-and-garden/drones-the-
next-frontier-in-real-estate-marketing/article
--
829bd032-
10cb-518f-aee6-ff092e519a82.html
\9\ Ibid.
\10\ http://www.realtor.org/articles/updated-list-of-faa-approved-
drone-operators-available-on-realtororg

These are just a few examples of the real-world, small
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
business applications of UAS. And there are many, many more.

The FAA continues to approve about 50 new commercial
operations a week, a process that has been recently streamlined
and expedited. However, this current system of case-by-case
approvals--whether streamlined or not--isn't a long-term
solution for the many small businesses wanting to fly. In
addition, the requirements for UAS operators are generally more
onerous under the section 333 exemption process than the
operator requirements contemplated in the draft UAS rules. It's
our view that a Realtor or a wedding photographer who wants to
fly a lightweight platform for aerial photography shouldn't
have to master stalls in a manned aircraft or learn how to land
a 2,000 pound Cessna.

As an industry, we want to see the integration of UAS
proceed and without any further delays. Once this happens, we
will have an established framework for UAS operations that will
allow anyone who follows the rules to fly. It will do away with
the case-by-case system of approvals that currently exists,
reducing the barriers to UAS operations. And importantly, the
integration will establish rules for the commercial use of UAS
so that small businesses from every industry sector can take
advantage of this innovative technology.

Given the technology's potential, it is important that the
FAA finalize the small UAS rules as quickly as possible.
Moreover, Congress needs to pass--and the President needs to
sign into law--an FAA reauthorization measure before the
current authorization expires on September 30, 2015.

This measure is critical for accelerating and expanding the
commercial use of UAS and the most immediate way to encourage
additional collaborative innovation between the numerous
governmental and private sector stakeholders. AUVSI has been
engaged with the committees and staffs leading the FAA
reauthorization efforts in both chambers of Congress to address
specific recommendations on how this can be accomplished.

Equally as important, government and industry need to work
together to permit expanded uses of UAS technology that pose no
additional risk to the airspace system. For example, whether
within the context of the rule, through the FAA reauthorization
measure or by other means, we need to allow for beyond-visual-
line-of-sight, nighttime operations and operations over heavily
populated areas. Otherwise we risk stunting a still-nascent
industry, and restricting the many beneficial uses of this
technology.

It's not just the many uses of this technology that are at
stake, but also the 100,000 jobs and $82 billion in economic
impact that the UAS industry is expected to create in its first
decade following integration.\11\ With the right regulatory
environment, there's no question these numbers could go higher.
The benefits of this technology are broad, and we need to make
sure we are doing all we can to support its growth and
development. But the longer we take, the more our nation risks
losing its innovation edge along with billions in economic
impact.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ http://www.auvsi.org/econreport

UAS technology is at an exciting and pivotal stage. The
technology is developing rapidly, with new applications being
highlighted nearly every day, much faster than our country's
capacity to develop the necessary regulations. We need to make
sure that the FAA adopts the proper framework to keep up with
this technology and is sufficiently resourced to work with
industry stakeholders to perform essential research ensuring
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the safety of our airspace.

Thank you again for the opportunity to speak today. I look
forward to answering any questions the committee might have.
Testimony of

Michael J. Gilkey, CEO

3D Aerial Solutions, LLC

Before the

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee on Small Business

Hearing on

Taking Flight: Small Business Utilization of Unmanned Aircraft.

July 15, 2015

Good morning Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez and
Members of the Committee. It's a pleasure to be here today to
discuss an entrepreneur's perspective on the emerging unmanned
aircraft systems industry.

Opening Comments

Unmanned systems hold the potential to truly revolutionize
our economy and way of life in the United States. Unmanned
Aircraft Systems, or UAS, provide innovative new tools to the
common man, which are being employed in uncommon ways. A new
industry is being born resulting in the creation of many new
small businesses.

UAS enjoy wide coverage in the media. However, much of it
is negative due to the irresponsible behavior of those who
don't know or don't follow the rules. All of us in this
industry are genuinely concerned about the proper use of UAS
and want to see violators dealt with comprehensively and
effectively. We understand and appreciate the need for rules.

However, the highly restricted nature of the current
interim rules and the slow pace of permanent rulemaking
continue to stifle the ability of small business to capitalize
on this market's potential. Furthermore, the lack of permanent,
uniform rules is spurring state and local governments to
establish their own restrictions that are creating an
inconsistent patchwork that will be difficult for small
business to navigate.

Small business people like me are slugging their way
through the obstacles and bureaucracy to fulfill our dreams of
creating this new industry. We are pioneers, determined to
succeed and believe the country and world will be
beneficiaries. I welcome the opportunity to be here today to
inform the Committee of our story and explore how Congress can
foster a more accommodating environment for small business,
which also ensures safe operations and protects privacy.

Creating a Startup UAS Company

My colleagues and I created 3D Aerial Solutions, LLC in
2013 to leverage our expertise working with military unmanned
aircraft and transition advanced technology know-how to solve
civilian problems. We focus on applications that utilize:

Automated flight planning and aircraft
control

Automated sensor control and data processing

Advanced man-machine interfaces

We self-funded 3D Aerial through an initial round of owner-
investment and began buying aircraft and equipment. We
purchased a senseFly eBee aircraft because it is highly
automated, easy to use, and precise. We are now a sales agent
for this product line. We began flying under Academy of Model
Aeronautics (AMA) `hobbyist' rules and became experts on this
equipment.

3D Aerial became an affiliate member of The Entrepreneur's
Center, a technology business incubator in Dayton, OH, to gain
access to business advice and meeting facilities. This is
proving to be a positive relationship from which we are pursing
additional investment funding for capital investment and
business expansion.

Well-intentioned state economic development funding is now
being deployed to help foster the creation of new businesses in
my area, and includes a special interest in the UAS industry.
However, it appears to be directed primarily to public colleges
and universities and has been of no benefit to the startup of
private companies like 3D Aerial Solutions.

Getting our Wings

Despite owning aircraft we were expert at flying, our small
private business was not eligible to apply for a Certificate of
Authorization (COA) in order to fly commercially. We were
limited to demonstration flights and we began marketing future
projects with no idea when we would be allowed to perform them.

3D Aerial believes we in the UAS industry have a
responsibility to reach out and educate the public of the
benefits and restrictions associated with responsible UAS
operation. To this end, we started the Dayton Drone Users Group
for community outreach and completed a volunteer community
service project, producing a promotional video for a local YMCA
camp.

We collaborated with the Ohio/Indiana UAS Center and Test
Complex and were able to fly on a COA they established. For the
most part, however, we spent a year and a half in a holding
pattern awaiting authority to make money flying unmanned
aircraft.

3D Aerial submitted our request for a FAA Modernization and
Reform Act of 2012 (Pub. L. 112-95) Section 333 Exemption on
October 14 2014. We received and responded to a FAA's request
for information in February and were granted an exemption on
March 3, 2015. We were the 2nd company in Ohio to be granted a
Section 333 exemption.

3D Aerial received the corresponding COA on March 23. It
took over a month to get the registration for our eBee aircraft
from the FAA, which came May 7th. With these steps complete, we
are now authorized to legally perform commercial flying
services, limited to only flights of the eBee aircraft and only
for the agricultural applications that we requested. The
blanket COA allows us to operate throughout the United States
but is subject to a large number of significant restrictions.

Benefits of UAS to Agriculture

Precision Agriculture is an information and technology-
based agricultural management system used to identify, analyze
and manage variability within fields for optimum profitability,
sustainability and environmental protection (ref. USDA web
site). These practices allow producers to determine precisely
what their needs are for fertilizer, herbicide insecticide and
water at every point throughout a field. Modern farm equipment
allows them to apply exactly the prescribed amounts at the
required location to maximize yield. This saves farmers money,
maximizes yield reduces environmental risk from over
application of unnecessary chemicals.

Aerial imaging using satellites and manned aircraft has
been used for years in agriculture to augment on the ground
techniques of soil sampling and crop scouting to support
precision agriculture. Field techniques are highly accurate,
but are labor intensive, time consuming and result in limited
sampling. Aerial imaging offers greater coverage by sampling
every point in the field at the camera's image resolution.
Small UAS like our eBee can fly much lower than manned aircraft
and can offer extremely high image resolution (to less than 1
inch per image pixel). They can also operate very inexpensively
and virtually ``on-demand''.

What the Images Tell You

The images record reflected sunlight at different
wavelengths, or `colors'. Different cameras are used to collect
in different spectral bands (i.e. visible, near infrared and
thermal infrared) to provide a variety of techniques for
analysis. Multispectral cameras efficiently collect multiple
colors simultaneously.

Early in the season, farmers may be imaging to perform
plant counting, so areas that don't initiate can be replanted.
Throughout the season, producers are looking for things like
chlorophyll indication, plant stress, and moisture analysis.
These conditions and more can be detected and localized in the
field through the proper processing of aerial imagery using the
various colors.

Collected images are ortho-rectified and geo-registered so
each point in an image can be tied to its corresponding
location on the ground. Image processing software stitches
these images together into high-resolution, wide area `maps'
called orthomosaics. Also, 3 dimensional point clouds can be
extracted through triangulation processing. Image analysis
software applies algorithms to compute vegetation indices and
other health metrics. These can be used to create treatments to
address various crop health problems. These prescriptions can
be turned into a geographic `shapefile' and loaded onto farm
equipment for precision application of nutrients, etc.

3D Aerial is now providing UAS flight services to perform
aerial imaging of crops using the eBee. We also process the
imagery into the desired image products, which are provided to
the farmer. We are in the process of hiring more pilots and
buying more aircraft.

Permanent Rules

The FAA has stepped up the issuance of the Section 333
exemptions and 714 exemptions approved as of the end of June
2015 (ref: Bloomberg News).

The FAA issued its Notice of Proposed Rule Making (NPRM)
for Operation and Certification of Small UAS on February 23,
2015. Implementation of final rules is not expected until mid
2016 at the earliest. While there are still many restrictions,
the current rules as proposed will represent a big step forward
for the small UAS industry.

Positive aspects:

Pilot certification requirements are
reduced. A full private pilot's license is not
required.

No FAA airworthiness certification required.

Aircraft performance limits accommodate
operating range. These will foster broad range of
commercial UAS applications.

Most of the remaining requirements are
similar to what we operate under now.

3D Aerial's concerns as a small business operator:

Cost to gain FAA operator certification. The
NRPM's Regulatory Flexibility Determination estimates
that out of pocket costs for small UAS operator to be
FAA certified is less than $300. This estimate appears
quite low. Specific training and testing requirements
are currently unknown.

Phase in period for compliance with the new
rules. Will currently approved operators (with private
pilots with 2nd class medical certificates) be suddenly
ineligible to perform their duties until new
certification requirements are met?

Impact of state and local rules restricting
UAS operations. Will our small business be forced to
learn and comply with a wide variety of rules that
change state-by-state and city-by-city?

Enforcement of regulations. Will FAA have
the ability to prevent UAS businesses that don't have
the certifications and don't follow the rules from
operating and undercutting business from those of us
who do?

In Summary

It's exciting to be on the ground floor of the emerging
commercial small UAS industry. If fostered through a reasonable
balance of regulations to protect the national airspace and
accommodating economic policy, small businesses will be a
significant engine of growth, delivering on the promise of new
jobs and an expanded tax base that will benefit our economy.
Furthermore, the advanced technical capability we offer today
will continue to improve and provide growing value to our
society. On behalf of my colleagues at 3D Aerial Solutions, I
thank you for allowing the opportunity to speak to you today.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Testimony of

Brian Streem

CEO

AeroCine

Before the United States House of Representatives

Committee on Small Business

``Taking Flight: Small Business Utilization of Unmanned
Aircraft''

July 15, 2015

Chairman Chabot, ranking member Velazquez and members of
the committee--thank you for having me here today and for
holding this critical hearing--it is my honor to be here before
you.

My name is Brian Streem and I am the co-founder and CEO of
AeroCine, a drone company that uses Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs) to fly Hollywood cameras for movies, television,
advertising and real estate among other things.

I wish I could tell you that I am one of the world's
foremost roboticists or rocket scientists but for a hearing
such as this, my experience as an artist and NYU Film School
graduate is the real story. It just so happens, I might humbly
add, I am building my own drones and consider this part of the
new American Dream.

The Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) industry worldwide has
created a new generation of entrepreneurs who are innovating
with small businesses that will reshape the global economy.
Safe and responsible use of UAS will be ubiquitous across every
sector of the economy. Unfortunately, this worldwide phenomenon
is in jeopardy here at home in the United States due to the
current state of regulation that prohibits commercial
operations absent an exception. I consider myself lucky as
AeroCine was among the very first U.S. companies to receive an
FAA exception to operate commercially but we continue to have
to seek permission to adapt and change to what clients need. It
is expensive, time-consuming and frustrating.

And yet, my passion for this industry has not waned.

Three years ago witnessing a quadcopter flying a miniature
camera capturing breathtaking videography. I was astonished and
realized that this new technology would introduce the world to
a new creative frontier, in addition to hundreds, if not
thousands, of additional efficient and paradigm shifting
innovations. The implications for filmmaking were readily
apparent. I thought, if someone could put a small camera on a
small multirotor, why could I not put a thirty-pound, high-
quality cinema camera on a twenty-five pound multirotor?

Film producers make extensive use of cranes, camera cars,
and helicopters, all in an elaborate effort to get the best
shot. This is sufficient and still viable in some cases, but
drones are more cost effective and when operated responsibly
can greatly reduce potential risks to human lives. A drone has
the capability to replace all of these on film sets while
reducing the risk to human life and enhancing the artistic
pursuit. UAVs excel at showing us our world in new, fascinating
and beautiful ways. What excited me about drones three years
ago is the same thing the excites me today--at their very core,
drones present a way to easily p0lace a sensor anywhere in
three dimensional space. What could once only be dreamed can
now be produced.

What began as an idea for my business partner Jeff Brink
and me to turn a quick profit in the world of ultra high-end
production grew quickly and far exceeds what we had initially
conceived. When we started the company we planned to simply
purchase a drone to carry large cinema cameras. Finding no
suitable system on the market, we drew from academic and
aerospace circles to build a team of engineers and set out to
create an aerial robotic system of our own. Today our work
ranges from designing custom UAVs to operating UAVs for big
budget films, television shows, live programs, and special
events. We are proud to be bringing to consumers images and
video that has never been imagined.

The FAA's efforts to integrate UAVs into the national
airspace (NAS) are commendable in the face of extraordinary
challenges. One notable step is the increased speed with which
the FAA is awarding Section 333 Exemptions. The publication of
a proposed rule for small drones is also promising, but we
understand we may be a year or more away from a final rule, and
even so, the proposed rule is in many respects too restrictive.
We recognize the FAA prefers the incremental approach of
crawl--walk--run. But right now regulation in the United States
is sorely lagging behind the technology, which is sprinting.
The industry in United States has been quick to create
innovative hardware and software solutions ranging from auto-
deploying parachutes to designing automated air traffic control
(ATC) schemes. This technology exists to protect people and
property in the NAS and on the ground and as a nation, we must
be able to rapidly adopt these solutions.

UAV operators in America are subject to the onerous task of
satisfying bureaucratic hurdles which do little to enhance
safety, such as securing certificates of authorization (COAs)
for flights under 400' above ground level (AGL). Securing a COA
can take anywhere from hours to weeks for a routine series of
flights.

A commercial UAV operator must also employ an FAA licensed
ATP, Private Pilot or Recreational or Sport Pilot to fly their
unmanned vehicles. The skills of piloting a passenger plane
versus an unmanned vehicle are worlds apart--as the FAA
acknowledges in its proposed rule--and this requirement does
little to enhance public safety.

Evidenced by many companies move to test in Canada and
elsewhere, if we do not scramble to bring our regulations up to
speed quickly our innovators will be eclipsed by entrepreneurs
in other countries that have an established legal framework.

We would like to see FAA expand its Section 333 Exemption
authority to include flights over persons not involved with the
particular UAS operation, flights closer than 500 feet from
such persons, and operations beyond the visual line of sight
(VLOS). These various operations can be conducted safety
because of the technological capabilities of the drone and
because of operational limitations the FAA can impose.

Even after the FAA issues its final rule for small drones,
we believe the FAA should use its discretion to authorize
operations beyond what the rules allow, provided the safety
case can be made. This can be done through the Section 333
Exemption process, or some other process that avoids both
another rulemaking or protracted type and airworthiness
certification.

AeroCine stands ready to assist this committee and the U.S.
Congress in bringing this exciting technology to consumers and
we thank you for your leadership in holding this hearing.

Mr. Chairman, ranking member Velazquez and members of the
committee, this concludes my opening statement. I look forward
to answering any questions from the Committee.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Motion Picture Association of America

Statement for the Record in the House Committee on Small
Business Hearing

``Taking Flight: Small Business Utilization of Unmanned
Aircraft''

July 16, 2015

The Motion Picture Association of America is excited to be
on the forefront of small unmanned aircraft system innovation.
The MPAA has worked closely with the Federal Aviation
Administration and sUAS operators to secure cinematography as
among the first approved commercial applications of unmanned
aircraft in the United States. Incorporating sUAS in domestic
film and television production is not only safely advancing
aerial photography and helping tell stories in new and exciting
ways. It is also starting to generate the economic benefits
that the technology can bring our country by reducing costs and
advancing the domestic aviation industry. And the sUAS
operators that our industry turns to for this new and exciting
application of technology are invariably small businesses. Such
reliance on small businesses is typical for the film and
television industry. Of the 99,000 businesses located in every
state of the Union that make up the industry, 85 percent employ
10 or fewer people.

As the voice of the motion picture, home video and
television industries, the MPAA submits this statement on
behalf of its members: Paramount Pictures Corp., Sony Pictures
Entertainment Inc., Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., Universal
City Studios LLC, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, and
Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. The film and television
industry is currently employing sUAS under exemptions the FAA
granted vendors to use the aircraft in scripted, closed-set
filming. The controlled nature of our sUAS use greatly limits
exposure to the general public, minimizing any safety or
privacy concerns.

When the first handful of sUAS operators received exemption
approval from the FAA last fall, Senator Dodd, MPAA's Chairman
and CEO, called the announcement ``a victory for audiences
everywhere as it gives filmmakers yet another way to push
creative boundaries and create the kinds of scenes and shots we
could only imagine a few years ago.'' The MPAA and its members
look forward to the continued development of this budding
sector of the film industry as we work with the FAA to
establish formal rules allowing use of sUAS in domestic movie
and television production.

Filming with sUAS is already authorized abroad and we have
now built a positive track record here at home, having
completed a growing number of successful flights. One of the
small businesses we work with that received an exemption from
the FAA in September 2014, Aerial MOB, has already completed
more than 60 film projects to date totaling more than 1,200
successful flights. Advancing such domestic use will help keep
production revenues from leaving our shores, promote jobs,
expand the U.S. aviation industry, and provide real-world
experiences in controlled environments to help pave the way for
other uses of sUAS.

Looking ahead, we asked the FAA earlier this year in the
formal rulemaking proceeding to allow additional flexibility,
such as night flying, for filming in controlled environments as
technology advances. We are in the initial stages of sUAS
cinematography in the United States and, as use grows, the
capabilities of the systems will likely evolve rapidly.

We thank Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member Velazquez and
the other members of the Committee for their attention to this
matter. We look forward to continuing our work to further
integrate the use of sUAS into domestic film and television
productions, and are eager to see how the creative minds of our
industry use the techno9logy to the benefit of audiences around
the world.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
