- HELP WANTED: SMALL BUSINESS PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HELP WANTED: SMALL BUSINESS PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 19, 2016

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-061
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-198                    WASHINGTON : 2016

_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Jan Oliver, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Ms. Lisa Goring, Executive Vice President, Programs and Services,
Autism Speaks, New York, NY....................................     4
Ms. Terri Hogan, Owner, Contemporary Cabinetry East, Cincinnati,
OH.............................................................     6
Mr. Rajesh Anandan, Co-founder, ULTRA Testing, New York, NY......     7
Mr. Joe Steffy, Owner, Poppin Joe's Gourmet Kettle Korn,
Louisburg, KS, accompanied by Mr. Ray Steffy...................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ms. Lisa Goring, Executive Vice President, Programs and
Services, Autism Speaks, New York, NY......................    18
Ms. Terri Hogan, Owner, Contemporary Cabinetry East,
Cincinnati, OH.............................................    25
Mr. Rajesh Anandan, Co-founder, ULTRA Testing, New York, NY..    44
Mr. Joe Steffy, Owner, Poppin Joe's Gourmet Kettle Korn,
Louisburg, KS, accompanied by Mr. Ray Steffy...............    52
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
Source America...............................................    55
Testimony of Jose H. Velasco, Head of Autism at Work
Initiative in the United States for SAP....................    57

HELP WANTED: SMALL BUSINESS PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 19, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Chabot
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Hanna,
Huelskamp, Brat, Radewagen, Curbelo, Hardy, Kelly, Velazquez,
Clarke, Chu, Lawrence, and Adams.
Also Present: Representative Smith
Chairman Chabot. The committee will come to order. I want
to thank everyone for being here today. Before I give my
opening statement I would like to welcome here the co-chairs of
the Autism Caucus, Chris Smith from New Jersey and Mike Doyle
from Pennsylvania, his Democratic counterpart. We thank you all
for your hard work in this area and appreciate you being here
today.
Often when this committee meets, it is to discuss the
challenges facing small businesses. Today however, we get to
talk about some of the truly inspiring opportunities they can
offer. After all, small businesses are not just the backbone of
the American economy, but they are also at the heart of our
committee. Today the committee will hear about the role small
businesses are playing in expanding employment opportunities
for all Americans.
I am proud to welcome our four witnesses today who have had
such a positive affect on their communities. I am especially
pleased that one of our witnesses, Ms. Terri Hogan is visiting
us today from my hometown of Cincinnati, and we welcome you
here. As we do all our witnesses I will introduce all of you
here shortly.
For adults with intellectual or developmental disabilities
or disorders, finding and sustaining employment can be a real
challenge. These individuals can be overlooked when employment
opportunities arise and too often they are shut out from the
workplace all together. Yet across the country we are seeing
examples of how small businesses, with their ability to adapt
and accommodate, are able to provide employment opportunities
to those who might not otherwise get a chance.
Today we are excited to hear about some of these stories
and learn more about the ways individuals who may have special
needs are contributing to small business success all over the
country. As we approach the end of May, graduation season is
officially upon us. Thousands of young adults will be leaving
school, ready and eager to join the workforce. This new chapter
in their life can present challenges for everyone. But for
those with intellectual or developmental disorders or
disabilities this can be especially daunting. These men and
women leaving school might face a future where the prospect of
finding employment is unknown and options for the future seem
limited. Thankfully small businesses working to expand
opportunities are allowing individuals with special needs to
enter the workforce and grow their quality of life.
I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses today
and applaud them for the example they have set in showing the
tremendous impact expanding employment opportunities can have.
I now would like to yield to the Ranking Member Ms.
Velazquez for her opening remarks.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
putting together this hearing. I am very, very excited. For
most people work is closely aligned with feelings of self worth
and a general sense that one is contributing to society.
Generally when small businesses are succeeding the result is
greater employment opportunities for all Americans. Small
businesses create jobs in their communities, opening doors for
their neighbors. We have seen this phenomenon recently as the
U.S. economy recovered from the Great Recession.
Today we are in the midst of the longest streak of private
sector job growth in history. In fact, 10 million jobs have
been created since 2009. And thanks largely to small businesses
the overall unemployment rate has been cut in half from 10
percent to 5 percent. Unfortunately, one particular demographic
continues facing persistent challenges when it comes to
securing employment not only when there is an economic
downturn, but in good times as well.
Sadly, those with autism spectrum disorder or down syndrome
have an unemployment rate significantly higher than the
national average. It is estimated that 90 percent of these
individuals are unemployed or under employed. Regrettably this
population faces an uphill battle to overcome false perceptions
about their abilities and their capacity as employees.
Many of those on the autism spectrum excell in specialized
kinds of work like software testing, lab work and proofreading.
They observe details that others miss and are able to focus for
long periods of time. Naturally they take well deserved pride
in their distinctive abilities and have a typical ways of
viewing the world. Similarly, individuals with down syndrome
are valued members of the workforce when given the opportunity.
They are proven to be efficient and loyal employees.
Yet despite their proven abilities, desire to work and the
benefits to all parties involved, a lack of opportunity
remains. Enhancing opportunities for these employees is not
only beneficial from a business perspective but also from an
overall society perspective as well. Research shows employing
individuals with disabilities reduces reliance on publicly
funded adult services. With increased public awareness and
inclusion efforts many of the false notions about those with
autism and down syndrome has been dispelled.
Today thousands of small businesses are providing not only
job opportunities but career opportunities to these
individuals. We are very happy to have some of them here today
with us to share their experiences. If there is one thing
entrepreneurs are good at, it is creating opportunity.
Today small businesses are at the forefront of creating
innovative business models that employ these competent and
hardworking individuals. I hope today's hearing will further
dispel misconceptions while making clear that what we can do to
further facilitate small business employment for all Americans.
On that note, I thank the witnesses for testifying and I look
forward to your story. Thank you.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much.
I will now explain our lighting system here. Each of you
gets 5 minutes to testify and then we will ask questions for 5
minutes. The green light will be on for 4 minutes, the yellow
light will be on for 1 minute, to let you know time is wrapping
up, and when the red light comes on and we would ask you to
stay within that if at all possible. If you need a little extra
time that is okay, but try to stay within it to the degree
possible.
I might note we may be--we will be interrupted by votes at
some point we think around 10:30 or so, so if you hear buzzers
go off and members go scurry out of the room that is what is
happening. We will adjourn for a little while, and then some of
us will come back and some of us will head to our districts. I
guarantee I will be back and the ranking member will be back.
Without further adieu I would like to introduce our very
distinguished and very interesting panel here today. Our first
witness will be Lisa Goring. Ms. Goring is the Executive Vice
President of Programs and Services at Autism Speaks where she
has worked since 2006. She has been there 10 years. Under
Lisa's leadership Autism Speaks has provided resources and
support to hundreds of thousands of families and individuals
with autism all across the country. Lisa has implemented many
grant programs over the years to expand services and support
for people of all ages with autism and is working with Autism
Speaks on its small businesses initiative. We welcome you here
this morning.
Our next witness will be Ms. Terri Hogan, who is coming to
us from the great city of Cincinnati. Ms. Hogan is the Chairman
and CEO of Contemporary Cabinetry East, a small business with
around 70 employees. Seeing the need for inclusion and
diversity in the workplace, Ms. Hogan has through her business
looked to provide opportunities to individuals who might
otherwise be overlooked or shut out from employment. Her
business has also partnered with local schools and
organizations to provide career exploration tours to connect
real world labor skills with the academic and life skills
curriculum. This helps students gain the skills needed to get
into the labor force.
I would now like to yield to the ranking member for the
purpose of introducing another witness, Rajesh Anandan.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure
to introduce Rajesh Anandan who is the cofounder of ULTRA
Testing, a high quality software testing company employing
individuals on the autism spectrum. Rajesh began his career at
Microsoft and then joined Bain & Company where he focused on
business incubation and growth strategy. For the past decade he
has worked in the impact sector, including setting up and
running the private sector division at the Global Forum to
fight AIDS, TB and malaria. Rajesh is a member of advisory
board of the Asperger syndrome training and employment
partnership, the steering committee of the UNICEF Global
Innovation Center and serves as an adviser to a number of
technology startups. He holds degrees in computer science and
electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Welcome.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much. We thank the ranking
member for that introduction. I would now like to introduce our
final witness Mr. Joe Steffy. Mr. Steffy is coming to us from
Louisberg, Kansas, where he is better known as Poppin' Joe,
owner of Poppin' Joe's Gourmet Kettle Korn. He is a shining
example as to the tremendous promise everyone is capable of
achieving. When others sought to limit his potential, Mr.
Steffy and his family developed a business plan. Through his
hard work he has grown his business to where Poppin' Joe's
Kettle Korn can be found at Walmarts, fairs, craft shows, car
shows and events throughout Kansas and Georgia, and hopefully
some day in my office.
Mr. Steffy has also shipped his kettle corn to our troops
serving overseas. We would have welcomed him bringing popcorn
here today, but our rules prohibit bringing food into the room,
so unfortunately we probably won't be doing that today, unless
he is really persistent.
He is accompanied today by his father, Ray Steffy, who will
also be available to answer questions. We welcome his father as
well. Once more we thank all the witnesses for being here. Ms.
Goring, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF LISA GORING, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, PROGRAMS
AND SERVICES, AUTISM SPEAKS, NEW YORK, NY; TERRI HOGAN, OWNER,
CONTEMPORARY CABINETRY EAST, CINCINNATI, OH; RAJESH ANANDAN,
CO-FOUNDER, ULTRA TESTING, NEW YORK, NY; AND JOE STEFFY, OWNER,
POPPIN JOE'S GOURMET KETTLE KORN, LOUISBURG, KS, ACCOMPANIED BY
RAY STEFFY

STATEMENT OF LISA GORING

Ms. Goring. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Chabot,
Ranking Member Velazquez and members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak to you today about a topic
that is of great importance to the autism community, advancing
the role and impact of small businesses and employing
individuals with autism.
As mentioned I am the executive vice president of program
services at Autism Speaks. Autism Speaks is the world's leading
science and advocacy organization. We are dedicated to funding
research to improve the lives of people with autism, increase
awareness of autism spectrum disorders, and advocating for the
needs of individuals with autism and their families.
Autism Speaks aims to support adults on the spectrum in
part by providing the tools and resources to expand employment
opportunities and workplace supports for individuals with
autism. As the largest wave of children with autism age out of
our school system one of our community's most daunting
challenges is finding employment. It is being tackled by
entrepreneurs and small businesses. Across the country small
businesses are utilizing unique flexibility to create
accommodating and innovative business models that sustainably
employ individuals with autism, expose students earlier in
their education to real world work experience, and provide
opportunities for work based learning and technical skill
attainment.
National data indicates that the vast majority of adults
with autism are un or under employed, with some estimates
ranging as high as 90 percent. While 50,000 young adults with
autism each year age out of the school system in the United
States, only a fraction of those are gainfully employed in jobs
that match their capabilities.
Autism Speaks is working with small businesses to improve
employment outcomes. Over the past 3 years our collaborative
efforts with small business communities strive to spread
awareness about the benefits of employing people with autism,
to develop innovative and sustainable business models, and
hiring practices, and to provide technical assistance to
implement best practices.
What we have learned is clear. The innovation and
flexibility unique to small businesses and entrepreneurs enable
them to lead the way in employing individuals--small businesses
are in a position not only to develop new models that employ
individuals with autism, but to innovate in a way that directly
responds to local labor market needs.
The connection many small businesses have with their
community is vital to creating the partnerships necessary to
transition students into local workforce and share best
practices with other businesses and nurture workforce comprised
of people of all abilities.
Businesses hire employees to fill a need and support their
businesses bottom line. Small businesses with workforce that
include employees with intellectual or developmental
disabilities consistently report that these employees
performance equals or exceeds that of their coworkers.
The popular narrative that has largely been based on a
sense of corporate social responsibility must shift to business
centered and represent the worth, the capabilities and the
efficiencies that individuals with autism can bring to the
workplace.
Employers are often unaware of the low-cost, high-impact,
of work accommodations and benefits of hiring individuals with
autism. All employees need the right tools and work environment
to effectively perform their jobs. Similarly, people with
autism may need some adjustments or accommodations to maximize
their productivity. Employers report that a high percentage of
job accommodations cost nothing and the rest typically cost
less than $500.
From our small businesses initiative we learned that
creating communities of experts and invested partners who share
information about accommodations and best practices is
essential to help businesses utilize this untapped workforce.
Looking forward, leveraging small businesses as a key
partner in workforce development strategies could better
prepare students with autism for employment and provide
employers with a pipeline of skilled workers.
National, State and local workforce development strategies
should collaborate with small businesses to increase access to
work based learned and work experience for secondary school
students to raise employment and independent living aspirations
of people with autism and their families while demonstrating
local employers the value that individuals with autism bring to
the workplace.
Individuals with autism deserve the opportunity to
contribute as productive workers and actively improve their
quality of life. Businesses today have the opportunity to
access a largely untapped labor pool of qualified job
candidates who happen to be on the autism spectrum.
Once again Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Velazquez, I thank
you and the committee for this opportunity to testify today. I
have submitted additional remarks for the record and I look
forward to answering any questions you may have.
Thank you so much.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much. It has been brought
to my attention that Poppin' Joe, Mr. Steffy, actually does
have popcorn here that will be available at the end of the
hearing. It is an encouragement for folks to stick around all
the way through the end. Let's hear it for Joe. Excellent.
Thank you.
Ms. Hogan you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERRI HOGAN

Ms. Hogan. Good morning Chairman Chabot, and Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the committee. I am Terri Hogan,
speaking on behalf of Contemporary Cabinetry East located in
Cincinnati, Ohio. My title is CEO and chairman and we are
certified NW BOS, women owned business.
We began as a very small family business in 1984. My
husband and I purchased the company from the family in 2003 and
have grown the business steadily and today employ 70
individuals. My husband Paul and I volunteer in the special
needs community and are raising our 17 year old son, Bailey,
who has autism. We understand the concern of families who are
facing transition into adulthood, and those who have already
reached this stage. What happens now is a question frequently
asked: How can our young adults become independent members of
the community?
Thank you for this opportunity to speak before you to
discuss how we can address these concerns and to discuss
inclusion in a small business workplace. We need to educate
others so they can begin to take the d-i-s out of disabilities
and replace it with abilities. We also need to make small
businesses aware of the huge untapped resource, people with
diverse abilities.
Hiring people who are physically, genetically or
cognitively diverse is not just the right thing to do, it is
the smart thing to do. I believe the Cincinnati small business
community needs to work harder to address inclusion in the
workplace.
Over a year ago our company hired Mike, and Mike is here
with us today. When he started he had a job coach working with
him and after a few months he became self-sufficient. Job
coaches shadow employees and empower them to improve
performance. Since Mike has been with us he has become a model
employee. He comes to work on time. He is reliable, he has
raised morale, brought community awareness and has caused
others to have a broader perspective. He has also developed
many friends at our company. For the business, Mike has helped
to develop a healthier bottom line and everyone works harder
because of Mike.
A quote from Employment First fact sheet, when businesses
identify the strengths of employees with disabilities then put
them in jobs that match their skills, those employees turn out
to be faithful, low turnover, hardworking employees. These
special employees come to work on time and when scheduled and
have lower sick time off.
In conclusion I hope you all leave here today with a better
understanding of how inclusion in the workplace adds to the
diversity of the workplace environment and may lead to a more
diverse customer base.
The positive effect these individuals have on lifting the
morale of our employees and set role model work ethic examples.
Begin career and technical education in middle and high schools
so students can learn these skills before they face transition
into adulthood. Take the d-i-s out of disabilities and focus on
abilities.
Here is a quote I recently read and I feel it is applicable
to this discussion. ``We become like our friends. The people we
surround ourselves with either raise or lower our standards.''
Mike has raised everyone's standards at CCE, and hiring Mike
was the best business decision I have ever made.
Thank you for your time and attention. Let's go to work.
Also, thank you Congressman Chabot for supporting the ABLE to
Work Act.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much. Appreciate it. Mr.
Anandan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RAJESH ANANDAN

Mr. Anandan. I would like to start with a video.
[Video shown.]
Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, members of the
committee, thank you for your continued efforts to support
small businesses in the U.S. My name is Rajesh Anandan and I am
one of the cofounders of ULTRA Testing, a company I started 3
years ago with my old College roommate Art Shectman who is not
here with us today, someone has to run the business. Together
we started a company that we believe will revolutionize the
software testing industry. More importantly, we are building a
business that we hope will prove the tremendous economic
opportunity to be unlocked by employing individuals on the
autism spectrum.
David, whom you saw in the video, is one of our team
members at ULTRA. David graduated in 2001 with a computer
science degree and he was eager to start work. He interviewed
for dozens, and applied for dozens of positions, but
unfortunately was not able to find job in his field or any
field. He was eager to work so he started volunteering at a
computer repair shop, and helping friends and family with their
IT issues.
For over a decade David tried to find paid work without
success. In 2014 he applied for a part-time software testing
position at ULTRA and successfully completed our rigorous
recruiting process. Within a month after starting work he was
working on billable client projects, generating an income for
himself, revenue for the company and value for clients. Within
a year, based on consistently excellent results that David
produced, we offered him a full-time position at ULTRA. Today,
thanks to his heightened abilities around patent recognition,
logical reasoning, his innate curiosity about technology, his
thirst to learn and improve, his willingness to persevere
through difficult and challenging tasks and projects, and his
commitment to work hard and do his best every single day.
David is one of the best software testers we have on our
team at ULTRA and I would argue in the world. There are 3-1/2
million Americans on the autism spectrum and by some estimates
one-third of this community have graduated high school and in
some cases college. Many individuals on the spectrum, like
David, are extremely capable and willing to work hard and would
make a fantastic addition to any team or organization. Yet over
80 percent of this population is not employed.
When my cofounder Art and I founded ULTRA, 3 years ago, we
set out to prove that we can build a technology company that
brought excellence to our industry by employing a truly diverse
workforce of people with different abilities.
Today we have team members working in 13 States across the
U.S., including the home states of most members of this
committee. Over 75 percent of our employees have Asperger
syndrome or a similar autism spectrum profile. 100 percent of
us believe that it is our differences that make us better.
Thanks to our exceptional team, ULTRA has tripled our
revenues 2 years in a row. We have achieved profitability and
we have consistently outperformed our competition. And to do
that, we haven't used a single dollar of philanthropic or
government support. Instead we developed an entirely new
operational model for running a business, one that reinvented
how recruiting and training works, that re-imagined how
projects and teams need to be managed and redesigned how we
communicate and interact with each other.
Today, thanks to widely available tools and technologies
that allow for data driven hiring that don't require resumes or
interviews that promote digital first communication that don't
mean you have to be showing up to an office and can work from
an environment that is comfortable for you, and that allow
remote teams to work as efficiently as teams that are co-
located. Any business small or large can leverage the talents
of individuals anywhere in this country, including individuals
on the autism spectrum.
Our experience at ULTRA has proven that by doing so,
companies can not only gain highly capable employees but can
also achieve a consistently superior result and a competitive
advantage. Thank you.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much. Mr. Steffy, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOE STEFFY

Mr. Joe Steffy. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking
Member Velazquez, and members of the Small Business Committee.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you
about my journey from no expectations to becoming a successful
businessowner. It is an honor for me to be here.
I was welcomed to life with ``here is your label''. I was
welcomed to school with ``here is your label''. Then came
welcome to adult life with ``here is where you belong''. Labels
create low expectations, the worse disability of all. My
parents attended a Kansas partners in policymaking training
when David Hammis presented. They learned that I and others
with significant challenges could own their own business.
Mom wrote the business plan, dad continued the trial work
period with me. The data collecting was useful for developing
the business plan. My future in the kettle corn business looked
promising. My startup team included the Kansas Council for
Developmental Disabilities. Another member of my startup team
was Social Security, vocational rehabilitation provided support
for the specific business equipment and supplies. My PASS plan
let me set aside money to achieve my specific work goals. I
submitted my business plan to each of my team members. Their
support made it possible for me to become a sole proprietor of
Poppin' Joe's Kettle Korn in April 2005. The first 5 years
shows a steady increase in sales. Each year since remains
constant, 2015 grossed $67,000. Please watch with me a few
minutes of my work day.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Joe Steffy. Owning my business works for me, it creates
opportunities for me to grow as a person and to be an engaged,
valued member of my community. With the right support system
being a self supporting entrepreneur can happen. I love being
Poppin' Joe. Thank you for inviting me. Have a poppin' great
day.
Chairman Chabot. Excellent. The gentleman's time has
expired. Thank you very much, all four excellent testimony. The
buzzer you heard was votes, we probably have time for one group
of questions before we break. I will go ahead and recognize
myself for 5 minutes and then after that we will adjourn, go
vote, we will be gone for a while and then come back.
I will begin with Joe, you and your father Ray. First of
all, I want to thank you for upgrading the pronunciation of my
name to Chabot. It sounds much more distinguished than Chabot,
the way we say it, so very good. That is the French
pronunciation so you obviously did some research here.
What are some of the challenges that you faced in getting
the businesses off the ground and how did you overcome those
challenges, what recommendations would you have to others that
might want to do something similar?
Mr. Ray Steffy. Basically in the beginning Joe had a
transition meeting with the school and they said that he had no
attention span, couldn't keep on task, would probably never
hold a job and that he would live in a group home the rest of
his life. No one wants to hear that said about their child. I
was determined, I was going to prove to this committee that he
could work. It was from there that we found kettle corn as
being a business with a number of different processes to making
the product. That way Joe could move from one phase to another
phase as he chose so he could keep his attention span involved
with it. That was one of the main things in the beginning.
For funding we were able to work with David Hammis and Cary
Griffin and they showed us resources that we could go to,
Social Security, DD Council in Kansas. All of those entities
contributed money for him to get his equipment to start with.
It was from there that we started just doing it to prove Joe
could work, it was within a 5-year period of time that they
indicated that we would be able--Joe would be able to own the
business. That is how we got started.
We made the application, and on the 5th of April in 2005 he
became the owner and has he has been the owner ever since.
Chairman Chabot. In the film there it said they sold $6,000
worth of the product, but that is just that business, right? My
understanding is the business makes----
Mr. Ray Steffy. Yes. That is a cider mill there located in
Louisberg and that is how much they paid Joe for his corn.
Today they are selling over $10,000. They are selling close to
$100 a week right now. When you get into the fall during cider
season he will be selling up to a $1,000 a month.
Chairman Chabot. That is just that one business.
Mr. Ray Steffy. That is just one business. Yes.
Chairman Chabot. Overall, not to be nosey but how
successful is the business? The IRS wants me to ask this
question.
Mr. Ray Steffy. No, no. Right, right. He has been audited
too. Basically he is selling upward of $70,000 worth of popcorn
a year going by festivals and he has about five or six outlets
where he sells retail to people, convenience stores, that kind
of thing.
Chairman Chabot. Congratulations, tremendous. Next
question, Ms. Goring and Ms. Hogan let me ask you this real
quickly, what perceptions do you hear from other businesses
that are public about hiring folks that have challenges? How
would you respond--how do you address those challenges, and the
pre-disposition that some folks might have about hiring folks
like this?
Ms. Hogan. I think a whole lot of them have hesitations
because they are not educated and they are not aware. One of
the things that went to my advantage is I am raising a son with
autism, so I understand the language. I get it. What is
important is that we get out there and educate the small
business owners that aren't like me.
How do we tap into them to tell them it is okay? I have
quotes from our employees with me today and the things that
they have said that Mike is has just totally brought their
morale up, made them all better employees. Most of them have
never been around anyone with special needs before. It has
created awareness for them. It has done a lot better for our
business. Because we are doing it, we need to work with you
somehow and how can we get out there and talk to these people,
how do we reach them? We can give them such a positive story
about how good it is for their business.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you. In 25 seconds, Ms. Goring,
which is all I have left, if you would like to respond.
Ms. Goring. I just think it is important that we utilize
the skills that people with autism have and they are very good
at complex, yet repetitive tasks that others may not be at good
at. It is really a competitive advantage.
Chairman Chabot. Unfortunately, as I mentioned votes have
been called so we are going to have to adjourn. My
understanding is that we have votes that will take up about 45
minutes and then we will be back. Remember there is popcorn
waiting after we get back so stick around. We are adjourned.
[Recess.]
Chairman Chabot. I apologize for telling everybody it would
be 45 minutes, and it ended up being a lot longer than that.
Please accept our apologies, and I would now like to turn to
the ranking member for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me first thank all of the witnesses for your moving,
touching testimonies. I just went to the floor, as you know, to
vote, and every member who was participating in the hearing
were commenting how it has been an incredible experience. It is
not every day that we have the opportunity to make a positive
contribution in making sure that we open the door for
opportunity for everyone in America. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Anandan, one of the common misconceptions about hiring
individuals with disabilities is the need for costly
accommodations in the workplace. Can you elaborate on the
actions ULTRA took to accommodate its workforce?
Mr. Anandan. Of course. As a start-up, we don't have the
ability to do costly anything. We run a lean company and a
profitable business. A lot of the things we have put in place,
I would argue, are things that any business should do to be
more efficient. So we have communication tools we use and
communication rules we have put in place that take a lot of the
unwritten rules in a workplace that can be confusing and
inefficient for anyone and make them explicit. For example, at
ULTRA, you say don't email the client directly unless it is
important, and if you do, keep it short. Well, what is
important, and what is short? Is it really worth anyone's time
to spend minutes or hours trying to figure out what that is? So
at ULTRA, an email has to be 700 characters or less, no more
than three bullet points, and if it takes two iterations to
resolve it, you should talk live.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. Can you elaborate on how the
Federal Government can incentivize its larger contractors to
utilize the diverse workforce and the talents of innovative
small businesses like yours?
Mr. Anandan. As you know, Section 503 of the Rehabilitation
Act includes a goal of seven percent of a contractor's
workforce being individuals with disabilities. That goal
doesn't do a lot to support small businesses who are not likely
to be government contractors. On the other hand, they could
serve as subcontractors. Yet small businesses are much more
likely than large companies to be innovative and be proactive
and employing individuals on the spectrum.
A change in policy that would allow a subcontractor's
employees to count towards a large contractor's seven percent
goal could catalyze an entirely new ecosystem of small
businesses employing people with disabilities partnering with
large contractors and ultimately doing better business and
being better for society.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Ms. Goring, as you mentioned, your organization has hosted
various programs, including town halls and small business
accelerators together with--about employing those with ASD.
What were some of the biggest lessons you learned from these
programs? Are there any takeaways that would be helpful as the
committee looks into further nontraditional employes?
Ms. Goring. We learned a couple of things. First we learned
that you need to do what is best for the business, that it
needs to make sense to the business, and you lead with that.
You lead with the quality of the product or the service that
you are providing, and then the second piece can be that it
happens to be a person with autism.
But first and foremost you lead with that. To that point,
we found that many of the small businesses and entrepreneurs
maybe didn't have as much business sense as they needed to. So
we provided them with information about how they can build
their business, how to make it a profitable business. Then the
third piece was to provide very specific training about what
exactly the job entails, what outcomes you are looking for, and
to break it down into small steps that are taught and then
chained together. Those were some of the things that we found
to be helpful.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Ms. Hogan, in your testimony, you discuss how your company
partners with local schools. Can you elaborate on how
partnering with schools benefits both small businesses and
individuals with disabilities seeking employment?
Ms. Hogan. Are you asking how--what do we do to partner
with these schools and how do we make this work?
One thing that is really important to me is that we bring
the educators into our company and give them tours so that they
can see the type of jobs that are out there. Then they need to
go back to their schools to teach the skills. We have done this
with several of the schools that are involved with the
transition schools from ages 18 to 22. You have transition type
schools available for those who wish to keep their students
still learning. They go to Project SEARCH or something like
that. It is important that they come and see what we have so
that they can go back to these transition schools and teach the
skills.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. Yes. I yield back.
Chairman Chabot. The gentlelady's time has expired. Thank
you. The gentlelady yields back.
We are going to go into a second round. I know Mr. Smith is
coming back to ask some questions. As I mentioned before, what
happens oftentimes, this is our leave-town day. Once votes are
over they scatter out of this place, all back to their
districts.
Mr. Anandan, I will start with you this time. How has
employing individuals with autism impacted your business bottom
line? Is there any advice that you might want to give to other
businesses out there that might consider working with folks
with autism?
Mr. Anandan. I would say we consider ourselves one of the
best software testing companies in the world because of the
teams we have and the team members we have. We have shown over
and over again that when we have been benchmarked against other
competitors, whether they are onshore or offshore, we do
better. We have tested the Webbys, which are sort of like the
Oscars of the Web. Within a week we found 20 percent more bugs
and issues in the system than the partner they were working
with. We won a project away from IBM and redid their work, and
found 56 percent more bugs than the IBM team, for a Fortune 100
financial services company.
The reason we are able to do that is because three-quarters
of our company have Asperger's Syndrome or a similar autism
spectrum profile and have the exact profile we are looking for
to do software testing. Our staff have the raw talent, but also
the perseverance, the ability to learn, the ability to work
with teams. We have managers that work with our teams who are
veteran technologists who join our company to be part of a
company that has purpose and a mission. We are able to attract
fantastic talent into all roles.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much. Ms. Hogan, I will
turn to you next, if I can. In your testimony you had
mentioned, what a great employee Mike is and works hard and
comes on time and everything else. But most interestingly you
said Mike has had a positive impact on other employees and made
them better employees. Obviously, a small business owner, you
know that is important to being successful and keeping
everybody employed, and hiring more people. How has that been
the case? Are there any stories or examples where the quality
of Mike has improved the quality of your other employees?
Ms. Hogan. I have brought with me some quotes and stories
that several have written. I read through all of them. They are
all amazing. This one is very interesting to me because it has
a perspective of someone who didn't know anything about the
disability world. He says, ``My journey with Mike Ames began
three months ago when I started at my new company, Contemporary
Cabinetry East. I was assigned to edge banner and Mike was my
co-worker on the machine. Mike is my first extended exposure to
Down Syndrome. I will be honest. I entered our work
relationship with a certain amount of trepidation. There were a
lot of unknowns for me about what I was getting into. But at
the same time, I was so excited about the opportunity presented
to me.
In my limited experiences with Down Syndrome, I have always
found those individuals to be gentle with incredibly big,
loving hearts. Mike is no exception. My ignorance is being
erased and my concerns have dissipated. I have to say that
being around Mike is one of greatest joys I take from my job.
His kindness and willingness to help anyone who asks is
admirable. He has earned my respect and affection. Mike teaches
me every day how to love more. His outlook reminds me to
appreciate the things and people in my life. His presence
somehow frees me so I can be in the me that sometimes I am
afraid to be. I am a happier person because of my friend
Mikey.''
Chairman Chabot. That is excellent. Thank you very much. I
appreciate it.
I have got like a minute and 15 seconds left in my time and
two people I would like to ask questions to. So rather than ask
you some long question, I would just like to say, I will start
with you, Ms. Goring, and then Ray, we didn't have time to ask
a lot of questions. For 30 seconds, what would you like to tell
us that you already haven't told us that you think we ought to
know that might be helpful to folks out there that would
consider hiring folks with Autism or Down Syndrome or any other
disability?
Ms. Goring. I think it is important to start early when
they are still in school to work on some of the skills that are
needed and to do that out in the workplace as much as possible
in the real environment.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much.
Joe and Ray?
Mr. Ray Steffy. Yes, basically I would say a similar thing
as far as if they could--a lot of people that have significant
disabilities, their ability to work either owning--working for
someone in a job or owning a business, they will surprise you
what they can do when they realize that it is theirs. That is
the same with Joe. We had hoped he would come here, where he is
doing this for us.
Chairman Chabot. Very good. Thank you very much, my time is
expired. You stayed right in that time. Excellent. Thank you.
I would like to turn to the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Smith, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Chairman, thank you so very much, Chairman
Chabot, for convening this extremely important and timely
hearing, and of course, Nydia Velazquez, thank you. What a team
of people committed to expanding job opportunities. Nobody
creates more job opportunities than small business, and it is
timely for other reasons.
The Autism Cares Act enacted on August 8 of 2014, as you
know, the administration has been given marching orders to look
at every aspect, all the inventories of what we are doing in
every area, including employment, for persons with disabilities
who have Autism. As Lisa said earlier, 50,000 every year
matriculate from minor status to adult. They lose education and
a whole lot of--you know, the challenges are almost
overwhelming, and we will get a capacity assessment on or
before August 8.
It will probably be late. All administrations are. But it
will be a further blueprint. You are ahead of the game because
small business will be playing, I think, the key role in that
employment piece.
I also would point out that GAO also has undertaken a
comprehensive study, assessment, unmet needs. The first
iteration of that, which will come out probably in two or three
reports, will be at in July. So again, Mr. Chairman, you are
ahead of the game. Your witnesses were extraordinary. I can't
wait to taste the popcorn, I think like everyone here. Thank
you so very, very much for this.
Frankly our other committees of Congress should be
following this lead, Education and Workforce and others in
terms of how we position now for an employment breakout. There
needs to be a radical transformation on our outdated, and I
think very foolish, views as to what people with disabilities,
including people with Autism, can contribute. The statement
that was made by Joe Steffy about how his IEP team had so
utterly failed him with the low expectations game. He said, the
worst disability, quoting him, is that of low expectations.
To Dad, thank you for the love you show for your son and
that support. All of us need support teams. Persons with
disabilities need those support teams as well. You are the
quintessential example of a family who just gets behind their
son lock, stock, and barrel.
I just have a few very, very couple of questions. I have
many but I know there is a time limit. I had a hearing which we
heard from SAP who is in the process of hiring 650 people by
2020. They already have 100. They made the exact same points
that were made today, and made so eloquently. Part of their
testimony was in spite of autism, and because of autism and the
very special skill set that is brought to the employment table.
One of the things that was pointed out that I think--and
perhaps our distinguished witnesses could speak to it, is that
there needs to be a rethinking of talent acquisition processes
at businesses, and the interview methods, which very often are
a barrier that needs to be overcome. I also would ask you, if
you could, to speak to the accommodations issue. There was a
very important study. The Jan Workplace Accommodations Study
updated in 2015 that said that 58 percent of the accommodations
cost absolutely nothing.
It is a matter of will, political or employment will on the
part of HR. Beyond that, it is only about $500. We are not
talking about any kind of onerous burden financially to an
employer, and then what they get in return in terms of loyalty,
focus, the ability to do a job exceedingly well. I would also
ask you, Lisa, if you could speak to, the Chambers working with
you and NFIB and some of the other great groups that I know the
chairman and Nydia Velazquez work with all the time. They have
a very, important role to play with this as well. Again, the
low expectations game, I know it is the educational piece, but
how do we get those who are creating these IEPs to be much more
knowledgeable about the very young person they are working with
to say: You can really dream and dream large, and there is a
whole path for you into the future. Those couple of things.
Ms. Goring. I think it starts with job sampling, to start
that early. Small businesses are sometimes great opportunities
to start some of that job sampling. You would be surprised some
of the things, the preconceived notions of what you thought
would be the right job for a person aren't always true, but
that you can actually learn what they are good at.
In terms of the interview process, videos have been very,
very helpful. You don't need to have that oral exchange as much
when you can show a video of the terrific work that someone can
do.
Then in terms of accommodations, I think we have all seen--
some of the accommodations are no more than having a script in
place for someone so they know exactly what to say when they
pick up the phone. It could be writing out some of the rules
that we take as sort of unwritten rules, but they are just laid
out clearly. As ULTRA Testing did, 700 characters. It couldn't
get more clear than that. Those are the types of accommodations
that don't cost anything but have tremendous dividends, not
just for those with disabilities but really for everybody.
Mr. Anandan. First of all, I would like to say we don't see
any of the changes we have made to how a business works as
accommodations. That is how we collaborate. We are
collaborating across people who have very different strengths.
It just makes us better, we deliver better results, it makes us
more efficient. I think if you take something like recruiting,
a resume tells you how good someone is at writing a resume. A
firm handshake and eye contact maybe works for your job, but it
has nothing to do with software testing. For companies to be
disciplined and rigorous about what it is that they are
actually looking for, and collect data to validate that they
are finding what they are getting, versus letting our natural,
very natural human biases override our assessment of what
someone is capable of is absolutely critical, and ultimately it
will make sure that like we do, have a 95 percent success rate
of someone coming through recruiting to out perform IBM.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
has expired. Thank you very much.
I would like to yield such time as she might consume to the
Ranking Member.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one more
question.
I would like to ask Ray, what advice would you give
similarly situated individuals and families that are interested
in starting their own business?
Mr. Ray Steffy. At different times when we have spoken to
groups, especially parents that have kids with special needs,
we kind of put it in this way. You have a choice. You can sit
on the couch and worry about what is going to happen to your
child when you are gone, and we all would agree worry takes
energy. Or, you could take that same amount of energy and put
it toward an endeavor that can develop to be something that
could go on far beyond you. Basically that is kind of the
message we have, and also helping them look for resources to
bring funds available to start in an endeavor that the child is
interested in, not the adult parents.
Ms. Velazquez. So, you see a role for government to play?
Mr. Ray Steffy. Oh, yes. Yes. I do.
Ms. Velazquez.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chabot. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
We want to thank this panel very much for this testimony.
Sorry that you got interrupted by votes. It is an operational
hazard around this place, especially on heading-out-of-town
day.
It has been a great hearing. I think all the members here
and the ones who were here obviously before but had to take off
for their districts, we learned a lot. We will pass this on to
our colleagues. Thank you for being an inspiration to all of us
by doing your jobs and doing them well and helping others to do
their jobs and just have a better life. Thank you so much.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record.
One more thing. Popcorn Joe has popcorn out there for
everybody. Please enjoy that, thank you Joe and Ray for
providing that for us.
If there is no further business to come before the
committee, we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:35 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Testimony of

Joe Steffy, Owner of Poppin Joe's
TM
Gourmet Kettle
Korn

Help Wanted: Small Business Providing Opportunities for All

Before the Small Business Committee

United States House of Representatives

May 19, 2016

My Name is Joe Steffy, I am 30 years old and I own Poppin
Joe's Kettle Korn. I was born with Down Syndrome and later
diagnosed with Autism. When I was in school, my professional
reports said I had an IQ of 32 with profound intellectual
disabilities. These reports said that my receptive and
expressive language was at a 3 year old level, and that I had
minimal basic academic skills.

As I grew, my parents saw that I liked to do things
independently, I loved being active with other people and
spending time with family and friends. They recognized that I
had a very good memory for detail, and could follow through
with activities that are part of a regular routine. I was
blessed with many community opportunities and became a very
strong swimmer. This led to being able to work at the community
pool. I enjoyed riding horseback at a local stable and began to
volunteer there to work with the horses. Soon I worked in
exchange for riding.

In high school, my IEP (Individualized Education Plan) team
began to plan for my transition into adulthood. The team had
very low expectations. The worst disability there is that of
low expectations. They said I would never hold a job, that I
had no attention span, could not focus, would need to live in a
group home and go to a sheltered workshop. My parents
disagreed. They knew I was capable of working and that I
learned by watching. They also knew I would do exactly what I
saw done, so teaching me the right way to do things would be
important. I am happiest when I am busy and my parents knew
this. I would work, they said.

While on a trip, my Dad saw a man popping Kettle korn that
caught his attention. He asked many questions about the process
of the man, and learned that Kettle Korn is an old German way
of popping popcorn with sugar. When you add the sugar and
secret ingredients to the popcorn and vegetable oil in the hot
kettle, the sugar breaks down into a liquid. As the popcorn
pops it comes up through the sugar and gives the kernels a
sugar coating. While popping, the kettle is 500 degrees so it
is important that it is constantly stirred. As you stir the
popped kernels, it comingles. Once it is all popped, it is
dumped out onto the screening table where it cools.

My Dad came away excited about the possibilities to use
this to build on my strengths. This was a way for me to prove
that I could work. We began my work trial in October of 2000.
The goal was to see if I could work. We popped on weekends at
local grocery stores and I showed Dad I could stay on task for
up to 6 hours. In the work trial, Dad saw that I could learn
the repetition of the production process. I could pop, and I
could bag, both key parts of popping Kettle Korn.

My parents decided this looked like very promising work for
me. They attended a Partners in Policymaking class in Kansas
that David Hammis presented at. They learned that I and others
with significant disabilities could OWN their own business. The
key to making Poppin Joe's Kettle Korn came true was having a
business plan, doing the work trial to prove I could work.
First Steps helped Mom set up the business plan, and the Kansas
Department for Development Disabilities provided me with a new
business startup grant to purchase new equipment. My start up
team included Social Security, which offers a program called
PASS (The plan for achieving self-support) which supported my
business goals and provided cash set aside for my monthly cash
flow. My parents also worked with Vocational Rehab to purchase
a computer and laser printer for my business. They submitted my
business plan to open Poppin Joes Kettle Korn to each of these
team members. My Team was then able to provide me the start-up
supports I needed to become the sole proprietor of Poppin Joe's
Kettle Korn in April of 2005.

I offer five products in my business. Cinnamon Kettle Korn,
Sweet and Cheesy, Old Fashioned Kettle Korn, White Cheddar
popcorn, and Golden Karmel Korn. I sell 65% at Festivals like
the County Fair, Car shows, and various festivals around Kansas
City. 25% of my business is through Retail outlets, where I
supply weekly to specialty stores, gas stations, medical
centers, and Farmer's Markets. The final 10% is done for
special events like weddings, graduations, employee events, and
internet sales.

My daily business tasks include deliveries, banking, paying
my bills, and sending out invoices, as well as popping kettle
korn to keep up with the demand. My gross sales started out
$15,000 in 2005. They doubled in 2006 and have now tripled.
Sales in 2016 were just over $67,000. I have 7 seasonally
employees. I even pay taxes. I am a success because of teamwork
and the commitment my parents have made to me.

Poppin Joe's Kettle Korn began with the Mission of: 1)
Honoring God in all I do, 2) To be a blessing to other people,
3) To purpose excellence, 4) To grow profitability. I am a
member in the community that I work in, which gives me a place
to belong. I am a contributing citizen and am able to do
fundraisers for local churches, schools, businesses and
communities events, as well as for many non-profit
organizations. I shipped kettle korn to the troops in
Afghanistan. My community values me.

In 2008, Poppin Joes helped me move into my own home. I
love my freedom--it gives me a great life! I go to work during
the day, and hang out and do fun activities at night, just like
most business owners. I have many activities I enjoy, like
shooting hoops, horseback riding, swimming, traveling, skiing,
going to amusement parks, water surfing, sky diving, lifting
weights, scuba diving, spending time with my family and
friends. My business has also enabled me to have many
adventures, going places and meeting people I would not
otherwise get to meet. I have been invited to travel and share
my story with groups across the country. This has brought me
many new friends, and expanded my business even further.

My business works for me. It creates new opportunities for
me to grow as a person, and to be an engaged, valued member of
my community. With the right support system, being a self-
supporting entrepreneur can be, and is, a reality for me. Thank
you for inviting me.

I have been blessed by incredible parents who have
advocated for me from my birth. They saw my potential, they
knew that I could succeed. They have helped me make my business
a reality, and a continued success.

I love being `Poppin Joe'. It is an honor to be here. Thank
you.

*Article is from Joe's Power point presentation he uses
with his augmentative device to tell his story.

Joe Steffy is 30 years old and lives in his own apartment
in Louisburg, Kansas and is the owner of Poppin Joe's Kettle
Korn. www.poppinjoes.com

[[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
