- FIELD HEARING IN NEW YORK: THE EMPIRE (STATE) STRIKES BACK: CREATING 21ST CENTURY MANUFACTURING OPPORTUNITIES IN NEW YORK CITY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FIELD HEARING IN NEW YORK: THE EMPIRE (STATE) STRIKES BACK: CREATING
21ST
CENTURY MANUFACTURING OPPORTUNITIES IN NEW YORK CITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
FEBRUARY 22, 2016

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-044
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

98-750 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Emily Murphy, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Adam Friedman, Director, Pratt Center for Community
Development, Brooklyn, NY......................................     7
Ms. Bob Bland, CEO & Founder, MANUFACTURE NY, Brooklyn, NY.......    10
Mr. Michael DiMarino, Owner, Linda Tool, Brooklyn, NY............    11
Ms. Nekisia Davis, Founder and Owner, Early Bird Foods & Co.,
LLC, Brooklyn, NY..............................................    13
Mr. Edward Jacobs, FXE Industries, Brooklyn Navy Yard, Brooklyn,
NY.............................................................    15

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Adam Friedman, Director, Pratt Center for Community
Development, Brooklyn, NY..................................    30
Ms. Bob Bland, CEO & Founder, MANUFACTURE NY, Brooklyn, NY...    41
Mr. Michael DiMarino, Owner, Linda Tool, Brooklyn, NY........    45
Ms. Nekisia Davis, Founder and Owner, Early Bird Foods & Co.,
LLC, Brooklyn, NY..........................................    47
Mr. Edward Jacobs, FXE Industries, Brooklyn Navy Yard,
Brooklyn, NY...............................................    51
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
`Made in NY' Expansion to Fashion Industry Testimony.........    53

THE EMPIRE (STATE) STRIKES BACK:
CREATING 21ST CENTURY MANUFACTURING OPPORTUNITIES IN NEW YORK CITY.

----------

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., at City
Hall, New York City Council Chambers, New York, New York, Hon.
Steve Chabot [chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Velazquez, and Clarke.
Also present: Representative Meeks
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order. Good
morning. I am Congressman Steve Chabot. I am the chairman of
the House Small Business Committee. We want to thank you all
for being with us here today as we discuss manufacturing here
in New York City.
Before we get started, I sincerely want to thank our
ranking member, Nydia Velazquez, for inviting me to her
district to do this field hearing. The two of us have a very
unusual relationship that is not seen very often in Washington,
D.C. We actually get along and conduct our Committee business
in a bipartisan fashion. Time and time again I have been
impressed with the tenacity, she has for defending and
supporting small businesses, and the commitment she has to
fighting for the people of her congressional district. As she
has said many times, helping our small businesses grow is not a
partisan issue, and we strive to work together in that regard.
I also want to thank our colleague, Greg Meeks, for being
here. We have been on the Foreign Affairs Committee a number of
years together, and have worked very well. And he has that same
attitude also that rather than worrying about the politics of
things, he wants to get the job done. And he works extremely
hard. We are not the same party, so I am telling you as
somebody who has seen these people operate in action, and they
do really a great job for their districts. So I want to commend
them for that.
We will be joined shortly by Congresswoman Yvette Clarke,
and she has that same sort of relationship also in working very
hard for her constituents. So I want to thank all of them for
their work and the work that we don the Small Business
Committee together.
My visit is actually a bit overdue. Back in 2007, Nydia was
kind of enough to come and conduct a hearing in my district,
which is in Cincinnati, the City of Cincinnati, Ohio. That is
right. She was the chairman of this Committee at that time, and
I was the ranking member. If your party is in the majority,
which Republicans are right now in the House of
Representatives, the chairman of the committees or chairwoman
of the committees are Republicans, and the ranking member is
the lead Democrat on the committee. And if the Democrats are in
the majority, which they have been, I was the ranking member,
and she was the chair. I like it better the way it is now
obviously.
[Laughter.]
But it all----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Do not get too confident.
Chairman CHABOT. Do not get confident, that is very true.
Well, I am very glad to be able to come to Nydia's district to
talk about manufacturing here in New York City. While people
often envision manufacturers as giant corporations with huge
production facilities, the truth is that the vast majority of
manufacturing is done by small businesses, by small
manufacturers. In fact, 99 percent of all manufacturers are
considered by definition small. Generally, below 500 employees
is considered in this country as small business, which can be a
fairly large entity.
While they might be small businesses, their effect on our
economy is enormous. Manufacturers employ over 12 million
people all across the country and directly contribute over $2
trillion to our economy each year. We cannot underestimate its
indirect influence either. Every dollar spent on manufacturing
in America adds $1.37 to the economy. A single manufacturing
job can lead to the creation of three to five more jobs in
other industries. Without a doubt, manufacturing plays a
critical role in America's economic wellbeing.
Manufacturers are increasingly participating in
international trade as well. Over the past 25 years, U.S.
manufactured goods exports more than quadrupled. In 1990, for
example, manufacturers in the United States exported $330
billion in goods. By 2000, that number had more than doubled to
over $700 billion in goods, and in 2014 it reached an all-time
for the 5th consecutive year of $1.4 trillion in goods, despite
slowing global growth.
But we can do better. A topic our Committee has examined
extensively is the cost of Federal regulation and how that cost
is borne by various segments of the economy. Research has found
that manufacturers pay over $19,000 per employee per year on
average to comply with Federal regulations, or nearly double
the $10,000 per employee per year borne by firms as a whole.
Small businesses pay a much higher percentage of their revenues
in the cost of regulations than do larger companies. In
addition, small manufacturers, those with fewer than 50
employees, spend two and a half times the amount of large
manufacturers. We must work together to eliminate unnecessary
and burdensome regulations to help unleash the full capacity of
the manufacturing engine.
Another challenge going forward is maintaining a skilled
workforce. The products we build, the way we build them, and
the skills required to do so are different than in generations
past. According to the National Association of Manufacturers,
over the next decade nearly three and a half million
manufacturing jobs will likely be needed, and two million are
expected to go unfilled due to a skills gap. We need to enact
education policies that prioritize these new trades and make
skills training more widespread, more accessible, and more
affordable.
Given the importance of manufacturing to our economy, I am
delighted to be here with all of you today with my colleagues
here in Congress, and I am looking forward to hearing all the
witnesses' testimony here this morning. And I would now like to
yield to Ms. Velazquez for her opening remarks.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Good morning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
really I welcome you to New York City. I want to take this
opportunity to thank you for holding this hearing here in New
York, and also recognize Joe Hartz, who has been very
accommodating. I really appreciate it. My colleague, Gregory
Meeks, thank you for being here, too. Mr. Chairman you have
always been a very strong voice for manufacturers, not just in
the Midwest or your state of Ohio, but around the country. I am
glad we are getting an opportunity to showcase before you some
of the leaders in the New York business community.
What the chairman related to you before is completely true.
My mantra is that when it comes to small business, there is no
Republican or Democratic approach. What we need is to make sure
that we develop the kind of public policy that will enable
small businesses to do what you do best, and that is creating
good jobs.
Across the nation we have seen a manufacturing resurgence.
Following years of decline, in the last 7 years, U.S.
manufacturers added 856,000 workers to their payrolls. Just
last month, 29,000 manufacturing jobs were created, the largest
month-to-month gain since November of 2014. These are positive
developments. With almost one-eighth of our economy rooted in
manufacturing, strengthening this sector is vital to our
country's overall economic health, and to job growth for
working families and the middle class.
While New York City is often thought of as the financial
and media capital, there is also a rich manufacturing history,
and we are seeing growth in this area. In New York's 7th
District, and neighborhoods next to it, we have seen some of
the greatest manufacturing innovation. The Brooklyn Navy Yard
has become a vibrant manufacturing and commercial hub. Today
more than 7,000 people employed in 330 companies, work out of
the Navy Yard. Creative reuse of this space has become a model
for similar projects around the country.
A support city with deep ties to shipping, our
manufacturers are well positioned to export products abroad.
New York manufacturers sell almost $70 billion worth of goods
overseas, and 94 percent of these exporting firms are small
businesses. With exports driving much of manufacturing growth,
New York firms stand to benefit given their proximity to such
an active port system.
Although this renaissance is promising for our city and the
nation as a whole, there remain challenges that are preventing
this sector from reaching its full potential. Here in New York,
some of these hurdles are unique to an urban area. Other issues
are sector-wide regardless of geography.
Connecting workers with employers and addressing small
manufacturers' employment needs is a longstanding challenging.
Many of Brooklyn's neighborhoods are walk to work communities.
To the extent small manufacturers hire locally, we can
strengthen local economies while generating opportunity for
low-income workers.
On a broader scale, we must ensure we are adequately
investing in human resources. Greater federal investment in
science, technology, engineering, math education will enhance
domestic manufacturing. Local and private sector apprenticeship
programs can prepare young people for careers in rapid growth
areas. I would like to hear your thoughts and insights on these
aspects, on these issues.
Transportation and rental costs remain an ongoing challenge
for all manufacturers, but especially New York based. In the
outer boroughs, industrial rents have climbed 10 percent in a
single year. Similarly, transporting goods produced in a
congested, urban market is always more expensive than in rural
areas, one reason I have pushed legislation aimed at
modernizing our freight system.
For manufacturers everywhere, access to capital is a
persistent problem. This is especially true for smaller startup
firms that are on the cusp of fast growth. For this reason, I
introduced the Scale-Up Manufacturing Investment Company Act.
This legislation will expand investment opportunities for small
and emerging manufacturers, and I hope to hear our witnesses'
perspective on it today.
All of these and other challenges point to a need for a
concerted effort at the federal, state, and city level. In
recent years, House Democrats have united behind the Make it in
America agenda, a series of proposals to strengthen and expand
our manufacturing base. Locally, New York City has a 10-point
plan aimed at bolstering our industrial infrastructure and
better train workers.
I would like to see a more holistic, cohesive approach in
terms of the federal, state, and city governments. Each one of
them has programs, and have come up with public policy, but how
can we work together to strengthen what each level of
government is doing in a way that makes sense to the businesses
that are on the ground?
These efforts are important, but they can only succeed if
they are guided by insight from the actual businesses here on
the ground that are fueling our city's manufacturing
renaissance. That is what makes today's hearing so valuable. As
such, I would like to thank all of the witnesses for
participating today. And, again, I thank the chairman for
holding this field hearing.
I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much for your opening
statement. We appreciate that very much.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman, Mr. Meeks, for
the purpose of making an opening statement if he would like to
do so.
Mr. MEEKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
you, Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member Velazquez, for your
thoughtfulness and for your leadership in bringing this hearing
to New York City. It is indeed tremendously important that we
look and listen to our small business folks because that is the
essence of job creation in America, and it is what makes
communities strong. If you go by a community and you do not see
thriving small businesses moving forward, you see a community
that is suffering, that is looking and yearning for jobs.
So I want to thank the witnesses and recognize the
panelists, and the distinguished entrepreneurs, and the leaders
of our community who we will hear from today. And as a member
of the Financial Services Committee, which I serve on with
Ranking Member Velazquez, and, as the chairman indicated, on
the Foreign Affairs Committee, you know, small business is
ripe, and the appropriate Committee to determine how we enhance
manufacturing.
When you look at New York City and our communities, many of
our small business are still recovering from the economic
crises of 2008 and 2009, combined with the destruction of
Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy. In the 5th Congressional
District, businesses like Madelaine Chocolates and Atlantic
Steel faced a 1-2-3 combination that could have been a
deathblow to manufacturing in Queens and in our great city.
But our incredible businesswomen and men, community
development financial institutions like the Disability
Opportunity Fund, and economic zones, including the industrial
business zones in Jamaica and around our Nation's most traveled
international airport, John F. Kennedy Airport, have provided
our region's most skilled entrepreneurs an opportunity to
compete on the world stage. To me, that is vital.
If we have a level playing field, our small businesses can
compete with anybody, any place on this planet. We have the
best minds and the best workers, and all we need is to make
sure that the playing field is level. Let us be reminded that
New York has the 3rd large economy in the United States
trailing only Texas and California. New York's economy is the
15th largest in the world ahead of countries like the
Netherlands and home of Europe's largest cargo port, and just
behind one of our largest trading partners, South Korea.
So to get ahead, we need to address the cost of drag on our
local businesses preventing them from expanding in scale and
diversifying the scope of their products and services. Many of
the most significant impediments that manufacturers in Queens
and across the city face are the growing costs of overseas
transportation, and a shortage of high-skilled workers, and the
shift of budget priorities in Washington that reduced
investment in research and development and other incentives
that are critical to growing a manufacturing base.
Now more than ever, manufacturers face stiffening
competition from global competitors. Without policies to
buttress the tremendous growth that manufacturing is
experiencing in New York City and other places, our city may
find itself slipping in its ability to provide well-paying
competitive jobs. I would remiss if I failed to mention the
substantial and important role, when I look at small
businesses, I think it is tremendously important to make sure
that women and minority-owned businesses are there because they
can contribute positively to the competitiveness in this global
economy.
Throw something out real quick, for instance, the number of
businesses owned by African-American women grew 322 percent
since 1997, making African-American females the fastest-growing
group of entrepreneurs in the United States of America. We have
to make sure that we continue to focus on that.
As the ranking member has said, I am a firm believer of
making it in America and selling it every place else. When we
look at our policies, and whether it is our trade policy, et
cetera, we have got to make sure that we are opening up markets
abroad because some of the markets abroad have been closed to
United States' products. Our trade agreements, et cetera,
should be opening up these markets so that we can get our small
businesses into these markets so that you can grow your
businesses here at home and make sure that there are
opportunities there to create jobs for people right here.
We need to get the message out clearly that outsourcing is
not what you do when you are shipping your goods and your
services, your manufactured goods overseas. That is not
outsourcing. That is creating jobs here in America. That is
what I think that you do and you are looking forwarding to
doing. I want to know what we can do to make sure that you are
successful.
I thank you again for being here, and I thank the chairman
and the ranking member for their wisdom to hold this hearing in
the city that is so great, they had to name it twice--New York,
New York. And I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. I
appreciate your opening statement. And very briefly, I will
explain the timing system here. We operate under what is called
the 5-minute rule. It is pretty straightforward. It means that
each member of the panel, and there are five of them, get to
testify for 5 minutes. We actually have a light up on the clock
to let them know what is going on, and we would ask you to stay
within that as much as possible. We will give you a little
leeway, but not much. We hope you stay within that rule. We
limit ourselves to 5 minutes in asking questions when you are
all finished.
I would now like to yield to the ranking member, Ms.
Velazquez, for the purpose of introducing our very
distinguished panel of experts here this morning.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
first open the witness panel by introducing Mr. Adam Friedman.
He is the third executive director of the Pratt Center for
Community Development, and the founding director of the New
York Industrial Retention Network where he led efforts to
strengthen the city's manufacturing sector and promote
sustainable development. He is one of New York City's leading
advocates in support of manufacturing and employment
opportunities it brings.
Then I would like to also introduce Ms. Bob Bland, a
Brooklyn-based fashion designer, entrepreneur, and community
organizer. She is the CEO and founder of MANUFACTURE New York,
a fashion incubator and factory dedicated to providing
independent designers with the resources they need to
streamline production and transform local manufacturing.
She will be followed by Mr. Michael DiMarino, president of
Linda Tool, a second generation family business that
manufacturers precision machine components and assemblies.
Linda Tool's state-of-the-art manufacturing facility is located
in the historic Red Hook neighborhood, part of my district in
Brooklyn, New York. Mr. DiMarino has participated in the launch
of Goldman Sachs 10,000 Small Business Program, as well as the
UBS Mentorship Program. Socially committed to the restoration
of the community, Linda Tool is also participating in a number
of green initiatives designed to promote a healthy,
sustainable, and safe working environment for its employees.
He will be followed by Ms. Nekisia Davis, founder and owner
of Early Bird Foods, which makes small batch granola and other
foods by hand. Prior to starting this business, Ms. Davis
managed a famous local pizzeria and sold her granola at local
markets, including the Brooklyn Flea Market. Now, they are
located in Brooklyn's own Red Hook neighborhood.
She will be followed by Mr. Edward Jacobs, co-founder and
CTO of FXE Industries. His startup company is based in the
historic Brooklyn Navy Yard and focuses on advanced motorcycle
design, engineering, and manufacturing. With over 10 years of
experience, Mr. Jacobs uses an innovative approach to
manufacturing that offers greater accessibly to customers.
And with that, Mr. Friedman, welcome.

STATEMENTS OF ADAM FRIEDMAN, DIRECTOR, PRATT CENTER FOR
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK; BOB BLAND, CEO AND
FOUNDER, MANUFACTURE NY, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK; MICHAEL DIMARINO,
OWNER, LINDA TOOL, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK; NEKISIA DAVIS, FOUNDER
AND OWNER, EARLY BIRD FOODS & CO., LLC, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK; AND
EDWARDS JACOBS, FXE INDUSTRIES, BROOKLYN NAVY YARD, BROOKLYN,
NEW YORK

STATEMENT OF ADAM FRIEDMAN

Chairman CHABOT. You are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank
you very much.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. I appreciate your efforts to reach out to the
manufacturing community in New York. I thank you on behalf of
every member, every participant on this panel.
I am the director of the Pratt Center for Community
Development, which provides research, and urban planning, and
economic development services in low-income communities and to
small businesses through the city. I am also the chair of the
Urban Manufacturing Alliance, which is a network of about 350
economic development practitioners in 100 cities across the
country, all committed to sharing research, to collaborating
and program development, and to try and articulate the urban
perspective in the debate around economic development policy,
particularly industrial development.
I hope you all have the Power Point presentation, so let's
s just go to the first pie chart, which is on page 2, and this
kind of says why we do it. It's because of the jobs that
manufacturing brings. I'm sorry, it's at page 1 for you all,
and it's that pie chart. What it shows is manufacturing is
still the best way to get a decent, well-paying job,
particularly for people who have limited levels of educational
attainment.
Chairman CHABOT. Excuse me, Mr. Friedman. You may want to
pull the microphone a little closer to your mouth just to make
that folks all over the room can hear you, too. Thank you.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Okay, thank you. So the top of the second
page you have this chart, and this really picks up on something
that the chair said earlier. Urban manufacturing is small
business, but large job numbers. In New York City, for example,
the average manufacturer employs only 15 people.
Let's go to the bottom of that page, the urban
manufacturing challenges. Sometimes I'll be meeting with a
manufacturer, and I feel like saying to him something like,
run, save yourself, you know? This is a crazy place to do
business. Your neighborhood can be rezoned at any point. You
have crumbling infrastructure and tremendous conflict for land.
Third, even if your neighborhood is not rezoned, it could be
converted to a vintage clothing store. There's tremendous
pressure on manufacturers in New York City.
At the beginning Congresswoman Velazquez said there are
normal anxieties that manufacturers face, and there are these
problems that are kind of unique to urban areas, and they
should have an influence on the program design that we'll talk
about later.
If we go to the next slide about the rebirth of urban
manufacturing, this is how it's done. You know, we have lost
the large companies like Farberware that made pots and pans and
Swingline that made staplers because they were large commodity
products. They didn't have a real reason for being in a city,
let alone New York City. But what's left here are the high
value added producers that have a reason for being here because
of proximity to market, proximity to the design talent, to a
highly skilled workforce. On today's panel I think we have some
great examples of how the competitive advantages of a city can
really work for a manufacturer.
Let's look at some of the advantages that we have, the next
one on high-tech manufacturing. I want to say at the outset
technology is not the only way to create high value in a
product. But high-tech advanced manufacturing is overwhelmingly
concentrated in urban areas around the country. This is data
gathered by Brookings Institute, and 95 percent of all the
advanced manufacturing in the United States is in urban areas.
The second reason for the rebirth of urban manufacturing is
cities are the centers of innovation. This is the graphic with
the map of the United States. It's number 7 I think. So in
addition to technology, design is often critical, and cities
are where the universities are. For example, in New York City,
New York Schools each year award 4,000 degrees in design and
architecture. That is a tremendous economic engine. In
addition, universities are increasingly the launch pad for
entrepreneurs. At University of Cincinnati, first batch
graduates of a design department apply to be in this incubator,
and not only are they launched, but they are hooked up with
local manufacturers so that the jobs that are created are
created locally.
The last slide on the rebirth of urban manufacturing, 8,
which is changes in technology benefit cities. It's not only
that we have new micro technology, like 3D printers and CNC
equipment which is shrinking factories, it's also how that
technology is organized. We have co-location, co-working spaces
which Bob Bland can talk about because that's what MANUFACTURE
New York is.
In addition, we're seeing a growing amount of space sharing
and operations like Tech Shop, which is kind of a gym model,
which for about hundred dollars a month, you go in and you can
have access to equipment in a factory. The barriers to starting
up are far less than ever used to be.
Thank you. Slide 9, the emergence of micro manufacturing,
this is the result. We have manufacturers that employ one
people, two people, and that's what growing in the United
States. The congresswoman mentioned the Brooklyn Navy as a
great launch pad for companies, and we'll hear more about that
today. The secret to their success is that they're a nonprofit,
and because they're mission driven and because they're not
going to convert their space to a different type of use,
companies have the security to invest, to train their workers,
to build a network, to build relationships with the surrounding
community.
This is not unique to New York. This a national movement.
It's true in San Francisco. It's true in Indianapolis. It's
rising up across the country.
Let me go to the last slide on Federal policy. There's a
need to sort of retool the traditional Federal policies and
programming that's been used to support manufacturing. So start
with, for example, new market tax credits, it's increasingly
difficult to use in urban because of the restrictions on
eligibility for certain census tracts. You get one market rate
housing project in a census tract, bam, you know. The entire
census tract is ineligible. Arguably, these are exactly the
locations where manufacturing should be taking root to prevent
gentrification.
Second, industrial development bonds. The caps haven't been
raised in years, and that money just does not go very far in
urban areas. Really what's needed is a scan across Federal
programming to weed out sort of the provisions that are kind of
obsolete and that work against urban manufacturing.
Two final points. I have met with easily a thousand
manufacturers over the past 20, 30-odd years, and I've been on
a thousand shop floors. I can count on one hand the time a
manufacturer has said to me cut taxes and I'll create jobs. Not
the issue. At least not the issue for high value added
manufacturing. They're concerned about infrastructure. They're
concerned about education as the chair said at the beginning.
They're concerned about getting their product to market. It's
return on investment that's important, not just simply cutting
costs.
The last point I wanted to make, because it's kind of
counterintuitive, has to do with if you want an entrepreneurial
society, you have to provide healthcare. I'm on an advisory
board for Etsy, and I was at a meeting a couple of months ago,
and the subject came up. So here's an entire massive
organization devoted to launching new businesses. How can you
launch a new business? How can you put your family at risk by
walking away from a company that provides healthcare and start
your own enterprise? So we've got to figure out some way to
make healthcare more accessible, even beyond what it is today.
Make it universal if you really want to have an entrepreneurial
society.
Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The one thing I did
not note, there is a little doorbell like sound that goes off
at the end of the 5 minutes, so just so you know.
Ms. Bland, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BOB BLAND

Ms. BLAND. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Ms.
Velazquez, and members of this Committee for the opportunity to
testify. Thanks also to our local representatives for your
tireless commitment to retaining equitable opportunities for
working and middle class New Yorkers and their families.
My name is Bob Bland, and I'm the CEO and founder of
MANUFACTURE New York. I created MANUFACTURE New York in 2012 to
rethink the fashion ecosystem and create a new vertically
integrated 21st century business model that serves the
industry's domestic urban manufacturing needs of today and the
future. Our mission is to reawaken and rebuild America's
fashion industry, foster the next wave of businesses, and
create a transparent, sustainable global supply chain.
In the past 3 and a half years, we have grown our community
to over 10,000 American designers, manufacturers,
technologists, and proponents of domestic production, helped
150 small businesses here in New York City to successfully
launch or reshore their apparel lines, and piloted incubator
programs for startups in fashion and contracting manufacturing,
and accelerated programs for wearable tech startups, thanks in
part to the generous support of the SBA Growth Accelerator
Fund, which is a great example of a program to help not just
small business, but incubator and accelerator programs
themselves because they're usually small businesses, and they
need help starting up, too.
Since the recession, virtually all small creative and
manufacturing businesses in New York City have had the exact
same challenges. It was stunning for me at the beginning as a
designer finding out that my contract manufacturers had the
exact same problems that I did, access to affordable industrial
space. Long-term leases, major problem. Relocation grants and
construction loans are very hard to come by when you are
displaced.
Access to affordable housing is increasingly becoming
impossible here in New York City, especially within a
reasonable commutable distance. For instance, we have 40
percent of our apparel manufacturing workforce here in New York
City in the Flushing area of Queens, and getting them down to
South Brooklyn, how in the world do you do that? We have major
transportation problems.
There's very low access to working capital that's
affordable, and also lines of credit to grow our small
businesses, and that's still a huge, major problem. Access to
competitive equipment procurement and training programs that
are sector specific so that we can adapt to our rapidly-
changing industry, are very necessary. They need to also be
nationalized in a way that can result in certifications so that
people can understand across States and across cities.
Fashion design and manufacturing jobs are more than just
jobs. They're inclusive pathways to careers and potential
business ownership themselves regardless of educational
background or socioeconomic statutes. Typically they pay on
average apparel manufacturing $59,750 a year, which is a good
job, and they're likely to include benefits and a clear path
for growth. Also, skills training is typically included, and
opportunities to advance in management positions and beyond.
The New York City fashion ecosystem is unique in that
historically New York's iconic garment district in 1931 was the
largest garment district in the world. I'd like to say it's the
original fashion incubator, and the original incubator program.
It was because of the co-location and the proximity of all of
the different parts of the supply chain together. It employed 1
million people at its height here in New York City. While it is
contracted now to 15,000 apparel manufacturers total for the
entire city as of this year, that still accounts for 30 percent
of manufacturers in New York City. It's still a very huge
sector when it comes to manufacturing. Every single one of
those jobs are important.
We have several opportunities coming up at the intersection
of fashion sustainability and technology if we seize the moment
for urban manufacturing here in New York. There's already 900
fashion companies headquartered here in New York City that
employ 180,000 people and generate over $11 billion in wages
and $2 billion taxes per year, so it's a big business. The
industry at large is a $4 trillion global business, but we're
also the number two polluter in the world right behind oil,
which is shocking to most people.
From the smallest emerging design startups that are
MANUFACTURE New York to the largest department stores and
conglomerates, everyone is looking for a solution that includes
conceptualization, research and development, commercialization,
and a shared set of resources and best practices to capture
value and provide accountability at all stages of the supply
chain. That's an area that New York City could really take
hold, and then connect with other urban manufacturing centers
all throughout the United States.
I'd like to say that the best example I've seen of that so
far, Representative Ms. Velazquez, you were saying, is that
we're now part of one of the Manufacturing Innovation
Institutes. That is an Obama Administration initiative to
create these advanced manufacturing institutes. The one that
we're in is the Revolutionary Textile and Fibers Manufacturing
Institute.
And I would like to say that that program--I'd love to give
you more information about it--really needs to be expanded to
other urban centers because it's a way for us to bring all the
stakeholders to the table, all the national educational
institutions, all of the state organizations, workforce
training, and then to create this network nationally for a
specific sector, in this case, the next generation of textiles
and fibers.
So thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
Mr. DiMarino, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL DiMARINO

Mr. DiMARINO. Good morning, and thank you all for inviting
me to testify before this Committee. I'm Mike DiMarino,
president of Linda Tool. We're a second-generation family-owned
manufacturer of precision machine components and assemblies
located in Brooklyn, New York. Linda Tool has been located in
Brooklyn since its inception in 1952.
Manufacturing in New York has always been so much of a
challenge as it has been a blessing. New York has always
enjoyed a rich history of manufacturing and cutting-edge
technology. I'll give you a few examples.
Most people don't realize that New York is the proud home
of the Coleman gas lamp mantle which was invented on Canal
Street in New York City. The company today, Navis Global, is
still a major customer of Linda Tool and has been since 1964.
It now produces high-tech cloth processing equipment, and
Linda Tool makes components that no other company has ever made
New York is also home to the largest manufacturer of window
envelope machinery in the world, F.L. Smithe, located on West
44th through West 48th Street and West Street in Manhattan.
This was a cutting technology in its day. The Bahama Hinge
Company, which probably most of the doors in this room have on
them, was also located in Brooklyn, and AMF, the maker of
bowling alley equipment, was located in Brooklyn, and now
houses Lutheran Medical Center. Mergenthaler Linotype,
Correcto-Type, even Ex-Lax belongs in New York City. These are
all companies with cutting-edge technology in their heyday.
As it was in 1950, 2016 New York City is still a great
place to manufacturer and has so much to offer. New York now
boasts a robust 3D printer industry, a rapidly-growing drone
manufacturing sector, and cutting-edge technology in recycling
and biofuel. Honeybee Robotics of Manhattan was instrumental in
development of the Mars Land Rover. This is all made possible
by the opportunities that New York has to offer.
Most recently, New York City Schools have placed an
emphasis on the development of manufacturing skills. Linda Tool
recently hired two graduates from City Tech who went through
their manufacturing engineering curriculum. These two new
employees have the skills necessary to help Linda Tool move
forward in the next phase of manufacturing. Their skills
acquired in school, coupled with Linda Tool's old world
training, is already paying off with some great advanced
technology capabilities.
The schools are on the right track, but need more hands-on
training in this curriculum as this would make graduates much
more job ready. I personally would love to see an
apprenticeship program for the manufacturing sector in place in
the future.
The challenges are many. They are difficult, but you can
understand some of it. Trying to marry urban life with
industrial production is a challenge for anybody or any city
that tries to do it. The New York City industrial business
zones are one aspect that helps those of us trying to maintain
a viable manufacturing business in New York.
One of the main challenges going forward is the loss of
commercial industrial property. Gentrification is probably the
biggest obstacle. As commercial and industrial areas are
rezoned, it drives the price of real estate to such levels that
economics just fail in trying to maintain a business. The
preservation of the IBZs will greatly help with this, but they
must be maintained.
The ability to move in this sector of technology can only
have good benefits for all. Linda Tool itself was once an old
world smoky, poorly lit, hazardous place to be employed. Today
it is a modern, air-conditioned, well-lit, well-equipped
manufacturing facility that boasts an employment stay of 15
years. We're also one of the few, if not the only, manufacturer
in New York City that boasts a green roof on the entire roof of
its facility.
We also have a wage scale that meets or exceeds our
industry, and personally it is very satisfying to see employees
of the company thrive. The higher wage scale is because of our
ability to introduce more advanced technology into our
business. This may not result in the head counts of yesteryear,
but it most certainly lends itself to a higher-paying job for
those that acquire the skills to do so.
Looking back, New York has always been a technology leader
in many aspects. Obviously the technology has changed
drastically, and many today have no idea of some of the things
that were previously mentioned in this testimony. Regardless,
New York was always a leader in advanced technology whatever
the era. Looking to the future, I believe there is a bright
spot for us in the manufacturing sector as long as preserve our
industrial zones and concentrate on educating and training our
youth, providing them with hands-on learning and what to expect
in the working world. A good part of that is the work that our
local development organizations are doing, coupled with the
work that the Federal and local government is contributing.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Ms. Davis, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NEKISIA DAVIS

Ms. DAVIS. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and also Congressman Meeks. I am honored to be here
today to testify.
My name is Nekisia Davis. I'm the owner of Early Bird Foods
in Red Hook, Brooklyn. We're a very small manufacturer of
granola and granola bars. As Ranking Member Velazquez says, I
started the company when I was managing a restaurant in
Brooklyn called Franny's. I brought granola in to co-workers,
and there was kind of like a small cult that was formed, and it
was within a year that I was a full-time granola maker.
To say that I had no idea what I was doing is a giant
understatement. I had been fumbling into being a small business
owner every step of the way. I feel like I'm at a table of
people who are so articulate and know exactly what they're
doing, and I am learning every day. Every single day I learn
how to be a better businessperson, and I think I'm definitely
not one of few. There are a lot of people that are in the same
industry as me that are kind of doing the same thing.
We now have six full-time employees, two part-time
employees. We have many selling channels. We distribute our
goods throughout the United States, very soon to China, Japan,
the United Kingdom. I sell direct to a lot of stores in the
U.S., and then also we have pretty good Web site sales.
I think we tapped into something that was very familiar
that we approached in a unique way. I developed a palate
through working at some of the best restaurants in New York
that allowed me to kind of approach in a new way in how to make
it. It's been very successful. Within the first 3 months of my
business, I was on the Martha Stewart Show making granola with
Martha. I had a write-up in the New York Times, New York
Magazine. I was on the shelf at Whole Foods--that was my second
account--all because of the community that I've created through
working in restaurants and food with chefs and wonderful people
here in this city.
At that time, it felt like small food manufacturing in this
city was in its infancy. It was difficult to find a place to
legally produce food, and no one really knew what to do or how
to do it. You certainly couldn't make it in your kitchen, and
you didn't really know what the other option was. I kind of
fumbled around to a couple of different office cooperatives. I
landed in an incubator kitchen in Coney Island where I would
have to lug 50-pound bags of oats and sunflower seeds into my
car, load them into the kitchen, and, 1, 2, 3, go, bake as hard
and fast as I could, package, label, clean, load back into my
car, bring it back home, and come back and do the same thing
the next day. It was a very, very challenging time.
I took out a very small loan from a friend, built out a
space in 2001. It was 900 square feet. I quickly realized
within a week it had improper electric to run all the equipment
I needed, and I was there for 4 years doing kind of a gamble, a
jump around and forth.
Two years ago, I was able to take out a business loan. I
had been in business for 5 years, and I had a bank that
believed in me, which I was very proud of. We built a warehouse
and commercial kitchen in Red Hook, and I fear that we'll
outgrow it probably in another 2 years, although I have a lease
secured for another 8.
We have had very, very good luck in business. We've always
been a business people love. I was raised in the way of the
Danny Meyer hospitality. You have to run your business with
compassion and empathy, and take care of your people first,
take care of your customers second. It's worked very well, and
I think that it resonates well with people. We have very, very
loyal customers because of it.
Now, in all this sweet hippy granola fest, we have a lot of
challenges. The number one challenge for me is workers' comp
insurance. We are in a classification of manufacturing, and I
don't know if I share the same issue with people at the table
here, but we pay 3 times the rate of a cook in a restaurant
kitchen, and that is a very high-risk job. The highest risk
that I have in my kitchen is someone getting a burn on their
arm. It's just very, very low risk. We're baking oats in an
oven, and letting them cool, and putting them into a bag. The
numbers I pay for workers' comp are astronomical. There's no
one that I can talk to or convince that these rates are not
appropriate to the amount of risk that we have.
Another issue has been with landlord-tenant relations. I
feel like a landlord to provide a safe place for us to do
business, to help facilitate business is just a given. I've had
a lot of problems with landlords not having equipment that's
working properly, and it really, really hinders our business. I
had a freight elevator in my last kitchen go down for 3 weeks
with no attempt to get it fixed. I had a P.O. that was supposed
to go out to Whole Foods. I mean, my business was pretty
paralyzed for 3 weeks. Thousands and thousands of dollars of
business was lost.
When I attempted to negotiate a rent break from the
landlord because of the loss in business, not only were we not
helped out, but we were turned against. We were discriminated
against as women, being told that we didn't know what we were
doing because we're women in business. He turned against us, he
sued us, doubled our rent, and evicted us, and we had no power
at all.
I think the final thing beyond those struggles, obviously
getting capital to buy bigger, save money, it's very, very
difficult. I acquired capital to build out the kitchen where I
am now, and I just can't have access to anymore because I have
such a large amount that's borrowed. We have excellent credit.
We have excellent annual revenue. We just don't have access to
anything. We are trying to keep up and grow at the same time.
It's very a paralyzing feeling. Cash flow is growing smaller by
the day.
I want to thank you again, and say in these moments we have
to zoom out and remember this is one moment in a long journey.
To have the collaboration and the care from the three of you is
very comforting. Again, I'm honored to be here today.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Jacobs, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD JACOBS

Mr. JACOBS. Good morning, Ranking Member Ms. Velazquez,
Chairman Chabot, and other members of this Committee.
My name is Edward Jacobs, a Pratt graduate with a focus on
industrial design, architecture, and engineering. Most of my
adult life has been spent living and working within New York
City being a designer and working initially with smaller-scale
products. One quickly recognizes the challenges of sourcing
manufacturers locally while attempting to secure reasonable
pricing affordability and access to product.
I'm honored to be here with you today to talk about
attempting to navigate the manufacturing community locally in
New York City, nationally living in other States, and
internationally sourcing to eventually manufacturers ourselves
with FXE Industries.
FXE is a startup focusing on transportation and, more
specifically, advanced motorcycle design and engineering. Our
approach is a holistic one that bridges the gap typically found
between fields within the realm of manufacturing. This is a
modular approach to large-scale manufacturing that allows us to
circumvent some of the pitfalls of highly-specialized niche
employment, and, in turn, allows us to train and foster greater
technical manufacturing abilities in house. This approach will
allow us to offer accessibility of product so we may open up
the market to a significantly greater number of customers.
We're in the process of securing 50,000 square feet of
design, engineering, and manufacturing space. This opportunity
to grow to a 100-plus team has ultimately been afforded to by
the Brooklyn Navy Yard. I initially became a tenant of Brooklyn
Navy Yard through New Lab. It's where I grew my first design
and engineering company, DNI. New Lab is a great example of an
entity that is helping enable a very substantial evolution in
specialized manufacturing.
A good example of this is DNI's design, engineering, and
sourcing for the Lowline underground park to be located at the
base of the Williamsburg Bridge that has many challenges in its
initial stages to be completed. This is an example of a
potential large-scale architectural project with global
implications. The entire project has been designed, engineered,
sourced, and manufactured all in New York City.
The basis of this project being support of plant life and
public space below the surface of the earth is a great example
of the full spectrum of manufacturing and tremendous social
impact New York can foster. This correlates directly with what
FXE is attempting. Choosing to operate here in NYC with the
sheer density and diversity will allow us a fantastic base of
talent, younger, older, from all fields and walks of life to
pull from. Being a new manufacturer and being supported and
supporting establishments like the Brooklyn Navy Yard makes us
very hopeful for the new positive city building manufacturing
efforts growing within the 21st century in NYC.
I think a lot of the challenges that we've had have been
finding funding outside of private funding. It seems as though
a lot of the funding or the establishments are treated more the
same kind of treatment we get from a bank. I think there needs
to be development of a different spirit in lending where maybe
people can actually view a business plan, make competent
decisions so that startups, smaller entities can actually get
capital to grow. And there's one other educational kind of gap
that I see personally because of my background in industrial
design and engineering. There isn't an educational element that
bridges this foundation gap that you've seen throughout the
years. There's definitely a rift.
And so, I think there's an opportunity there in New York to
bridge this gap. I think what we have educational kind of
institutional wise, bridging the gap between a few of them can
really open up a whole new industry.
Thank you very much. I'm totally honored to be here. I
really appreciate the time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. I want to thank all
the members of the panel for their testimony, really excellent
testimony from each one. I would now like to turn to the
ranking member. I am going to allow her to ask her questions
first.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Bland, why did
you choose to locate your facility here in New York City? What
advantage does your business have over others because of its
location?
Ms. BLAND. Well, we are located in Sunset Park at Liberty
View Industrial Plaza, which is a development by Sumar
Properties. The reason we are located there is because Sunset
Park is a walk to work neighborhood that has many, many people
who are already familiar with manufacturing. It is primarily a
Latino and East Asian base, so a lot of these folks already
have apparel manufacturing skills. It makes it much easier for
us to hire people.
The reason for New York is because the fashion industry is
iconic to New York City, and there are already so many skilled
people also closing the loop in having all the designers, all
of the development, and then also the sampling, how they are
making all of it right in New York makes so much sense for
these brands. It is starting to make more and sense. For
instance, we just picked up Calvin Klein as a client. That was
not something that we were expecting to happen this soon,
because they are starting to pay attention to, oh, we need to
do our development closer to home. New York City has a really
incredible opportunity there.
For all of our startups, having the access to the major
media outlets and having all of the really good press, it very
much helps startups to get the word out about their new
products and their new businesses, as well as Silicon Alley,
the new fashion tech scene, the wearable tech scene. We are not
seeing a lot of venture capital go into anything besides tech
anymore. We have to take advantage of the fact that we are a
fashion capital, and make sure that there is not a bunch of
money being sunk into ugly products that do not make sense and
do not work for the customer, and that no one in fashion has
been consulted on them.
Instead we work with companies and work with VCs to ensure
that they are employing the local workforce, and that everyone
can take advantage of this opportunity, and that is going to
require a lot of STEM training. That is going to require a lot
of engineering, science, and other training to be combined with
commercial manufacturing. We see a next generation of jobs
there.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Thank you. I am so proud that we
worked to prevent that building from being sold----
Ms. BLAND. We are so grateful----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ.--and putting it up for auction.
Ms. BLAND. Thank you for your support.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Sure. Mr. Jacobs.
Mr. JACOBS. Yes?
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. There is a large and growing gap between
idea conception and sustainable sales that every manufacturer
must go through, the valley of death. Bridging that financial
gap is critical for success, but often funding for companies at
this stage is difficult to secure because of the inherent risk.
Can you describe your difficulties in obtaining financing at
this stage?
Mr. JACOBS. Yeah, absolutely. A lot of the challenges have
been since we do not have a lot of assets to leverage, that,
you know, borrowing can be very difficult. We have actually
tried multiple ways to secure financing. Most of it has been
from independent private financing, but we also have gone the
EB-5 route. But there seems to be a large challenge because EB-
5 funding seems to focus more so on real estate endeavors
because of their inherent lower risk. And also one of the other
panel members mentioned tech investment. It seems that everyone
through all of our meetings is always looking for a strictly
tech angle, almost looking for a very quick return, like a
Google or, you know, some type of explosion because of some
tech industry thing.
I do not know if it is because of a lack of understanding
about some of the basic things in hard product design and
manufacturing, but there seems to be, I guess, kind of just a
rose-colored glasses effect on the tech industry that people
are very much looking for a quick return.
What we are doing is something that we believe, it is more
of a long-term thing. Any large-scale manufacturing endeavor is
not a 1- or 2-year, you know, quick return things. It is a 10-,
15-year thing endeavor. I think sustained growth absolutely,
but to find the people that are doing it, very difficult.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. Ms. Davis, pretty soon we are
going to be voting on a trade agreement, and we know that small
exporters, small businesses are the majority of exporters. Yet
if they do business with just one country, they will have only
one customer in that country. I would like to hear from you,
can you discuss your efforts to export your goods, and what
challenges you have faced in doing business internationally?
Ms. DAVIS. Well, I think the biggest challenge is to try to
get it to a place where they can sell it. There are so many
costs that are involved in shipping. Me saying that we
distribute to China, this is the first round of going to China.
The taxes on goods that come in I think is something like 30
percent, and I don't know where that can be minimized, but that
is a huge, huge challenge is to get the goods, which are
already very expensive. My profit margins are right where they
need to be in order to keep going just to try to get pricing.
When we do work with a distributor, it is really for kind
of one place, and there does not seem to be a whole lot of
expansion possible. I work with one distributor that sells to
markets and dispensers in London, but that is the only person
they sell to.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. And just tell me with a yes or no answer,
have you contacted or used any of the programs through the
federal Department of Commerce or the Small Business
Administration----
Ms. DAVIS. No.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ.--to help you in that regard?
Ms. DAVIS. No.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. The gentlelady's time has expired. I
will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
With the four of you from here to here, let me ask you,
when you started out your business, was it just yourself? Did
you have anybody else? How many employees do you have now? We
will just go down the line so we can get a good idea of what
size businesses we are talking. Mr. Jacobs?
Mr. JACOBS. Yes, thank you. We started with two employees,
myself and a co-founder, Francois Terney, and we have expanded
now a very small amount. We only have four employees. We are
looking to expand within 2017 up to 50,000 square feet, and
probably----
Chairman CHABOT. So you have doubled two to four and maybe
even further.
Mr. JACOBS. Yeah.
Chairman CHABOT. Over what period of time is that?
Mr. JACOBS. Probably about a year and a half.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay, thank you.
Mr. JACOBS. Yeah.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Ms. Davis?
Ms. DAVIS. I started alone and was alone for several years.
I now have a team of eight including me, and we have been in
business for 7 years.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. Mr. DiMarino?
Mr. DiMARINO. Now we have 28. When I started working in the
company in 1975 we were three.
Chairman CHABOT. 1975 did you say?
Mr. DiMARINO. That is when I started working there, we were
three.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah.
Mr. DiMARINO. Now we are 28, but we also survived the
recession and did not lay anybody off through all that, which
was pretty difficult. But we are able to maintain our force and
expand it a little bit.
Chairman CHABOT. Absolutely, thank you. Ms. Bland?
Ms. BLAND. We started with just me, and 3 and a half years
we now have nine full-time W-2 employees, and then two part-
time W-2 employees. We have 20 businesses on site, and they all
have one or more employees.
Chairman CHABOT. Excellent. You literally are the backbone
of this economy, small businesses. Congratulations to each of
you for what you have accomplished. It is very impressive, it
really is.
Mr. Friedman, let me ask you, you had mentioned the New
Market Tax Credit Program. We use that pretty extensively in
Cincinnati, especially in revitalizing the downtown area, and
we have been pretty successful. In fact, the chairwoman at the
time came there and saw a few years back what they are doing
down there.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Our committee, Small Business, while I was
the chair was one that worked on the legislation.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah. We had a bunch of our colleagues
came from other communities around the country to kind of learn
about the New Market Tax Credit Program. Now, you mentioned
there are some things that could be better. Could you tell the
folks how that works in about a minute's time, and what
improvements you might make?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. In determining whether or not a project is
eligible for new market tax credits, they look at the Census
tracts and the income population in the Census tracts, and I
think it is increasingly targeted to highly distressed
communities.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. What has happened, in part because it is a
reflection of the density in cities, if you have a small
housing development that is market rate, it will skew the
income for that neighborhood so that it knocks out the entire
Census tract and everything sort of in proximity to it because
there is a boundary. It is not only your Census tract. It is
the adjacent tract.
Chairman CHABOT. So would it be your recommendation that
that is something that Congress ought to look at and maybe
adjust accordingly?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Yes, for industrial projects. Our resources
are scarce, and we recognize that, and we have to figure out
how to use it more effectively. Certainly beyond the industrial
development side, yes.
Chairman CHABOT. I would yield.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you for yielding. The main mission of
the market is to create jobs that will benefit low-income
communities. Because of gentrification and displacement, we
have an issue, but it is worth revisiting when we have to
reauthorize.
Chairman CHABOT. That is the kind of stuff that we have
worked on in a bipartisan manner over the years. We will look
at that as a result of this hearing.
Let me ask the four of you again. I think you said no, but
has anybody had occasion to use the services of the SBA in the
past, the Small Business Administration, either alone or
anything? Mr. Jacobs, what was your experience or what did you
use them for?
Mr. JACOBS. My experience was when the storm hit, initially
before we started or before I started FXE, my business partner
had another company, DNI. It was out on a pier in Red Hook, and
the whole place got flooded, 65 inches. Everything was
literally destroyed. I was able to get an SBA disaster loan to
continue----
Chairman CHABOT. Speaking of that storm, by the way, Ms.
Velazquez was able to get some legislation passed through
Congress that had a dramatic impact on that, you know. Did you
want to talk about, Nydia?
Mr. JACOBS. Thank you for that.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. What we found was the fact that the decline
rate of disaster loans was extremely high, and I asked for the
GAO to conduct an investigation that basically validated my
worst fears, that too many loans were declined. Many small
businesses on the Lower East Side, and in Red Hook were
impacted, and did not have an opportunity to get the assistance
that they needed.
For the first time in the history of the program through my
legislation, it was reopened. Any business that did not get a
loan could reapply, and anyone who lost their business could
also reapply.
Mr. JACOBS. One thing. Thank you very much for the efforts
you put forward in that. One thing I would just like to say
maybe so you would know, they actually made me leverage my
actual home, though, which if I did not own a property I would
not have been able to get that loan.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Well, now we changed it.
Mr. JACOBS. Okay, fantastic. Thank you.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Okay.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
The gentleman, Mr. Meeks, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MEEKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. I just
want to thank each and every one of these panelists.
Extraordinary is what makes America America. You are stick-to-
it, and I know it is difficult. Let me ask, I know Ms. Davis
was asked, but let me ask Mr. Jacobs first. Have you utilized
any, whether it is SBA, whether it is the U.S. Department of
Commerce? You indicated that you were looking to do things
internationally also. Is that correct?
Mr. JACOBS. Yes.
Mr. MEEKS. Whether it is the Ex-Im Bank or OPIC, have you
utilized any of the government programs to try to help enhance
your business?
Mr. JACOBS. In FXE, there are a few things that have been
done. I am basically behind the computer doing all the
engineering and the components and everything. We have a
different entity in our company that could probably speak a
little bit more.
I mainly do all the engineering and all the design work
actually, so I am not the one to focus on the international
kind of financing. The only internationally that we have
attempted to do is the EB-5 Program, which it does not seem to
be a program that is very stable, and there seems to be like a
loopholes and a lot of strangeness to it. Again, it focuses
more so on real estate and very low-risk investment where we
need that to be kind of be able to take a higher risk, you
know, and invest in companies like ours.
Mr. MEEKS. Ms. Davis, you indicated you are starting to go
into China, et cetera. Have you looked toward, and I listened
to your three problems. One, workers' compensation insurance,
two, landlord relations, three, access to capital, and breaking
down barriers internationally. I think that is indicated by
Ranking Member Velazquez, trade agreements that we are looking
at, whether or not they break down some of those barriers.
My question, have you looked at Ex-Im Bank, for example, or
OPIC, or any other government, you know, using the U.S.
Commerce. They have a program or the Chamber of Commerce. I do
not know if any of you are involved in the Chamber of Commerce,
whether it is the Brooklyn Chamber or the U.S. Chamber. Have
you utilized any of those entities to help you to grow and to
move forward with reference to the company?
Ms. DAVIS. I have not really, and honestly I am not too
aware of what is available to me. I think that is simply
because I spend most of my time chasing people for money to pay
my Amex bill. To be completely honest, to even imagine spending
enough time to devote to get into one of those systems or in
one of the programs, it is seems overwhelming, and maybe it is
not. But I have not ever because of that.
Mr. MEEKS. I am sure it is overwhelming. You are trying to
run a business, and you are trying to do a number of things.
Ms. DAVIS. Yeah.
Mr. MEEKS. Chasing and finding out what program is there or
not there is not something that is your focus.
Ms. DAVIS. No.
Mr. MEEKS. Your focus is move your product on a day-to-day
basis. But I do want to let you know that there are, especially
internationally, some opportunities for financing and access to
capital. We have been putting a very tough fight as far as the
reauthorization of Ex-Im Bank to make sure that they are
catering to small businesses to help them do exports. I wanted
to bring that to your attention.
Mr. DiMarino, let me ask you. You have been in business a
long time. Have you utilized any of the government services or
government programs that may be available to help you enhance
and grow your business?
Mr. DiMARINO. No loans through the SBA, but we were able to
put our green roof through the good graces of Congressman
Velazquez on our facility with a Federal grant, which was quite
a project.
Mr. MEEKS. Ms. Bland, same question.
Ms. BLAND. Yeah. We have won a couple of grants from the
SBA to run our incubator program, and then to expand our
incubator program to include contract manufacturers, so we are
very grateful for that. Also we were asked to come down and
talk with SBA about the importance of having a classification
for microbusinesses. I was astonished when I found out
originally what the definition of a ``small business'' was for
the United States, and that is still something that completely
vexes me. I consider 500 employees to be a huge business, you
know. There are a lot of smaller businesses that are 25 people
and under, and they deserve a specific type of support. I
appreciate them having us talk about that.
Mr. MEEKS. I think that we need to make sure that those
agencies are getting back out to small business so that they
know what is going on more.
Ms. BLAND. Well, I think they need sector specific Web
sites, that it is just like, hey, food businesses, here is what
you can do. Hey, fashion, here is what you can do. And have it
be completely separate and regimented and clear.
Mr. MEEKS. Let me ask. I know I am out of time, but, Ms.
Bland, you shook your head that you had worked with Chambers of
Commerce, whether it was the Brooklyn Chamber.
Ms. BLAND. Oh, yeah, I love the Brooklyn Chamber of
Commerce. I cannot believe how well they have outreached to
small business to hiring. Like I started, and it literally was
like me and two other people, and already they were reaching
out to us and seeing what they could do to help. I do not think
we would be where we are at without the Brooklyn Chamber of
Commerce.
Mr. MEEKS. Thank you. I am out of time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired. Before recognizing the gentlelady for her questions, I
would like to recognize one of your members of Council here.
Councilman Robert Cornegy is here, and he is the chairman of
City Council's Small Business Committee.
You all here also in City Council have a small business
committee as well, and Councilman Cornegy is the chairman of
that committee. We appreciate him being here and showing his
interest. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. MEEKS. He is short, though.
[Laughter.]
Chairman CHABOT. I would now like to recognize the
gentlelady from New York, although all my colleagues are
gentlefolks from New York, Ms. Clarke, for 5 minutes.
Ms. CLARKE. Thank you very much, Chairman Chabot, and to
Ranking Member Velazquez. To our witnesses, thank you for
coming today to share your and lend your expertise to the
subject matter. I, first of all, want to express my regret in
being delayed this morning. I had a small business event in my
district just prior to getting here, and so please excuse me.
I wanted to ask a couple of questions of you, Ms. Davis in
particular. We are intrigued, of course, by small businesses
that take on sort of the entrepreneurial spirit that leads them
to marketing overseas and to capturing those markets. As we
know, more than 95 percent of the world's consumers live
abroad, but more than half of small exporters post sales to
only one foreign market. It is our goal to make exporting more
attainable for small businesses, and your business is available
throughout Europe and Japan.
In your experience, which countries are generally easiest
to export to, and what makes breaking into more than one
foreign market so challenging?
Ms. DAVIS. I think it is difficult to answer that question
because I work with distributors that handle a lot of the
exportation, and the people that I export to have come to me as
most of our accounts have. I am like a business unicorn in that
way. We are really, really lucky. I do not have a good answer
for you.
Ms. CLARKE. So we would probably have to take a look at the
whole distribution network and the relationships.
Ms. DAVIS. I would hit up the international distributors
for that information because they are really the ones that are
going back and forth and dealing with taxes, and laws, and
tariffs, and transportation. I just have to get my pallets down
to them in a container, and then they take it from there.
Ms. CLARKE. Very well. Ms. Bland, MANUFACTURE New York
facilitates relationships between designers and a production
team, and you act as a type of mentor to budding fashion
designers, and encourage them to not only produce their brand,
but grow their business. Can you discuss some of the challenges
that you face in making these connections between production
teams and the designers?
Ms. BLAND. That is actually one of our strengths because
everyone on my team comes from the fashion industry, and we
have all been marketing locally for decades. So I would say
that it is a more general challenge for designers in New York
City before they find MANUFACTURE New York because most
manufacturers do not want to be contacted by unvetted designers
or new businesses that do not understand how to manufacture and
how to speak with manufacturers.
One thing that we have worked very hard on is to create
fashion design boot camps where designers get to learn the
entire manufacturing process in a weekend. At that point they
are not coming to all of these contract manufacturers who are
all individually all over the city and all five boroughs, and
asking for things that are impossible, things that cannot be
done in timelines that are not feasible at prices that sound
ridiculous because they are thinking that they are going to get
the same price as China.
We try to provide some background around that, and I would
say that those sort of programs, we want to work with local
schools, including high schools, to help get people more
educated earlier in the process because nationally fashion
designers as a career has doubled in terms of the Census over
the last decade. It is astonishing how many people want to be
fashion entrepreneurs, and we want to help them to have access
to it, but in a way that makes sense for manufacturers.
I would add that the garment district is a place where
everyone was co-located together in a very high concentration,
that idea still needs to remain. Having contract manufacturers
spread out throughout the city in a way that they are not able
to access the same support structures and the same
infrastructure as each other and networks is unfortunate. That
goes for everything from hiring, to equipment, to systems, to
grants, to you name it.
The idea of co-locating them all on site in one place,
which is what we are working towards at Liberty View Industrial
Plaza, that is a 21st century model for garment manufacturing.
Ms. CLARKE. And, Mr. Friedman, many small manufacturers
with growth potential may not seek assistance with operations,
marketing, and finance because they are simply unware that
resources are available. However, the SBA has many
entrepreneurial development programs, including SBDCs and
women's business center. What can we do to increase the
awareness among small manufacturers of the SBA's business
counseling services?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. I think there is a tremendous network of
economic development organizations and professionals out there.
I think Mike is on the board of----
Mr. DiMARINO. Yes.
Mr. FRIEDMAN.--of South Brooklyn Development Corporation,
so that is one example of an intermediary that generally does
not get Federal funding, but their job is to make those
connections. So Bob may be doing it in one particular sector,
but just building the basic economic development infrastructure
so that those connections can be made. Maybe there is a Federal
funding opportunity or just some acknowledgement about the need
for that strata of intermediary.
Ms. CLARKE. Very well. Thank you, Mr. Friedman. I wanted to
acknowledge very quickly Mr. Meeks and, of course, our
councilman, Robert Cornegy and thank them for being a part of
today's proceedings. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back. We are going to into one more round of questions here,
and I would like to recognize Ranking Member, Ms. Velazquez,
for 5 minutes first.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. DiMarino, as
more manufacturing work moves toward automation, workers need
advance education to operate the machinery that produces highly
technical goods, like computers and aerospace parts. And these
jobs also command higher pay. What are the challenges you are
facing today in that regard?
Mr. DiMARINO. The challenges are really the training. I do
not think it is so much of a higher education. It is one's
ambition or willingness to learn and apply themselves to it.
Like I said in my testimony, we hired two young people from
City Tech, and the first young lady came in and she wanted to
program my CNC machines. She never did it in her life. I
interviewed her, and I could just see the fire burning in her
belly. It was staring at me right in my face.
So I called my foreman. I said, Dave, you know, take Anna
around and show her. He said, what do you want to hire somebody
else in the office for? It is too much overhead. Just take her
around and talk to her. He came back in a half an hour, he
says, hire her. You could see she had a hunger for it, and we
sent her for training, and now she is programming five-axis
machines. It is unbelievable. It was tremendous.
Someone does not need years of education. I mean, we put
her in education, but not advanced education. But it is the
willingness to learn, and you have to have an interest in it.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Friedman, so many times we meet with
businesses, and when we ask them the biggest challenge they are
facing, it is the lack of trained workers. What kind of role do
you see for the federal government and at the state level that
we could be doing more in terms of learning opportunities for
our workforce?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. One is an expansion of something you are
already doing now having to do with support community colleges.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Not just growing support for community
colleges, but also shifting to an apprenticeship model or
providing additional funding for apprenticeships. One of the
things that companies often say to me is that they would prefer
to do the training themselves. Because manufacturing is
essentially small business, the diversity of skills is
tremendous. If we move towards kind of a lifelong learning
model using apprenticeships, I think that would, you know,
allow for the diversity in the sector, and yet create, you
know, a stream of skilled workers.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Let us talk for a second about how our
country needs to encourage more students to pursue degrees in
science, technology, engineering, and math, you know, the STEM
subjects. What do you think? In terms of your organization and
your relationship with the public school system in New York
City, do you have any type of interaction? Do you have any type
of conversation? Are there any type of meetings that take place
to assess how can we encourage more, especially in places like
New York City where the face is changing? You have more
Latinos, more women, more African-Americans, more Asians.
What can we do to narrow the gap that exists between what
is going on in terms of the marketplace and the curriculum that
we have in place these days?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Sure. I am not sure I can offer the big
answer there.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Sure.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. But to bring something together that I think
a bunch of us have talked about is how to co-locate different
types of services. Workforce development and education is
always the odd man out, and maybe that is a function of funding
streams that is distinct from economic development. There is a
tremendous silo between our economic development organizations
and our workforce and labor organizations.
One of the things that Pratt is working on with the
Brooklyn Navy Yard, with City Tech, with the Board of Ed,
Department of Education, is to co-locate a whole bunch of those
facilities in the Brooklyn Navy Yard. We are in proximity to a
number of NYCHA developments. So the idea is to make it as
absolutely seamless as possible.
Businesses, residents, they do not know who they are
getting services from half the time, nor should they, you know.
They should not have to have that skill. We want them to be
good at their business. We want them to be good in high school.
Pratt Institute already brings about 200 students to campus
every Saturday to do STEAM education, and we are trying to link
that moving forward with a CTE school that would be located at
the Brooklyn Navy Yard so that you can get a real seamless
integration of training, and resident employment, and business
development.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you very much. The
gentlelady's time has expired. I recognize myself for 5
minutes.
One of the things, and I think, Mr. Friedman, you had
mentioned that tax policy is not the primary concern that
business folks have, you know, but it certainly is one of the
things that they have to consider. I was wondering if any of
the members on the panel were aware that towards the end of
last year, Congress passed some legislation relative to the Tax
Code that was supposed to help especially small businesses that
did a couple of things.
One thing, there is Section 179 expensing that you could
buy a piece of equipment and take it off all in that year.
There are limitations to it, but overall rather than
depreciating this over 15 years or a long time, you could take
it all off that year right off your taxes. So the incentives,
the argument was people would buy that piece of equipment, and
put it into service, and become more productive, and be able to
take it right off their taxes that year. That would help both
that company that bought it, plus the company that made that
thing, hopefully made here in the United States. We cannot
control that, but hopefully made here, and the people that
worked in that factory. That would help the economy. That was
the idea.
Also the research and development tax credit, and we made
these things, we made them permanent. Let us see. Is that the
one was permanent? There is one that was not. Bonus
appreciation was the other one. That one is until 2019, I
believe, and that is a credit.
But we did those things. A lot of times we had done these
in the past, but we just kind of extended it from one year to
other, and we did it towards the end of the year, and so you
could not plan for it, and so it did not do a lot of good.
Well, finally Congress got its act together sort of in a
bipartisan manner and got this thing passed, and it should help
you to take advantage of the Tax Code out into the future.
First of all, were you aware that this happened, and did
anybody get a chance to take advantage of it yet or whatever?
Mr. DiMarino?
Mr. DiMARINO. I have been fortunate. I have a lifelong
friend and my tax attorney. I have been doing the R&D credit
since it first came out, so that it is in the 1980s. I think it
was 1986 when it first was implemented. But it is a wonderful
tool, and everybody here at this table should take great
advantage of it. It is tremendous. Really a tremendous tool.
Chairman CHABOT. I will yield to the gentlelady.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. You need to have good accountants so that
they could provide information to you in a timely----
Mr. DiMARINO. He is one of the Nation's leading experts in
tax and R&D credit.
Chairman CHABOT. Yeah. But, to me that would be one
criticism of Congress that a lot of times we did this stuff,
but we did it towards the end of the year in some gigantic
omnibus bill that you throw everything but the kitchen sink in.
By the time your accountant has got to go through it and figure
out what the heck was in there, it was too late to take
advantage of it, and you could not depend on it. But now the
stuff that we made, those in particular were permanent.
I would urge all of you to take a look at it because you
could buy stuff and take it right off your taxes that year. It
is a real advantage, and I would advise all small businesses
who may not know about that to look into it.
Another question, and I was going to follow up on something
that the ranking member talked about, job training and the
skills that you need when you are trying to hire something. I
talk to a lot of small businesses in my district, and one
complaint that I get is that, you know, we obviously want to
have a safety net. If people have been laid off or they have
not had employment for a while, something to make sure they can
take care of themselves and survive. But sometimes what I hear
is unemployment or other things make it such that people will
not take the job, you know, at something that the small
business could actually afford to pay somebody.
Do you hear this? Is this an experience that you had or
want to comment on? Ms. Bland?
Ms. BLAND. I have definitely never had that experience.
Chairman CHABOT. You have not had that experience.
Ms. BLAND. No.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay.
Ms. BLAND. I have had some employees who have been coming,
but they ran out of unemployment, and now it is just like, oh,
my god, what am I going to do, and then they come to us. Most
of the people that I have talked to, I have never personally
been on unemployment before, but most of the folks in my
community, it is very typical in the freelancer and creative
community for people to spend some time on unemployment at some
point during their career. And it has nothing to do with
laziness.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay.
Ms. BLAND. I would say that until we have a social safety
net for freelancers that is a little bit more coherent than
now, we are not going to have that truly flexible talent pool
that all businesses can take advantage of. Right now it is a
little wooden where I have to keep people as full time, part
time, or I am probably going to risk losing them as opposed to
if we had a little bit more play with it, we could have people
on a more hourly basis as opposed to either full time or part
time.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you. My time is just about
ready to expire, so I will not ask another question. I will now
yield to the gentlelady for 5 minutes, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. CLARKE. Thanks again. Thanks once again, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to just out of curiosity ask Mr. Friedman if your
experience in working with emerging manufacturers, is there a
role that you see sort of the social media landscape playing in
helping those entrepreneurs to access information and maybe to
network and connect with others that are in similar
predicaments, or that can be helpful in terms of resource and
support? I want to also extend that to the rest of the panel to
discuss.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Let everyone know that we did not conspire
before this meeting in any way to answer that question. There
is a tremendous role, and we are at the very, very beginning.
It is sort of like the shared economy comes to manufacturing.
There is under capacity in a lot of factories, and so the issue
is how can we begin to have different companies use the same
factory. That is an app, you know. That is what Uber does. That
is RB&B does. So there are those opportunities.
Beyond that, we also run the Made in NYC initiative, which
is a local branding campaign to drive consumer traffic to local
manufacturers. To be honest, it is has been a shoestring
operation. We got funding for the first time from the New York
City Council, which is really allowing us to ramp that up. What
we will be having is a social media campaign to attract
consumers, to educate them about what is made locally, and then
to get them to go to everyone's websites and buy directly from
local manufacturers.
Ms. CLARKE. I heard in particular Ms. Bland speak of the
need to sort of distill information by industry. And it would
seem to me that that maybe one of the vehicles that can be
helpful in doing so that, you know, at one click if you
manufacture motorcycles, you know who is in that space, what
types of government assistance or programs are tailored towards
that industry. I was just wondering whether you thought that
would be helpful given that it is such a utility, but whether
we have reached that space yet.
Ms. BLAND. Are you talking in reference to Made in NYC, or
just in general?
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Or fashion in general.
Ms. CLARKE. It could be----
Mr. FRIEDMAN. We are not there yet.
Ms. CLARKE. Okay, we are not there yet.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. The honest answer is over the next year and a
half, we hope to be doing a lot of that in New York City. We
are one city, you know. San Francisco is very advanced in that,
and if you go to sfa.org, they have a real inventory of what is
available. There is still much more opportunity for networking.
Ms. BLAND. Yeah, and I think it also starts with public
awareness campaigns here in New York City that are in the
languages of the people that are being targeted, you know,
because we see that it is more effective for us to go out in
Sunset Park with a printed out sign in either Mandarin or
Spanish and put it directly in the neighborhood than it is for
us to try to post something on Craigslist or anything like
that. We also have to contextualize it for the sector, and the
neighborhood, and the language.
Ms. CLARKE. Very well. Anyone else want to add anything?
Ms. DAVIS. Just a small thing. When you said bring it into
the language of the people who it needs to apply to, I actually
thought you meant the difference in governmental language and
the language of most people.
Ms. BLAND. That is a good point.
Ms. CLARKE. Right.
Ms. DAVIS. I am not in government. I am not anyone that is
involved in government. Any time things are simplified, bullet
points, to bring us into programs is so easy. A good example of
this I think Oscar Health Insurance. It is a health insurance
company that basically makes things click, click, click easy.
There is a picture. There is a big button. There is an app. It
is so easily accessible. I feel like you would just attract a
lot more people to these programs if it were simple.
Ms. CLARKE. What they call plain English.
Ms. DAVIS. Yeah. I mean, make it like a kid, whatever you
need to do.
[Laughter.]
Ms. CLARKE. Very well. Very well. If there are no other
answers, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. Before coming to Congress, I
was a lawyer, and if we made it too plain and simple, we would
put them all out of work, though. I am sure you would not want
to see that, right? No. I am sure we probably would.
But I can just say this has been extremely helpful, I
think, to all members that we were able to be here today. I
would like to yield to my colleague, Ms. Velazquez, if she
would like to make a closing statement or a closing point or
two.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate your taking time to come and listen to the people,
the businesses that are creating jobs, and to see what the
challenges are, what is working and what is not working. Mr.
Friedman, you have raised the issue of the tax credits, which
we will revisit.
Mr. FRIEDMAN. Thank you.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Jacobs, I am working on legislation that
would allow for private capital equity to invest in startups
like yours, but to structure that type of investment in a way
where you do not have to start paying back right away until,
you know, you have reached or you have put your product into
commercialization.
That will be a federal program geared towards manufacturers
in the United States that lack the kind of liquidity and
capital that will enable you to continue to work on your
business, especially emerging businesses. So how can we, the
federal government, incentivize with matching funds to create
those type of companies like SBIC, but where you do not have to
pay back immediately as is the case if you have a traditional
loan.
This has been very helpful. I really appreciate you all
taking time out of your busy companies and businesses to be
here with us. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back. I want to, as chair of the Committee, thank the Council
of New York City for opening up their chambers to us today to
let the United States Congress come here and use these fine
historic facilities. We do appreciate it. We appreciate the
folks here in the audience, and especially the panel members
here for their testimony. This has been very helpful to us. We
will take what we learn here back to our colleagues in the
Congress, and hopefully we will do whatever we can to help to
improve the climate for especially small business manufacturers
in the United States, so thank you very much.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we are adjourned. Thank you.
Ms. DAVIS. Thank you.
Mr. JACOBS. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
members of this committee for the opportunity to testify at
this hearing. And thanks to all of our local Representatives
for your tireless commitment to retaining equitable
opportunities for working and middle-class New Yorkers and
their families.

My name is Bob Bland, and I am the CEO and Founder of
Manufacture New York. Founded in 2012, we are rethinking the
fashion ecosystem and creating a new, vertically integrated
21st century business model that serves the industry's domestic
urban manufacturing needs of today and the future. Our mission
is to reawaken and rebuild America's fashion industry, foster
the next wave of businesses, and create a transparent,
sustainable global supply chain.

Fashion design & manufacturing jobs are more than just
jobs--they are an inclusive pathway to meaningful careers and
the potential for business ownership, regardless of previous
educational background or socioeconomic status. Typically
paying 20-30% more than equivalent service or retail positions
with an average salary of $59,750 nationally, they are more
likely to include benefits and have a clear path for growth,
both in terms of skills training and opportunities to advance.
The New York City fashion ecosystem is a unique creative and
dynamic cultural powerhouse that touches lives internationally
on a daily basis, whether we consider ourselves to be
``fashionable' or not.

Massive outsourcing of American jobs in the 1980's & 1990's
resulted in an 86% decline in US apparel manufacturing
employment, from almost 940,000 in 1990 to about 136,000
nationally in 2015. While in 1931, New York City's iconic
Garment District was home to the highest concentration of
apparel manufacturers' in the world, employing 1 million locals
at its height, it has since contracted to 15,000 total apparel
manufacturing jobs in the city, which contextually, still
accounts for 30% of all New York City manufacturers. This can
look like a bleak picture, but we are sitting on several global
opportunities for significant job growth in NYC at the
intersection of fashions, sustainability and technology if we
seize the moment.

New York City is home to 900 fashion company headquarters,
employs 180,000 people and pays $11B in wages and $2B in tax
revenue annually. According to a report by the U.S. Congress
Joint Economic Committee, spearheaded by U.S. Representative
Carolyn Maloney in 2015, our New York Fashion Week alone
generates $887M in economic impact locally per year. And yet,
we are a $4T global industry at an inflection point--we cannot
go forward as the #2 world polluter (behind oil) with systemic
human rights violations throughout the supply chain, generating
more than 200,000 tons of textile waste in NYC alone and 12.4M
tons on a national scale annually. From the smallest emerging
design startup to the largest department stores and luxury
conglomerates, over the past 3.5 years we have experienced
significant national & international interest in the
conceptualization, research, development and commercialization
of a shared set of resources and best practices to capture
value and provide accountability at all stages of our supply
chain. And we are not alone.

New York City's unique proximity to a talented, experienced
and passionate workforce; the headquarters of major brands and
media outlets in web, print, television and radio; and the
emergence of Silicon Alley as a hotbed for VC funding of
related technology companies from biomaterials (Modern Meadow)
to wearable technology (Ringly) to the coming connected devices
revolution known as the Internet of Things (IoT) means that
major 21st century manufacturing opportunities for New York
City will be where fashion (apparel, textiles, footwear,
jewelry, home goods) collides with previously distant sectors
like consumer electronics, health care, transportation and
defense.

Anticipating this great need and in partnership with Salmar
Properties, and thanks to the support of the New York City
Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC), Deputy Mayor Alicia
Glen, City Hall and our local representatives, Manufacture New
York has been awarded a $3.5M Construction Grant to build our
1st Manufacturing Innovation Hub for Apparel, Textiles &
Wearable Technology at Liberty View Industrial Plaza in Sunset
Park, Brooklyn.

Sunset Park is a rarity in 21st century New York City: a
blue-collar walk-to-work neighborhood. Downhill from the
residential area is a 30 plus block industrial zone anchored by
the Brooklyn Army Terminal, Industry City, Liberty View and the
future South Brooklyn Marine Terminal, where companies employ
many neighborhood residents. Many more small factories and
warehouses intermingle with housing on the area's many mixed-
used blocks. More than one-third of Sunset Park residents work
in some form of manufacturing. Relatively affordable housing
stock and well-established Latino and East Asian communities
reinforce Sunset Park's status as a haven for small businesses,
manufacturers and their families. The neighboring industrial
neighborhood of Red Hook, where I live with my family and young
daughter, shares a similar character, and a great need for
similar support, particularly as economic recovery of local
small businesses and residents has stretched out for years
since Superstorm Sandy decimated our working waterfront.

Unemployment, under-employment and lack or sector-specific
training resources remain a major barrier for economic
prosperity in South Brooklyn, particularly among 18-24 year
olds who are just entering into their professional lives. We
are committed to working with community stakeholders including
local schools, community organizations, non-profits and trade
or business associations to develop entirely new types of
internships, apprenticeships and workforce training programs
that blend STEM training in wearable technology and material
science with traditional, artisanal apparel and textile
manufacturing so that New York City and US domestic
manufacturing can regain its foothold as leaders in
entrepreneurship & innovation. We want to be sure that these
opportunities are designed to attract the marginalized and
underserved communities that can most benefit from them,
particularly given fashion design and manufacturing's
historical inclusivity, where stars can emerge and prosper from
the most unlikely places.

We applaud The Obama Administration's efforts to establish
a national network of Manufacturing Innovation Institutes
(``MII''), and are proud to be teamed locally with the Fashion
Institute of Technology (``FIT'') in our bid for the
Revolutionary Textile and Fiber Manufacturing Innovation
Institute (``RTF-MII''). We look forward to participating in
future institutes, as these sort of public-private partnerships
are essential to long term innovation and job opportunities in
advanced manufacturing. The United States lost 40% of our
middle class jobs nationally during the 30-year exodus of
domestic manufacturing, and after a catastrophic National
Recession that gutted my generation's chance at The American
Dream, the jobs that came in their place are not comparable, or
even enough to provide us with security that we will be able to
afford to establish careers and raise our families in New York
City for the long term. It is going to take significant,
sustained public and private investments across
administrations, with all key stakeholders working together, to
restore our middle class.

Manufacture New York also advocates for a healthy domestic
manufacturing sector at large. Not only do manufacturing jobs
pay better than comparable service jobs, but they currently
provide skilled work for roughly 12 million Americans.

Domestic manufacturers object to NAFTA-style trade
agreements that not only outsource American manufacturing jobs
to low-wage, unregulated countries, but they offer little in
way of oversight for overseas labor conditions. Because of this
Manufacture New York opposes the Trans-Pacific Partnership
(TPP).

Our objections to this trade deal include the fact that TPP
countries like Vietnam are known for ongoing labor and human
rights abuses. It's questionable whether TPP labor standards
can actually be verified or enforced in such countries.

Additionally, TPP does not include enforceable provisions
to prohibit currency manipulation. Deliberate currency
undervaluation by America's trading partners has cost the U.S.
millions of jobs over the last two decades. TPP also guts Buy
America provisions in U.S. law by allowing firms in any TPP
country to bid on U.S. procurement, including Chinese state-
owned firms located in Vietnam. Thus, U.S. tax dollars for
apparel and textiles could go to China instead of to U.S.
producers.

Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the issues &
opportunities around 21st century manufacturing in New York
City.
``The Empire Strikes Back''

Good morning and thank you to all for inviting me to
testify before this committee. I am Mike DiMarino, President of
Linda Tool. We are a second generation family owned
manufacturer of precision machined components and assemblies
located in Brooklyn, NY. Linda Tool has been located in
Brooklyn NY since its inception in 1952. Manufacturing in New
York has always been as much of a challenge as it has been a
blessing. New York has always enjoyed a rich history of
manufacturing and cutting edge technology. Most people don't
realize that New York is the proud owner of the Coleman gas
lamp mantle. It was invented on Canal Street NYC. The company
today, Navis-Global, is still a major customer of Linda Tool
and has been since 1964. It produces high tech cloth processing
equipment and Linda Tool makes components that no other company
has made. NY was also home to the largest manufacturer of
window envelope machinery in the world, FL Smithe located on
West 44th through 48th Street in Manhattan a cutting edge
technology in its day. The Bommer Hinge Co., AMF, maker of
bowling alley equipment, Mergenthaler Linotype, CorrectoType.
Even EX-Lax belongs to NYC. These were all companies with
cutting edge technology at the time.

Whether it is 1950 or 2016 NYC still is a great place to
manufacture and has so much to offer. NY now boasts a robust 3D
Printer Industry, a rapidly growing Drone manufacturing sector,
cutting edge technology in recycling and Bio-Fuel. Honeybee
Robotics of Manhattan was instrumental in the Mars Rover. This
is all made possible by the opportunities that NY has to offer.
Most recently NYC schools have placed an emphasis on the
development of manufacturing skills. Linda Tool recently hired
2 graduates from City Tech who went through their Mfg.
Engineering Curriculum. These 2 new employees have the skills
necessary to help Linda Tool move forward in the next phase of
manufacturing. Their skills acquired in school coupled with
Linda Tools ``old world'' manufacturing skills is already
paying off with some great advanced technology capabilities.
The schools are on the right track but need more ``hands on''
training in their curriculum as this would make graduates much
more job ready. I personally would love to see an
apprenticeship program for the manufacturing sector in place in
the future.

The challenges are many. They are difficult but you can
understand some of it. Trying to marry the urban life with
industrial production is a challenge to anybody or any city
that tries to do it. The NYC Industrial Business Zones are one
aspect that helps those of us trying to maintain a viable
business in NY. One of the main challenges going forward is the
loss of commercial and industrial property. Gentrification is
probably the biggest obstacle. As commercial and industrial
areas are rezoned it drives the price of the real estate to
such high levels that economics just fail when trying to
maintain a business. The preservation of the IBZ's will greatly
help with this but they must be maintained.

The ability to move forward in this sector of technology
can only have good benefits for all. Linda Tool itself was once
an old world, smoky, under lit hazardous place to be employed.
Today it is a modern, air conditioned, well lit, well equipped
manufacturing facility that boasts and average employment stay
of 15 years. We also are one of the few, if not the only,
manufacturer in NYC that boasts a Green Roof on the entire roof
of its facility. We also have a wage scale that meets or
exceeds our industry. And personally it is very satisfying to
see employees of the company thrive. The higher wage scale is
because of our ability to introduce higher technology into our
business. This may not result in the head counts of yesteryear
but it most certainly lends itself to a higher paying job for
those that acquire the skills to do so.

So looking back New York has always been a technology
leader in many aspects. Obviously the technology has changed
drastically and many today have no idea of some of the things
that were previously mentioned in this testimony. But
regardless NY was always a leader in advanced technology in its
day. Looking to the future I believe there is a bright spot for
us in the manufacturing sector as long as we preserve our
industrial zones and concentrate on educating and training our
schooled in ``hands on'' and what to expect in the working
world. A good part of that is the work that our local
development organization are doing coupled with the work that
NYC SBS is doing.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Introduction

Good Morning Chairman Chabot and Ranking Member Velazquez
and also Congressman Meeks and Congresswoman Clark and thank
you for inviting me here today to testify. My name is Nekisia
Davis and I am the owner of Early Bird Foods & Co., LLC.,
located in Red Hook, Brooklyn. I am honored to present this
testimony to you today on our experience and successes as a
small manufacturing business in New York.

Early Bird Foods is a small manufacturer of granola and
granola bars. I started the company in my kitchen while
managing a restaurant in Brooklyn called franny's. If you're
not familiar with this wonderful place, you are missing
something very special. I would bring granola to my coworkers
and regulars, and very quickly a cult-like following was born.
The demand was so intense that within a year ``granola maker''
was my full time job. We now have six full time employees and
two part time employees and are currently adding to the team.
We have many selling channels; several distributors who sell
our products in the Northeast region of the US, Texas, Japan,
the United Kingdom, and China, we sell direct to hundreds of
stores throughout the US, and sell quite a bit direct through
our website.

Successes

We have had success first and foremost because we tapped
into something familiar in a unique way. Granola, at least to
my knowledge at the time, was made with oils that I wouldn't
want in my kitchen, was undercooked and underseasoned. Through
my 7 years working in some of the best restaurants in New York,
I developed a pallet with which to approach granola in a new
way. I also developed an incredible community of people during
that time that would be integral to my launch and success, from
food shop owners, to members of the media, and owners of small
batch flea markets. Within the first 3 months of business, I
was on the Martha Stewart show making granola with Martha
herself, featured in the New York Times by friend and food
writer Melissa Clark, featured in New York Magazine by food
writers Rob and Robin, and on the shelves of Whole Foods
Markets in Manhattan.

At that time, small batch food manufacturing felt like it
was in its infancy in New York, and making food in the city was
quite difficult. I went from my kitchen at home to a small
office cooperative in Brooklyn with a tiny oven where I could
make about 12 bags at a time. I then moved to a kitchen
incubator in Coney Island where I had to haul 50 pound bags of
oats and sunflower seeds from my car, and then (1-2-3-GO!) bake
as fast and hard as I could, package everything I baked, clean,
pack it all back up and into my car in an 8 hours period.
Several days later, I would do the same thing again. In 2011,
my friend and colleague Betsy Devine of Salvatore Bklyn Ricotta
and I got investments from friends and built a commercial
kitchen in a 900 sq ft space in the Brooklyn Navy Yards. Within
a week, we realized the space didn't have enough power to run
my oven and her cheese vat at the same time, so the cheese and
granola dance began. Fast forward through 4 years of that, and
we were able to take out business loans to build out our
current commercial kitchen and warehouse where we have been for
a little over two years. We have a lease secured for another 8
years, but I fear we will outgrow the space in another 2.

Our next expansion will be continued growth, and hopefully
increased cash flow to allow for purchase of materials in
larger quantities at lower costs, therefore raising our profit
margin. In the plans are health care for employees, funding
transportation for employees, and a regular partnership with
charities. I look toward 2016 and hope for reduction of waste,
increased efficiency, and continuing to spread the Early Bird
love as many places as we can.

We have always been a business that people love. In our 7
years, we have had to do very very little reaching out for
accounts, they come to us because of the product, because of
our network, because of the customers who are loyal and have
been since day one. We have never had to put money into
marketing, and have just this year started investing a bit into
PR. We are a business that has always been highly magnetized,
and for that I feel grateful and blessed every day. I was
raised in the Danny Meyer philosophy in my New York restaurant
upbringing, and that is to lead with care, empathy, and
compassion. It's all about how you make people feel, most
importantly the people that work for you, and then your
customers. We operate from such an empowered place, we're
highly compassionate, stand true to our values, our mission,
are dedicated to the brand, and want to make as many people
happy as possible. This world is a tough one. If we can do
anything to bring a moment of positivity into someone's life, I
feel like we're doing a good thing.

Challenges

Now in all this sweet hippie granola love fest of ours, we
have had a unbelievable amount of challenges. The first one
that comes to mind is workers compensation insurance. The
classification system in place for this seems extremely
outdated when it comes to small batch food manufacturers. We
have to pay a rate that is over three times the rate of a cook
in a restaurant kitchen, which is a high risk job, because our
classification is considered ``manufacturing''. I can only
assume this was created to cover the risk level of industrial
manufacturing where you could potentially lose a finger at
work. Our biggest risk in the kitchen is a burn from the oven
door. This over and over makes my head feel like it's going to
pop off because there's nothing I can do and no one I can
convince that our risk level in this kitchen is very low. And
even if I could convince someone, the rules are the rules. The
numbers we pay for workers comp are astronomical.

Another challenge in the past has been with landlord/tenant
relations. I assume that when renting an industrial property
from someone, the basic benefits of operating in a space that
is free of danger, maintained at least minimally, and from
someone who cares that we survive in business, are just a
given. Our space in the Brooklyn Navy Yards, on the seventh
floor, had one freight elevator that was broken at least once a
week. This put a huge damper in our business seeing as we
constantly have goods moving in and out. There was one period
of three weeks that the freight elevator was broken completely,
with no communication from our landlord, no explanation as to
what was going on, and zero concern about the fact that it was
massively hindering our business. I had a purchase order from
Whole Foods held up that entire time, so essentially I lost
thousands and thousands of dollars in business, and my direct
shipping was impacted as well. FedEx, as lovely as they are,
will not walk up and down 6 enormous flights of stairs a dozen
times so you can get all your online shipping out for the day.
We also had to hire several people from Task Rabbit to help us
bring dry goods up those 6 flights to the kitchen so we could
continue baking, every day loads of over 4000 lbs were lugged
up all those stairs. When we attempted to negotiate a temporary
break in rent from our landlord to balance the huge losses we
faced, not only did he refuse, but he turned against us. We
were called out by him as incapable business people because of
our gender, and called ``silly little girls that didn't know
what the hell we were doing''. He eventually threatened to sue
us, ruin our credit, he then doubled our rent, took us to
court, and evicted us. I have never felt more discriminated as
a woman and less respected as a business owner. We had no
protection and nowhere near enough funds to properly fight him
in court. This man, this landlord, who was to simply provide
shelter and safety to help facilitate our business, was
actually attempting to drive us and our businesses into the
ground.

Beyond those struggles, we always have a hard time gaining
capital to make changes that would save us enormous amounts of
money. If I could, I would invest in small equipment that would
cause a drastic reduction in labor costs and increase my
overall output immensely. There are much more efficient ways of
doing everything we're doing, but we just can't afford to make
that leap. I have taken out a loan to build our current kitchen
in order to keep up with business, and am unable to acquire any
more capital to continue growth, despite our stellar business
credit rating and impressive annual revenue. Cash flow is
growing tighter by the day, we are trying to keep up and grow
at the same time. It's a paralyzing feeling. I think of moving
production to a co-packer all the time, but look into the
window of my kitchen and can't imagine losing my team.

Conclusion

The future of Early Bird looks so incredibly bright,
despite the challenges we have faced and, no doubt, will
continue to face. We are right on the cusp of what I believe is
our next big growth spurt and to tell you that there are
growing pains would be an understatement. At these times, I
have to zoom out and remember this is one moment on a long
journey for us. We are here, not in spite of those moments of
struggle, but because of them. I look forward to continuing to
grow our little granola company to something that can employ
more and more, feed more and more, and carry on making the food
world and my life a little richer.

Thank you to everyone again for inviting me here today, and
I genuinely say that I am honored.
TESTIMONY

Mr. Edward Jacobs

CTO AND CO-COFOUNDER, FXE INDUSTRIES

U.S. Congressional Panel to Examine NYC Manufacturing

Good Morning Ranking Member Velazquez, Chairman Chabot and
other members of this committee. My name is Edward Jacobs a
Pratt Graduate with a focus on Industrial Design, Architecture
and Engineering. Most of my adult life has been spent living
and working within New York City. Being a designer and working
initially with smaller scale products one quickly recognizes
the challenges of sourcing manufactures locally while
attempting to secure reasonable pricing to allow affordability
and access to product. I am honored to be with you today to
talk about attempting to navigate the manufacturing community
locally in NYC, nationally living in other states and
internationally sourcing to eventually to become manufactures
ourselves with Fxe-Industries.

FXE is a start up focusing on transportation, and more
specifically advanced motorcycle design and engineering. Our
approach is a holistic one that bridges the gap typically found
between fields within the realm of manufacturing. This is a
modular approach to large scale manufacturing that will allow
us to circumvent some of the pitfalls of highly specialized
niche employment and in turn allow us to train and foster
greater technical manufacturing abilities in house. This
approach will allow us to offer accessibility of product so
that we may open up the market to a significantly greater
number of customers.

We are in the process of securing 50,000 sqft of design
engineering and manufacturing space. This opportunity to grow
to a 100+ team has ultimately been afforded to us by the
Brooklyn Navy Yard. I initially became a tenant of the Brooklyn
Navy Yard through New Lab and it's where I grew my first Design
and Engineering company D.N.I. New Lab is a great example of an
entity that is helping enable a very substantial evolution in
specialized manufacturing.

A good example of this is D.N.I's design, engineering and
sourcing for the Lowline. An underground park to be located at
the base of the Williamsburg bridge that had many challenges
for its initial stages to be completed. This is an example of a
potential large scale architectural project with global
implications. The entire project has been designed, engineered,
sourced and manufactured all within New York City. The basis of
this project being the support of plant life and public space
below the surface of the earth is a great example of the full
spectrum of manufacturing and tremendous social impact New York
City can foster.

This correlates directly with what FXE is attempting.
Choosing to operate here in NYC with the sheer density of
diversity will allow us a fantastic base of talent young and
older from all fields and walks of life to pull from.

Being a new manufacturer and being supported by and
supporting the establishments like the Brooklyn Navy Yard makes
us very hopeful for the new positive city building
manufacturing efforts growing within the 21st century in NYC.

Sincere thanks,

Edward Jacobs
`Made in NY' Expansion to Fashion Industry

New `Made in NY' programs catalyze growth of independent
designers, production facilities, aim to build future pipeline
of industry talent

We are Made in NY is an economic development initiative
that supports the City's digital, film, theatre and
broadcasting sectors, and last year expanded to support fashion
companies as well. Made in NY highlights job opportunities in
the various sectors, celebrates the growing number of New York
City-based companies, provides access to resources and programs
to help companies grow, and helps novices learn how to become
part of the innovation system.

NYCEDC announced significant achievements for the `Made in
NY' suite of initiatives. Over the past twelve months, the new
and expanded programs supported by `Made in NY,' including
retail partnerships, competitions, fellowships, marketing, and
financing initiatives, have directly strengthened the fashion
community in the following ways:

Connected emerging businesses with more than
75 industry-leading mentors

Showcased over 150 local fashion brands to
650 million people

Generated over 450K in sales for NYC-based
established and emerging designers

Awarded more than 4.5M in financing and
prizes to emerging and small businesses

In addition, NYCEDC and the Council of Fashion Designers of
America (CFDA) announced the third round of winners of the
Fashion Manufacturing Initiative grant program, a $6 million
public-private partnership designed to support the City's
fashion manufacturing businesses and promote growth and
innovation in the fashion sector. Seven fashion production
companies will receive grants ranging from $8,000 to $250,000
to upgrade equipment and technology, and provide workforce
training to increase business capacity, and create and preserve
jobs with the City's fashion industry.

For 2016, NYCEDC announced the inception of new
initiatives, aimed at further bolstering the city's pipeline of
creative talent:

The Made in NY Showcase, which will directly
support the presence of local designers at trade shows.
The program will offer a selected group of fashion
designers a series of Made in New York-branded and
fully subsidized booths and display spaces at the
Designers & Agents industry trade show in early fall
2016, providing them with the opportunity to exhibit a
collection of locally designed and produced apparel and
accessories. The Showcase Program will also implement a
series of exclusive workshops and seminars on various
topics critical for successful trade show participation
to Program participants in the weeks leading up to the
industry trade show.

Throughout 2015, NYCEDC kicked off an array of new `Made in
NY' programs, designed to celebrate the city's fashion legacy
and endow the next generation of creative entrepreneurs with
the resources necessary to succeed:

Citywide Marketing Campaign

From August through September of 2015, NYCEDC highlighted
the `Made in NY' initiative's expansion to the fashion
community via a citywide consumer-focused & awareness-building
campaign showcasing nine local fashion brands, including Prabal
Gurung, Rosie Assoulin, Alexis Bittar, Chromat, and Public
School. The campaign spanned print and digital media outlets,
including Women's Wear Daily, Vogue, and New York Magazine, as
well as out-of-home media throughout the five boroughs, such as
billboards, buses, taxi stops and street pole banners
throughout the five boroughs.

Barneys New York x CFDA: Made in New York Collection

In September 2015 and in partnership with Barneys New York
and the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA), NYCEDC
unveiled the Made in New York Collection, a curated compilation
of limited-edition pieces produced entirely within NYC's five
boroughs and designed by seven prominent New York-based brands,
including Thom Browne, Narcisco Rodriguez, and The Row. The
Collection is retailed in 18 Barneys New York stores nationwide
through May 2016.

Designer Certification Program

In September 2015, NYCEDC launched the Made in NY designer
certification, which endows qualifying NYC fashion brands with
use of the `Made in NY' logo in order to help generate
visibility, cache, and demand for their businesses.

Made in NY Fashion Award Presentation

In October 2015, NYCEDC honored Andrew Rosen, CEO of
Theory, with the City's inaugural Made in NY Fashion Award.
Commemorating an individual's extraordinary impact on NYC
fashion industry, the Award was presented during the Women's
Wear Daily's Apparel & Retail CEO Summit, a two-day conference
attracting the industry's most prominent executives from around
the world.

Not Just A Label x Made in NY

In December 2015, NYCEDC partnered with Not Just A Label
(NJAL), a global e-commerce platform, and the Waldorf Astoria
New York to crate a temporary retail space featuring a rotating
collection of over 1,000 locally designed and produced apparel,
jewelry, and accessory items. More than 100 emerging designers
participated in the retail pop-up, which attracted an estimated
1,500 visitors over the 10-day period.

In addition to its newly implemented `Made in NY' programs,
NYCEDC has significantly expanded its investment in the
following fashion programs:

Fashion Manufacturing Initiative

In 2015, the Fashion Manufacturing Initiative (FMI), which
provides grants to local production facilities to upgrade
equipment and technology, offer employees skills training, and
cover costs of relocating within NYC, doubled funding
commitments to $6M, with support from the program's two Premier
Underwriters Ralph Lauren and The Coach Foundation. FMI also
launched new business development opportunities for grant
recipients, such as free industry trade show participation,
CFDA designer open houses, and consumer-focused retail
partnerships. To date, FMI has awarded $2M in grants to 19 of
the City's fashion production companies.

Made in NY Retail Activation

Retail activation offered a curated, rotating collection of
locally manufactured fashion items designed by 125 emerging
designers. This program was open to the public at the Waldorf
Astoria's ground floor retail space for 10 days from December
3rd to December 13th, 2015. The program aims to increase sales
of NYC-produced goods, raise the profile of NYC-based
designers, and create sales opportunities otherwise
inaccessible to emerging NYC brands.

NYC Fashion Production Fund

In 2015, the Fashion Production Fund awarded 24 loans,
totaling over $1.5M in financing. To date, the Fund has
provided 30 loans, a total of $2.5M in financing at below-
interest rates to emerging NYC-based designers in order to
locally manufacture their collections. The Fund was launched in
partnership with Capital Business Credit in June 2014 and
provides emerging designers with production financing at below-
market rates and flexible terms to cover the costs of purchase
orders. Loans are awarded between $50,000 and $300,000 in size,
with terms of 30-120 days.

NYC Fashion Fellows

In 2015, the New York City Fashion Fellows program
announced its fourth class of 25 fellows, comprised of the
industry's most promising emerging leaders. Building on the
program's foundation of mentorship, networking, and educational
opportunities, NYCEDC further incorporated professional
development and skill-based workshops in 2015. To date, the
program has directly supported the growth of 67 Fellows, in
collaboration with 50 industry-leading mentors. With strong
industry support, the program is entering into its 4th year,
with a new cohort of 25 Fellows for 2016.

Design Entrepreneurs NYC

In 2015, in collaboration with industry sponsor G-III
Apparel Group, Design Entrepreneurs NYC (DENYC) entered its 5th
year, with the military-inspired menswear Cadet earning the top
prize. DENYC also increased its prize monies awarded to the
competition's winners nearly fivefold, from $35K to $150K. To
date, the program has supported 130 emerging designers in
building their businesses. In partnership with the Fashion
Institute of Technology, DENYC is an intensive, ``mini-MBA''
program for fashion designers who have launched their own
labels. Participants take business and management modules over
3 workshop weekends and create and refine individualized
business plans, with the aid of an assigned mentor. On the
basis of their business plan, participants compete to win prize
money at the program's conclusion.
