- TAX REFORM: ENSURING THAT MAIN STREET ISN'T LEFT BEHIND

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAX REFORM: ENSURING THAT MAIN STREET
ISN'T LEFT BEHIND

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 15, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-008
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
TOM RICE, South Carolina
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Stephen Dennis, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Scott Lipps, Owner, Sleep Tite Mattress Factory, Franklin,
OH, testifying on behalf of the National Federation of
Independent Business...........................................     4
Mr. Pete Sepp, President, National Taxpayers Union, Alexandria,
VA.............................................................     7
Mr. Dan McGregor, Chairman of the Board, McGregor Metalworking
Companies, Springfield, OH, testifying on behalf of the S
Corporation Association of America.............................     8
Eric Toder, Ph.D., Institute Fellow, Urban Institute, Co-
Director, Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, Washington, DC....    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Scott Lipps, Owner, Sleep Tite Mattress Factory,
Franklin, OH, testifying on behalf of the National
Federation of Independent Business.........................    28
Mr. Pete Sepp, President, National Taxpayers Union,
Alexandria, VA.............................................    32
Mr. Dan McGregor, Chairman of the Board, McGregor
Metalworking Companies, Springfield, OH, testifying on
behalf of the S Corporation Association of America.........    48
Eric Toder, Ph.D., Institute Fellow, Urban Institute, Co-
Director, Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, Washington, DC    53
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
AEO - Association for Enterprise Opportunity.................    68
AICPA - American Institute of CPAs...........................    73
CFETR - Coalition for Fair Effective Tax Rates...............    91
IFA - International Franchise Association....................    97
Letter from Hon. Orrin Hatch, Chairman, Committee on Finance,
United States Senate, and Paul Ryan, Chairman, Committee on
Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives..............    99
WIPP - Women Impacting Public Policy.........................   101

TAX REFORM: ENSURING THAT MAIN STREET ISN'T LEFT BEHIND

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 15, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Rice, Gibson,
Brat, Knight, Curbelo, Bost, Hardy, Velazquez, Chu, Hahn, Meng,
and Moulton.
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order.
Good morning. I want to thank everyone for being here. A
special thanks to our witnesses, who have taken time away from
their undoubtedly busy schedules to be with us. Today is the
day that nobody looks forward to, except maybe the IRS, Tax
Day. I expect most of us have already filed our returns while
struggling to figure out our liabilities and deductions and
credits. We do this all the while trying to discern what,
exactly, the terms ``adjusted basis'' and ``imputed interest''
mean and sifting through a myriad of instructions or even the
most basic of tax returns. Without question, the middle of
April can be miserable for a lot of us. Taxpayers face a tax
code that has become intensely complex and truly temporary with
tax relief being extended for one year, months at a time, or
even retroactively sometimes.
America's 28 million small business owners, taxpayers
themselves, repeatedly complain that this uncertainty has made
it difficult to plan and grow their companies. In fact, a
recent survey by the National Small Business Association found
that the pure complexity of the tax code is actually a more
significant problem for America's small businesses than the
overall tax liability. Imagine that. Businesses are so fed up
with not knowing what to do and how to do it that they care
less about what they have to pay the IRS. Unfortunately, the
current U.S. tax code has become one of, if not the most
significant hurdles to the growth of existing businesses and
creation of new firms.
But it does not have to be that way. Over the past few
years, there has been a renewed effort in Congress to reform
our tax code to make it easier, fairer, and more stable. Here
in our Committee, we are working to identify the aspects of the
code that are most troublesome to small business formation. We
have already held hearings, met with trade associations, and
most importantly, we have talked with our constituents back
home. The message we hear is always the same. We have got to
make it simpler, and flatter, and fairer. And taxpayers want
Congress to enact changes in the code earlier in the year, or
better yet, make certain beneficial tax provisions permanent so
they can plan ahead. Unfortunately, Washington usually does
things at the last minute or even makes changes sometimes
retroactively.
Another critical aspect of the tax reform debate is making
sure we are not leaving Main Street behind. Some people may not
realize that the vast majority of small businesses in the
United States are organized as pass-through entities, meaning
they pay no corporate income tax. Instead, business profits are
passed through to the owner or owners to be reported and taxes
paid on their individual returns. Our entire tax system needs
to be revamped, not just half of it.
There is no doubt that we must reform our corporate tax
structure. We have the highest corporate income tax rates in
the industrialized world, but as our Committee has identified
numerous times before, our small businesses are the backbone of
our economy. They create 70 percent of the new jobs in this
country and represent over 99 percent of all employers in the
United States. Because so many of these enterprises file and
pay their taxes on their individual return, we cannot, and must
not, ignore them as we move forward with any tax reform debate.
It is time for Washington to get serious about helping
American families and small businesses. It is not just about
helping them keep more of their hard-earned money, as important
as that is, but about making April 15th not such a nightmare.
Nobody likes to pay taxes, but the convoluted system we have
now is simply too much of a burden. Reforming our tax code in
its entirety will unleash the true potential of our economy.
Our constituents deserve better than the mess Washington has
given them.
Again, I want to thank each of our witnesses for taking the
time to be with us today, especially my constituent, Scott
Lipps, who is from Franklin, Ohio, which is in the First
Congressional District, my district, and another Ohioan, Dan
McGregor. And we will do further introductions in a few
minutes, but I would now like to yield to the ranking member,
Ms. Velazquez, for her opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I, too, want to
thank all the members of the panel for being here, especially
Dr. Toder, our witness.
Spurred largely by Main Street growth, the American economy
is as strong as it has been in years. However, our nation has
also managed to outgrow many tax policies. For small firms,
these outdated and increasingly complex provisions create an
obstacle to success, rather than a means of fostering expansion
and job creation. This committee is well aware of the
challenges created by the Internal Revenue Code and the major
complications it has on business planning.
Modernizing our code to reflect new business reality will
assist in providing simplicity, fairness, and permanency to
businesses of all sizes. The last major reform of the code took
place in 1986, making an overhaul long overdue.
But we cannot go forward without input from small business
owners. These entities are a vital part of that equation as
they are responsible for most new job growth and business
income. As such, they are a major part of our economy, and an
important aspect of today's discussion, but too often, their
tax reform concerns are lost in broader debates. Today's
hearing will allow us to start a dialogue between the small
business community and policymakers regarding the best tax
policies supporting the success of small firms. They are the
drivers of the nation's economy, and we cannot afford to put
the cost of collecting taxes on them, which is what a
corporate-only approach will do. It is clear that small
businesses can thrive and continue to improve our economy if we
approach tax reform in a comprehensive manner, rather than a
piecemeal approach. Comprehensive reform will have immediate
benefits for small businesses, while also serving our nation's
economic objective of promoting pro-growth policies.
Focusing reform efforts to a complete overhaul of the code
ensures the small business community no longer has to worry
about keeping up with constant tax changes. It also guarantees
small business owners will not be the cause of lowering
corporate rates alone. Such an approach also reflects the
growth of tax reform simplicity, certainty, and fairness.
I stand committed to working in a bipartisan way to revise
policies that stifle entrepreneurship and innovation. A real
opportunity exists to implement long-lasting reforms, and doing
so will have immediate benefits for small businesses.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
If Committee members have opening statements, we would ask
that they submit them for the record.
And I will just briefly explain the five-minute rule, which
is you get five minutes. We will give you a little bit of
leeway there. But there is a lighting system. The yellow light
will come on when you have a minute to wrap up, and the red
light, we would ask you to wrap up as close to that as
possible. As I say, there is a little flexibility.
And I would now like to introduce our panel. I will begin
with our first witness this morning. Our first witness will be
Scott Lipps, who is the owner of Sleep Tite Mattress Factory in
Franklin, Ohio. He happens to be a constituent, as I mentioned
before, in the First Congressional District. Scott started a
business manufacturing institutional mattresses in 1989, and
after four successful years, he and his wife, Debbie, and their
five employees, merged with Sleep Tite, a company that was
founded in 1947. Now producing both institutional and home
bedding, Sleep Tite has grown to 18 total employees. In
addition to running Sleep Tite, Scott also served for 15 years
on the Franklin City Council and two terms as the city's mayor.
Scott, thank you for being here today.
And our second witness will be Pete Sepp, who is the
president of the National Tax Payers Union. In this role, he
leads the NTU's government affairs, public relations, and
development activities. He also oversees the research and
educational operations of the National Tax Payers Union
Foundation. He has been with the NTU since 1988. He received
his degree in History and Political Science from Webster
University, and we thank you for your testimony here shortly.
And our third witness is Dan McGregor, chairman of the
board of McGregor Metalworking Companies in Springfield, Ohio.
Also a Buckeye. Dan started his career with Morgal Machine
Tool. Machine Tool Company in 1968, the first of the McGregor
Metalworking Companies. Dan worked with other family members
and created five different business units, focusing on six
metalworking specialties. In June 2010, Dan retired as
president of McGregor Metalworking Companies and now serves as
Chairman of the Board. He graduated from Lehigh University in
1965 and served three years in the Navy, and we thank you for
your service to our country. And thank you for being with us
today.
And I will now yield to the ranking member to introduce our
fourth witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Dr. Eric Toder. He is an
institute fellow at the Urban Institute and co-director of the
Urban Brookings Tax Policy Center. Mr. Toder previously held a
number of positions in tax policy offices in the U.S.
government and overseas, including serving as deputy assistant
secretary for Tax Analysis at the United States Treasury
Department, director of Research at the IRS, and deputy
assistant director for Tax Analysis at the Congressional Budget
Office. He is the author and co-author of numerous papers on
tax policy, tax administration, and retirement issues. Welcome
to the committee.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
And we will now go to our witnesses. And Mr. Lipps, you are
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF SCOTT LIPPS, OWNER, SLEEP TITE MATTRESS FACTORY;
PETE SEPP, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL TAXPAYERS UNION; DAN MCGREGOR,
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, MCGREGOR METALWORKING COMPANIES; ERIC
TODER, INSTITUTE FELLOW, URBAN INSTITUTE, CODIRECTOR, URBAN-
BROOKINGS TAX POLICY CENTER

STATEMENT OF SCOTT LIPPS

Mr. LIPPS. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. I am pleased to be
here on behalf of the National Federation of Independent
Business (NFIB).
Our family owns Sleep Tite Mattress Factory and Showroom
and has been a member of NFIB since 1995. I also currently
serve on the NFIB-Ohio Leadership Council. Thank you for
holding today's hearing, ``Tax Reform: Ensuring that Main
Street Is Not Left Behind.'' The current tax code negatively
impacts small and closely-held businesses in several important
ways, so I appreciate the invitation to be here today to
discuss these important issues from the perspective of a small
business owner.
The NFIB is the nation's leading small business advocacy
organization. The typical NFIB member employs about 8 to 10
employees with annual gross receipts of about $500,000. All of
NFIB's members are independently owned, which is to say none
are publicly-traded corporations. While there is no one
definition of a small business, the problems NFIB members
confront, relative to tax code, are most representative of
small businesses. A few consistent concerns are raised
regardless of the trade or industry in which the small business
is engaged.
As part of representing small business owners, NFIB
frequently conducts surveys of both NFIB members and small
business population as a whole, and taxes consistently rank as
one of their greatest concerns. In the most recent publication
of the NFIB Research Foundation's Small Business Problems and
Priorities, 5 of the 10 small business concerns are tax-
related. In fact, the February 2015 Small Business and Economic
Trends report ranks taxes as the number one problem small
business owners currently face. Right now, taxes are a bigger
problem than poor sales, the cost and quality of labor, and
government regulation.
I would like to spend the rest of my time telling you about
my personal experience. Sleep Tite Mattress Factory and
Showroom was founded in 1947, by Stan Rothman. In 1990, our
family founded an institutional (acute and long-term care)
bedding company, HomeCare Mattress. In 1992, we merged HomeCare
and Sleep Tite. We started with four employees and now have 15
full-time employees. We are currently structured as a C
corporation, but we started as a pass-through. While oftentimes
a struggle, we are very proud to offer our team members health
insurance, a 401K program, paid sick leave, paid vacation time,
and more benefits. Aggressive tax rates and compliance efforts
directed to fulfill intrusive regulations severely impact our
ability to offer this full-time benefits package that our
employees need and deserve.
We are proud of Sleep Tite Mattress Factory. We think you
would be, too. As I mentioned, we strive to offer our team
members a positive work environment that offers a learning
experience, the ability to make decisions, career
opportunities, and full benefits.
Beyond that, we believe community involvement is critical.
Small businesses are the ``fabric of the community.'' For
example, across America, you will find small businesses
sponsoring school plays, pee-wee football teams, cheerleading
squads, and church youth group programs. The list goes on. The
small business owner works in the community, lives in the
community, and hires in the community. Sleep Tite Mattress has
been recognized by our schools for involvement and won our area
Chamber of Commerce Business of the Year Award in 1999. That
makes us feel good. What makes us feel even better is seeing
our employees grow and build their lives and stay with our
company for years. To serve our employees and community, we
must have lower tax rates, fewer regulations, and a less
confusing, less complex tax code.
We have been in business in our community for over 24
years. I witnessed and experienced what punitive local, state,
and federal laws were doing to the business community in
Franklin, so in 1999, I did something about it. I ran for city
council and won a seat. After encouraging a few fellow business
owners and business people to run for council, I was honored to
serve as mayor for two terms. We concentrated on fixing
problems a bloated bureaucracy and out-of-touch government had
levied on our city.
Our council addressed local incentive programs that
unfairly assisted large corporations but did not offer
incentives to small business. We instituted a ``Downtown
Improvement Program'' (DIP) that offered grants and low
interest loans to small businesses locating or expanding within
our community. We met with local zoning, planning, and building
officials and redesigned zoning laws to assist businesses with
fewer or less restrictive regulations. For example, sign
ordinances and requirements. Not every small business person
can run for elected office. Instead, Congress should work to
reform our tax code in order to help small businesses get back
to doing what they should be doing--running their small
business. Over 85 percent of NFIB members agree that Congress
should fundamentally reform the tax code.
As Congress considers tax reform, I would encourage you to
keep these most important goals in mind. Achieving these goals
will greatly enhance the ability of small and closely-held
businesses to thrive in the 21st century--permanently keep the
tax rates low, do not create disparity between the corporate
rate and individual rate, reduce complexity, and not separate
the business owner from the business. NFIB members are willing
to make tradeoffs necessary to lower taxes, such as reducing or
eliminating deductions, credits, or exclusions.
Should Congress enact comprehensive tax reform that
achieves these goals, small business owners would no longer
face one of their most consistent complaints--arbitrary and
inconsistent tax preferences, constant change, and complexity
in the current federal code.
Small businesses truly are the engine of economic growth.
This is not just a slogan, as small businesses created two-
thirds of the net new jobs over the last decade. Small business
owners are risk-takers and entrepreneurs. They are the last
businesses to lay off employees when business declines, and
slow to rehire when business picks up. The owners work
additional hours until they can take it no more. When small
businesses hire an employee, it is their intent to keep them
for the long run.
The current tax code has become a confusing and
unpredictable challenge for the vast majority of small business
owners. Our tax laws should not deter or hinder the ability of
small business owners to create or expand their business. Taxes
are a major issue for all small business owners. Tax law can
dictate the business decisions an owner must make, whether it
is the type of structure to adopt, whether to make an
investment in programs or machinery, to expand their facility,
or to hire employees.
After decades of patchwork changes, Congress needs to make
major adjustments to our tax laws to reduce the complexity and
confusion of business growth. I appreciate Congress taking a
serious look at reforming the tax code and urge you to keep in
mind the unique challenges that face small businesses.
Thank you for having me here today, and I am happy to
answer any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sepp, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF PETE SEPP

Mr. SEPP. Mr. Chairman, Madam Ranking Member, Members of
the Committee, National Tax Payers Union (NTU) is honored to
have been invited to this hearing. And I could discuss at
length very technical changes to the tax laws itself to go on
and on about rates and bases and JCT scores and econometric
analyses, but I want to focus my brief remarks here on one
issue--administrability.
To us, with the tax laws as they affect small businesses,
administrability means reducing complexity in the system that
businesses encounter every day. It also means increasing the
access to justice that businesses have should they find
themselves in a dispute with the IRS.
One interesting statistic about the complexity costs that
small businesses face--I give a number of them in my
testimony--but the National Association of Manufacturers
determined that for businesses with fewer than 50 employees,
the burden per worker of tax compliance alone is more than 50
percent higher than all other businesses. It is a regressive
burden, and it is a costly burden.
What we want to do here is try to identify the areas of the
tax code that are the most complex for small businesses and
legislate in those areas accordingly. There are some
instructive studies here that I think could help us.
One that was taken by the IRS Statistics of Income
Division, measuring the tax compliance burden of small
business, identified areas of business activity and tax return
activity where businesses encountered unduly harsh burdens of
time or money. Those were things like using the accrual
accounting method, having foreign operations, filing returns in
multiple states, keeping records for alternative minimum tax
liabilities, completing an end-of-year inventory to comply with
various tax requirements. These are areas where Congress needs
to focus its attention in simplifying the law. How do we do
that? Well, I think that for one, foreign operations of
businesses need to be scrutinized with an eye towards reducing
the number of forms and instructions. The Taxpayer Advocate's
office has the astounding statistic that there are for U.S.
businesses conducting economic activity abroad, 43 publications
with 1,212 pages referring to other publications with over
13,000 additional pages, 1,500 pages of forms. No small
business can possibly shoulder a burden like that without the
owner just throwing up his hands saying ``why bother to expand
abroad?'' And yet that's precisely what we want small
businesses to do--conduct more activity abroad.
I will confine the remainder of my remarks to a very
important and overlooked topic, and that's taxpayer rights in
the appeals processes and the special problems that small
businesses encounter. We heard hearing after hearing back in
the 1980s and 1990s from businesses that were literally shut
down just by the audit procedure itself. They simply could not
conduct their operations while the IRS was going through their
records. We enacted laws, especially a very comprehensive one
in 1998, to try to improve the appeals process, give businesses
more opportunities to remain self-supporting during the
examination and the appeals and collection process. We need to
make modifications to those laws now.
There is a set of proposals introduced on the Senate side
by Senator Cornyn, called the Small Business Taxpayer Bill of
Rights. This has some improvements to the current laws, such as
introducing alternative dispute resolution to the process for
appealing audits. This would be a fantastic tool. It would be
lower cost. It would be a quicker resolution. And it would help
to address some of the problems that the taxpayer advocate
herself has identified in the examination process. She is
saying, for example, that examiners, revenue officers, are not
being given the latitude to make offers and compromise and
approve them with businesses in audit situations quickly
enough. The businesses end up suffering, the collection
activities go on, and ironically, the government hurts itself
because these businesses are basically dissolved under tax
problems and they're on longer contributing to the Treasury.
That serves no one's interests.
In short, ensuring that Main Street does not get left
behind means ensuring that the tax system does not crush the
entrepreneurial spirit. And that entrepreneurial spirit is not
something you find when a small business owner confronts the
rates and bases and minutia of the tax system. It is what they
confront when they face hours upon hours, thousands upon
thousands of dollars trying to fill out tax returns, and the
very real fear that if the IRS questions an item on that
return, they might as well pay up rather than fight it, even if
they think they are right, because the expense to them
personally and to their business is just too great. We have to
change that situation. We came together in a bipartisan
fashion, not only in 1986, but in 1998, with the IRS
Restructuring and Reform Act. Let us do it again. NTU and its
members are ready to assist in that task.
Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much, Mr. Sepp.
Mr. McGregor, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN MCGREGOR

Mr. MCGREGOR. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member, and other
Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify here today. I recognized my timeliness when my cab
driver asked me this morning if I had paid my taxes. And he
went on to complain about his taxes.
Chairman CHABOT. The ranking member asked me the same thing
when I got up here.
Mr. MCGREGOR. This year is the 50th year----
Chairman CHABOT. And I did, by the way.
Mr. MCGREGOR. This year is the 50th anniversary of McGregor
Metalworking.
Back in 1965, my family purchased a small eight-man tool
and die shop. Today, we employ 375 workers in four locations in
Springfield, Ohio, and one in Aiken, South Carolina. These are
good-paying manufacturing jobs in areas that need them.
Our business is contract metal forming, and our major
customers are in transportation, auto, lawn and garden, and
agriculture.
In support of my written testimony, I would like to
accentuate the following important points. First, pass-through
status is essential for a family-owned business. In 1986, we
changed from C corp to S corp. This change fit our desire to
grow our business and still be able to reward our shareholders.
Last week we had our semi-annual family shareholder meeting
where we reviewed the results of 2014 and our plan for 2015.
This is important so that the shareholders understand the
impact of their pass-through earnings on their tax filing,
recognizing that when the earnings are reported, they have to
pay their taxes and pay estimates the following year.
Second, lower taxes mean higher retained earnings allowing
the company to grow. After the big recession of 2008 and 2009,
we were faced with two bank covenants--a requirement tying debt
service to free cash flow, and a cap on our total debt to
equity. Taxes play an important role here since our ability to
retain earnings is limited by how much tax we pay. Prior to
2013, we paid about 34 cents of every dollar to cover
shareholder taxes. Today we pay about 42 cents. This is a huge
increase and it limits both our ability to borrow and our
ability to increase employment. In my business, $30,000 in
retained earnings can mean the addition of a new job.
Third, the R&E tax credit. Because our business is
technical in nature, we rely on the R&E tax credit to develop
new processes. Some of our shareholders are unable to use this
credit because of the alternative minimum tax. Changing that
rule to allow taxpayers under the AMT to get the R&E tax credit
would fix that. The total elimination of AMT would be even
better.
Fourth, the estate tax. The 2012 increase in the estate tax
exemption to $5 million was a positive step for closely-held
businesses, but any family that grows their business beyond
this exemption must constantly make this part of their business
strategy. Often, this is contrary to the best interest of the
business and the family members. Transition of ownership in
privately held businesses is never easy and the estate tax is
often the death knell of family business continuance.
And finally, tax return. Our family business started 50
years ago and has become a significant employer in our
community of 65,000 people. The population of Springfield is
gradually declining and needs jobs to help retain citizens. Tax
reforms that incentivize business growth and retention are
essential to our community.
So I will close with three recommendations for tax reform
going forward. A, it should be comprehensive and improve the
tax treatment of pass-through businesses and corporations
alike. B, parity should be restored for the top rates paid by
pass-through entities and corporations. And C, it should reduce
or eliminate the double tax paid by C corporations.
Reform that follows these principles would help McGregor
Metalworking and other employers in our area continue to
succeed and create jobs.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member for this
opportunity to testify. I look forward to answering any
questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Dr. Toder, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ERIC TODER

Mr. TODER. Thank you very much.
Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and Members of
the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to appear today to
discuss the effects of tax reform on small business. The views
I am expressing are my own and should not be attributed to the
Tax Policy Center or to Urban Institute, its board, or its
funders.
There is a growing consensus that our current system of
taxing business income needs reform and bipartisan agreement on
some main directions of reform, although not the details. The
main drivers for reform are concerns with a corporate tax
system that discourages investment in the United States,
encourages U.S. companies to retain profits overseas, and
places some U.S.-based companies at a competitive disadvantage.
At the same time, the corporate tax raises relatively little
revenue compared to other countries, misallocates scarce
capital by providing selected preferences to favorite assets
and industries, and allows some U.S. multinationals to pay very
low tax rates by shifting reported profits to low tax
countries. No one is happy with this state of affairs.
President Obama's framework for corporate reform shares
important features with the tax reform proposal introduced last
year by former Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp. Both would
reduce the corporate tax rate, pay for the lower rate by
cutting back major business tax preferences, and reform
international tax rules.
Corporate tax reform, however, cannot proceed in isolation
from the individual income tax system. The base broadening
needed to pay for a lower corporate rate would affect all
businesses, including pass-through entities that pay no
corporate income tax but instead report income to their owners
who pay individual income tax. A reform that pays for a
corporate tax rate cut by reducing business tax breaks will
raise taxes on these business owners. Businesses affected
include partnerships, subchapter S corporations, and sole
proprietorships. Many of these are small businesses. Tax reform
proposals therefore must address the concerns of small business
owners.
A large and growing number of U.S. businesses are organized
as pass-through entities. In 2011, 95 percent of U.S.
businesses were either sole props or pass-throughs and received
38 percent of business receipts. Most partnerships in S corps
are small businesses, but 95 percent of their net income and
business receipts comes from large and mid-size businesses with
assets greater than $10 million.
Pass-throughs are taxed more favorably than taxable
corporations because they face only a single level of tax,
where profits from taxable corporations face both the corporate
tax and the individual tax when companies pay dividends or
shareholders receive capital gains. A lower corporate rate
would create a more level playing field between corporations
and pass-throughs.
Less than 4 percent of individual taxpayers who receive
most of their income from business are in the two highest tax
brackets. These taxpayers receive 65 percent of business
income, but much of this does not come from small businesses. A
broader tax reform that reduced marginal tax rates and
eliminated tax preferences, which I might prefer for both
individuals and corporations, need not raise taxes on pass-
throughs, but to maintain revenue and distribution on
neutrality, such a reform would have to cut back on popular tax
preferences, such as the deductions for home mortgage interest,
charitable deductions, state and local taxes, and the exemption
of health insurance premiums from tax. Even then, as in the
Camp proposal, an additional surtax at the highest incomes
might be required to meet the revenue and distributional
targets.
Congress should shield most businesses from the adverse
effects of business-only tax reform through targeted relief.
This might include extending and expanding the higher section
179 expensing limits that expired at the end of 2014, or
increasing the width of the 15 percent corporate rate bracket.
A special tax rate for pass-through income, however, would
create unequal treatment between high income individuals with
business income and those with labor compensation, and would
create market distortions as businesses seek ways to compensate
highly paid employees as independent contractors and engage in
other transactions to recharacterize income.
In conclusion, the corporate tax reforms now under
discussion raise concerns about the treatment of pass-throughs,
many of which are small businesses. These concerns are best
addressed through targeted relief for truly small businesses
instead of general tax rate cuts for income from pass-throughs,
and I would point out some of these forms of relief, like
expensing, would also be a major simplification.
Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much, Dr. Toder. And I
would like to thank all the panel for their excellent testimony
here this morning. And now the members of the Committee will
have five minutes to ask you questions. And I will begin with
myself recognized for five minutes.
Scott, let me begin with you. You mentioned the NFIB's
recent Small Business Problems and Priorities survey and that 5
out of the top 10 concerns in that survey relate to taxes.
Could you talk a little bit about where taxes fall on your list
as a business owner and how that has changed over the past 25
years that you have been in business?
Mr. LIPPS. Well, the most important part to us is we are
only 15 employees. We do not have a compliance officer to
assist with taxes. So just keeping up with the code and
investing--we have to hire outside help. So that is an expense
to the corporation that the tax burden is creating. So a less
confusing regulation would allow us to continue to offer more
benefits, for example.
I mean, I was very proud to tell you we offer a full range
of benefits. We even have paid healthcare for our employees. We
have paid sick time, paid vacation, but our 401K, something had
to give, and jobs are so important to us that we no longer can
match. So, example. If we were not paying or fighting an
aggressive tax code or a confusing tax code, I think we would
be able to do things like restore our match to the 401K.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sepp, I will go to you next. At a hearing that we
conducted last month, we focused a lot on the fact that for the
last six years, the number of business deaths, or businesses
going out of existence, small businesses, has outpaced the
number of business births. And apparently, that is the first
time in American history according to what we were told. This
is a very troubling statistic. Do you feel that the problems
with our tax code could be a factor in the fact that we do see
businesses going out of existence more, you know, dying than
rising?
Mr. SEPP. Oh, I definitely think so. In the metaphysical
sense, we have businesses thinking about the burdens of
complexity, not only at the federal level but even at the state
level in complying with taxes. That is not really something
that Congress can deal with, but it is a consideration in every
business owner's everyday operations. But even in the more
practical narrow sense, there may be an issue with the IRS's
own collection procedures here in that the taxpayer advocate
has noted several times that all too many cases involving small
business tax debts are being thrown into the automated
collection system rather than being kept at levels where there
might be an efficient resolution to the problem to keep the
business self-supporting.
So again, we sort of have a bifurcated problem here, one
that is systemic in terms of how the tax laws are written, and
one that is operational in terms of how the IRS is approaching
resolutions with businesses.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Let me turn to you next, Mr. McGregor.
You also mentioned the death tax in your written testimony,
Federal Inheritance Tax. We call it the death tax around here
now. This week we are voting once again on the floor on
legislation to eliminate it. Your family has had businesses for
several generations now. Could you talk a little bit about how
the death tax impacts a small business, plans that you make,
and how many employees you can hire and what you have to go
through in planning for that?
Mr. MCGREGOR. I think the real issue is the extenuation of
the business down into the next generation. In our particular
case, we gave stock to the next generation, which may or may
not be a great idea. It has worked out well for us but we have
continually worked around this issue and tried to prepare to be
able to move it forward. So it is really more of a cost of
planning and making a mistake that damages the business.
Chairman CHABOT. And we have been told for years that the
two entities that are most directly affected by the death tax
are small businesses because of the difficulty in passing to
the next generations and family farms are the two that it
affects most directly.
I am almost out of time, so in the time that I have left
here, let me just ask the question. We have talked about--I
think we are probably--it is a bridge too far now, but we have
talked about going to either a flat tax or a flatter tax. Or to
a national sales tax and getting rid of the IRS and getting
read of income taxes all together. And I would just like to see
a show of hands because I do not have a lot of time. Can I see
how many of you think that we ought to go to a flatter or a
flat tax? Just a show of hands. Three out of four.
And how about if we could get rid of income tax and IRS all
together and go to a sales tax, can I see how many would be
supportive of that? Okay. So I am seeing two of the four there.
Okay. It is interesting. I appreciate that very much.
And I will now yield to the ranking member, Nydia
Velazquez.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Toder, the last time broad based tax reform took place,
one of the driving principles was tax neutrality. Today, as we
move forward on tax reform, there is also concern with the
long-term budget; what principles should be included in our
effort to overhaul the code while also minding current fiscal
realities.
Mr. TODER. That is a very good question. We certainly could
have a revenue-neutral tax reform that would not address the
long-term budget efforts. I think it is difficult. The problem
with doing that is a true tax reform would cause so many
special interests to be hurt and so many people would object to
it that it is a very hard political lift to do without also
making some contribution to the long-term budget effort. So
that is my reservation, but I think that would be a positive
step to do revenue-neutral tax reform.
With regard to the long-term budget, you really have to
address the issue of entitlements and the growth of
entitlements and do something on the spending side. So I think
the revenue probably would fall short and we would need more
revenue as well, but those two things really need to be handled
simultaneously.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
The administration stated that its intention is to lower
corporate rates from 35 to 28, and 25 for manufacturers. The
tax code already has specific provisions for certain industries
and sizes of businesses, so this idea is nothing new. However,
should we be moving away from picking winners and losers as we
move forward to reform the tax code? Is having special tax
treatment inevitable to ensuring Main Street businesses can
compete on a level playing field as their larger counterparts.
Where do we draw the line?
Mr. TODER. Well, I think my view is we should have as
little special tax treatment as possible. And we would be much
better off with lower tax rates for all forms of businesses
rather than trying to have the government pick winners and
losers. I do not think the government is very good at that.
Some people talk about the research credit, so there might
be some argument for keeping that, but I am not even
necessarily persuaded of that. And there might be some
proposals, such as small business expensing, which are aimed at
the very high compliance costs that small businesses face
relative to their level of revenue or profits. And so I think
easing those compliance costs may require--does require some
special provisions. But generally, the answer, yes on the level
playing field.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Lipps, one of the goals of tax policies is providing
business owners with certainty when it comes to taxes. Adding
to this uncertainty is the ongoing debate on tax reform. What
effect does this have on your business success?
Mr. LIPPS. I think it would allow us to become more of the
fabric of the community. Any dollars that we have we use to
sustain the corporation and improve our benefits package. We
support our local school system. We give our employees, as I
mentioned earlier, a 401K match back. So I feel like a small
business owner has a responsibility to be part of the fabric of
their community. Tax assistance, of course, will help us with
that.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. If we do not take affirmative action on
comprehensive tax reform, what effect will that have in terms
of you being able to hire, to make business investments?
Mr. LIPPS. It will limit our ability, and we may have to
look at other options, like reducing how much we contribute
towards our company health policy. It will help some small
businesses in the sense that we have to pay a local tax
preparer, so fees are going to go up as it becomes more
confusing, so the local tax person is probably going to say,
``Scott, send a check.''
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
I would like to ask this question to each of the panel.
Many members on this committee have been adamant that
comprehensive tax reform legislation get passed this year. I
think quick action could send an important message to the
business community, yet there is widespread pessimism that
anything will evolve anytime soon because some difficult
compromises must be made. If we could accomplish only corporate
tax reform and not individual, is this something the small
business community could accept? I heard almost all of you
saying comprehensive tax reform. Or would you rather see
nothing get done until a complete overhaul can be completed?
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady's time has expired but you
can all answer the question.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes, Mr. McGregor.
Mr. MCGREGOR. I would rather hold out. I would like to see
comprehensive.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. MCGREGOR. Thirty percent of my competitors are C
corporations and I would be at a big disadvantage.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Sepp?
Mr. SEPP. Well, the last thing we want to see is some kind
of C corp reform effort that severely disadvantages pass-
through entities. We might be able to create some kind of safe
harbor for pass-throughs while the C corp reform is going on. I
also think there are other reforms that can be made
incrementally to benefit both small businesses and large ones
that would lead toward comprehensive reform in the next
Congress. I recount some of them in the testimony.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes. But my question was if all we can do is
corporate tax reform, would you be supportive?
Mr. SEPP. Not comprehensive enough.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Lipps?
Mr. LIPPS. We are a C. We were a pass-through and we are a
C now. So removing the individual story, I would say I fear
removing the business owner and the small business and causing
separation there.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Toder?
Mr. TODER. I cannot speak for the small business community,
but I can say that our international and corporate rate
structure relative to the rest of the world is so problematic
these days that I think we have to address those issues. And in
doing so, we will inevitably affect other businesses and we
will have to take some measures to deal with that.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank all of
you for being here today. I appreciate your testimony.
I want to start out with a situation. I know that the tax
extenders that we passed at the end of last year, you know, we
waited until the eleventh hour to do that and it is kind of
interesting. I had one of my constituents who sells a lot of
equipment to rock quarries and people who are in that business,
and he sold five particular pieces of equipment, all the rest
of the year, but when we passed the tax extenders at the end of
the year with accelerated depreciation in it, suddenly he sold
six more pieces of equipment in the last two months of the
year.
What tax extenders are important to you? The first part of
the question. And the second part of the question is with
complex tax reform or comprehensive tax reform, will you be
willing to give all that up if we can go back to a flatter tax?
Mr. Lipps, let us start with you.
Mr. LIPPS. We use section 179 small business expenses. I
think that is a tax extender. We also have the bonus
depreciation program we use, so that is important to us.
Obviously, section 199.
I think that tax extenders are critical today because of
the current tax code we are living under. However, if you
flatten that tax code out or do a comprehensive reform that
addresses all of our measures, I believe that small businesses
are much, much--very willing to give that up.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Sepp, what do you see?
Mr. SEPP. Well, section 179 is obviously very important for
small businesses. It takes us in the direction of full
expensing, which should be the ultimate goal of tax reform for
all businesses. That is probably a long way off, very difficult
to achieve. But among other extenders, there are only perhaps a
handful. The R&E is one that comes to mind that would be worth
preserving in many situations. Here again though, taking them
all and trading them for rate reduction in a simplified system
might be worthwhile. Your colleague, Congressman Pompeo had an
excellent bill in the last Congress to take about a dozen very
narrowly drawn energy credits and direct the secretary after
their repeal to put that into rate reduction. That is an
incremental approach we might want to take.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Perfect.
Mr. McGregor?
Mr. MCGREGOR. We do use the R&E tax credit and it takes a
lot of effort to create that data. So it is nice to know in
advance that it is going to happen, because to do it for a year
and not get it.
As far as tradeoffs, that is an expectation. You know. I am
not a huge bonus depreciation person. We are heavy, you know,
heavy investment and it can pay off beautifully. And if we have
it, it is wonderful, but you know, so that would be on the
table.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Perfect. Thank you.
Mr. Lipps, you are representing NFIB today, and quick
question for you here with regards to, you know, the chairman
made reference a while ago to the fact that we have lost more
businesses in the last several years than we have actually
created. And so I was wondering if you have an idea of how many
businesses were lost due to the complexity of the tax code or
how many were not started. Is there some sort of information
out there? That is a pretty nebulous question there but I am
just curious if you have seen some trends perhaps that you
could tell me that were based on the tax code.
Mr. LIPPS. I am usually spending my time trying to run my
small company and understand the tax code. So NFIB studies the
numbers. But I would certainly tell you a personal situation. I
have a daughter who actually asked to sit down in our company
and say, ``How do I resign when my dad is the president?'' She
wanted to start her own company. And we found it so much more
difficult than just 25 years ago. It was so complex for her
that we had trouble even helping her do that, and we were so
proud she wanted to be an entrepreneur, but it is a very
difficult and daunting situation when you first analyze it.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. I think, you know, that is one of the
problems that we have is that there are so many disincentives
now to starting a small business, and the statistics bear it
out. When you look at the number of businesses that are not
being started compared to the ones that are losing, it should
send up some alarms here.
Just very quickly, Mr. Sepp, you made a comment a while ago
with regards to business being able to expand abroad and to use
tax incentives to do that. Do you have some ideas?
Mr. SEPP. Well, I think that making the switch to a
territorial tax system versus the worldwide one we have would
be a step in the right direction. That is a very
comprehensive----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Do you think if you went to like a flat
tax that would that be helpful or would that be hurtful?
Mr. SEPP. That would be helpful in my opinion. There are
lots of other smaller steps we have to take, but most
importantly, even if we are to live under the current system,
we have got to simplify the structure of forms and reporting
for smaller businesses that have activities abroad. One way we
might want to do that is through a quadrennial simplification
process. That was something that was brought up when we were
debating the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act back in 1998. You
bring in a bunch of volunteers from the public and private
sector to go through the code and the regulations, make a list
of recommendations, have an up or down vote on them. That would
be a way to resolve some of this.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Well, it would certainly be great if we
could simplify the tax code because I know 15-20 years ago I
did my business's taxes and it was like eight or 10 pages, and
now my taxes, I cannot do them any longer and they are at least
an inch and a half thick. So we need to do something.
Thank you very much for your testimony.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Moulton is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, there is broad consensus on this panel and
certainly in the room that we need to have comprehensive tax
reform. And I just want to get at that a little bit more.
Mr. Lipps, from your position, not just as a small business
owner but also from your position at NFIB, from your
perspective, what is holding us back in being able to tackle
this issue? And you can answer that both in terms of what your
view of the problems in Congress is but also why is there not
more pressure from the small business community to really get
this done?
Mr. LIPPS. I think the small business community is so
committed to its job to daily making payroll that we--we are
not protestors. We do not have time. So we do at local town
halls when Congressman Chabot appears in Franklin, believe me,
we ask him to help us with this issue. But I really think it is
a time factor. If we take time away from our company, who is
going to do the job while we are out trying to fight for tax
reform? So sometimes our voices may be muffled.
Mr. MOULTON. That is a good question.
Is there anyone else who would like to comment on that? Dr.
Toder, do you have any thoughts in particular?
Mr. TODER. Well, you know, the tax system is very
complicated, and changing it is also very complicated. There
are many moving parts and there are many people who will be
affected, some of whom will be affected adversely. You get
lower rates down by eliminating benefits for some groups of
taxpayers. They are not just small loopholes. They are things
like home mortgage interest and charitable contributions. And
without saying that necessarily that is a bad thing to trade
off lower rates for eliminating benefits, it is not easy to do.
And I testified at a hearing on the home mortgage interest
and suggested ways which I thought it could beneficially be cut
back, and I was not surprised that the total lack of interest
from members of the Ways and Means Committee in those ideas. So
it is difficult.
Mr. MOULTON. Mr. Sepp?
Mr. SEPP. I would say there is a problem of follow through
at the granular level of small business input about the tax
system. The taxpayer advocacy panels, for example, that are
meeting around the United States, take all kinds of suggestions
from small business owners about everything--how to improve the
look of forms, the ease of compliance and the like. Some of
those are adopted by the IRS. Others are cast by the wayside.
The same thing happens with the Taxpayer Advocate's Report to
Congress. If you look through the report cards that follow
subsequent to each one of those, there are just a whole list of
recommendations the advocate made, and the IRS's responses.
More often than not, the IRS refuses to implement them. One
thing that might be helpful would be for Congress to put policy
riders, frankly, and appropriations bills instructing the IRS
to pay more attention to these recommendations and try to
implement them.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Would you yield for a second?
Mr. MOULTON. Yes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. You do not think that budget has any
implication in terms of the lack of staff at the IRS?
Mr. SEPP. I think budget does have somewhat of an
implication, though I would point out that between 2005 and the
present, if you take a look at the three major categories of
the IRS budget, taxpayer service has been declining at the
expense of enforcement and administrative costs. So that is a
priority problem, too.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you.
Mr. MCGREGOR. Can I just say a word?
Mr. MOULTON. Mr. McGregor, yes, sir.
Mr. MCGREGOR. The big C corporations are squealing loudly
because of global competitiveness, and you are hearing them. We
are starting to squeal because we do not want to be left
behind. So that is my answer for you.
Mr. MOULTON. So there is broad consensus among many people
on the principle of a simpler tax code where we are able to
reduce overall rates in exchange for eliminating loopholes. The
problem, Dr. Toder, as you referred to, is that everybody has
at least three or four loopholes that he or she wants to hang
on to. From the small business perspective, what are the carve
outs that are most important if you were to just pick two that
you think are most important to preserve in a reform that would
eliminate many of the loopholes overall?
Mr. Sepp?
Mr. SEPP. I would say the provisions regarding expensing
because they take us as close as we can to the full expensing
ideal that we want in a tax system.
Mr. MOULTON. Mr. Lipps?
Mr. LIPPS. I would say for our situation, the 179 has been
most beneficial. And I would certainly look at the death tax
because I have so many family farms in my area that it is a
bigger problem for the family farm than small businesses
because you have got the $5 million carve out right now.
Mr. MOULTON. Mr. McGregor?
Mr. MCGREGOR. You are asking what do we not want to give
up?
Mr. MOULTON. Exactly.
Mr. MCGREGOR. I would say state and local taxes as a
deduction.
Mr. MOULTON. Great.
Dr. Toder?
Mr. TODER. Well, I am not sure I am----
Mr. MOULTON. That is all right. My time is expired.
Mr. TODER. I am not giving anything up, I guess.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you.
Mr. TODER. I mean, I have my benefits but they are not
business benefits.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired. Thank
you.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Gibson, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. GIBSON. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
panelists' informative hearing. I appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Sepp, a couple of data-related questions. The first
one, if you can, if possible, I would be interested in your
report and analysis in terms of 1987 to 2015, if that is
available. First question is compliance cost as a percentage of
business. Any data you have on that and sort of looking at it
from 1987 to 2015.
Mr. SEPP. Well, there have been attempts to quantify the
costs of the federal tax system going back something on the
order of 70 years, and depending on what you count in the
estimates, the burdens have been figured at anywhere between 1
percent and over 11 percent of actual tax collections. There
was one conducted back in 1993 by Professor James Payne, who
suggested that for every additional dollar of tax raised on the
federal level, there was a 65 cent deadweight loss. Now, my
review, and I am certainly not in academia, but my brief review
of the literature says that is the edge of the envelope as far
as costs go.
Mr. GIBSON. Is there any sense in terms of what the
opportunity costs--have you seen any follow-on studies there?
In other words, it comes disproportionately at capital
investment, or it comes disproportionately at wages and
benefits? Is there any sense on what the opportunity costs are?
Mr. SEPP. It tends to come proportionately on new
investment. That is what a lot of the literature says. Not all
of it, certainly. There is also this problem we have, I think,
in identifying precisely that point, the opportunity cost.
Payne attempted to do that, which is why his estimate is so
high. We have a difficulty trying to figure out how you
quantify something that has never really happened. And I think
that given the fact the last study I was able to find of small
business tax burdens was 2011 for the SBA Office of the
Advocate, this is something Congress might want to explore, is
having some kind of symposium between SBA, private sector
professionals, and the like, and really drill down on this
question of opportunity cost.
Mr. GIBSON. Thank you.
And then the second data-related question. It might not
have empirics on it but maybe intuition or speculation anyway.
It has to do with 1987 to 2015 IRS approach in terms of
education and compliance. Have you noted any significant
changes there in terms of approach, whether or not they are
spending sufficient time helping small businesses who may be
not knowingly complying versus coming in and penalizing them?
Mr. SEPP. I think it is a matter of peaks and valleys. In
the late 1980s, you had Congress engaged in activity like
Taxpayer Bill of Rights I. In 1996, you had the second TBR. In
1998, the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act. And the 1998 act is
what really put the emphasis on reorganizing the agency
retraining employees toward customer service, and thinking more
about the ability of allowing businesses to remain self-
supporting while they were going through collection due
process. The taxpayer advocate though has noted that
increasingly they are relying on the automated collection
system to handle a lot of these things, and I think we probably
hit a peak on the emphasis on proactive service in resolving
these problems somewhere in 2005-2007. It has been downhill
since.
Mr. GIBSON. And do you think that as we proceed as a
Committee, it may be worthwhile for us to sort of recapture
that essence of trying to be helpful?
Mr. SEPP. Absolutely.
Mr. GIBSON. Yeah. And then finally, just from the panel,
given the 1986 reform, a lesson learned. Something that you
think we should--certainly, a lot of people think it was a good
reform, but what should we try to stay away from? One each.
Mr. TODER. All right. I will start.
I think it was a good reform, but in terms of meeting
certain targets, they did something, things that they should
not have done, like the Individual Alternative Minimum Tax in
its current form is really a product of 1986 reform and trying
to get a few more dollars to hit targets. And so I think you
have got to be careful that you do not put time bombs into the
system.
Mr. SEPP. That is good.
Mr. MCGREGOR. I would say that they may have done a few
things wrong but that would be the target going forward.
Mr. SEPP. I would have to agree with Dr. Toder about AMT.
That was a major mistake.
Also, in the current draft--well, the draft from the last
Congress, some of the methods, such as repealing LIFO
accounting might have been a step too far and deserve
reexamination.
Mr. LIPPS. In 1986, we were not in business yet. We had a
dream of being in small business. So I am going to yield to my
esteemed colleagues.
Mr. GIBSON. Yeah. Thank you. This is very helpful.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
is expired.
Ms. Meng, the gentlelady from New York, is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. MENG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, ranking
member. Thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
I believe that certainty and clarity are necessary to
improve the tax code for small businesses, and complications
stem from the various temporary, unstandardized deductions and
credits. However, many of these credits do serve a valuable
purpose in incentivizing financial activities useful for the
public, such as student loans, first time homebuyers, R&D
investment, charity, and so forth. Do you have any ideas that
simplify the tax code while still maintaining a system of
positive incentives for small businesses? And anyone can
answer.
Mr. TODER. I will make a comment on that. I think it would
be very desirable for the Congress to reexamine these proposals
once and for all that you call extenders. Decide which ones you
want to keep and which ones you want to get rid of so we do not
have this uncertainty in this process every single year which
creates difficulty for taxpayers, difficulty for the IRS,
difficulties for the tax system. I mean, there are probably
some of those benefits that you want to make permanent but
there are many that we would be better off without.
Ms. MENG. On another note, our current tax code is not a
progressive tax system because there are many with greater
ability to pay do not always pay a higher rate. Is there more
room in our tax code, and if you have any ideas to reflect the
progressive personal income tax structure.
Mr. TODER. All right. Well, I will comment on that, too. I
think we actually do have a very progressive personal income
tax structure. And to the extent that that does not apply to
everybody and there are some very high income people who are
not paying a large share of tax because of certain tax
benefits, I think the solution to that is to remove those tax
benefits and try to lower rates in compensation as we did in
1986. But, you know, you may want the system to be more
progressive, but I think it is progressive.
Mr. SEPP. I would just add the concern that while we think
a lot about longitudinal fairness in the tax system looking up
and down the income scale, we need to keep looking sideways on
the income scale, making sure that people with roughly the same
amount of income or profit pay roughly the same amount of tax.
And the answer in this system is nowhere close. There was
actually a study by Quantria Strategies for Small Business
Administration which took a look at compliance burdens by
industry for sole proprietorships and the fluctuations were
wild depending on business models and activities. Some like
mining, agriculture, transportation, and warehousing, they had
complexity burdens in terms of hours spent and money spent that
were 500 percent or more higher. Gigantic differences.
Ms. MENG. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Knight, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. KNIGHT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will just make a
couple comments before question.
You know, coming from California, our biggest concern from
small business is not so much the whole complexity of
everything but how much we change. Changing the rules every
year seems to be the number one concern of small businesses. I
cannot do a five-year plan or a 10-year plan if you are going
to change it 5 or 10 times on me, and I cannot invest a certain
amount of money if you are going to change the rules in the
next few years on me.
So let me ask just a broad question about that, about the
Federal Government. How much does certainty help the small
business, especially when it comes to taxes and regulations as
we move forward, and how much has that been changed since the
reforms in the late 1990s?
Mr. LIPPS. It is the most critical part of us deciding to
invest in new facilities, infrastructure, or machinery. If we
know what we are facing and we face it on time--sometimes the
extenders are a little late--if we know what is ahead of us, we
know how much risk can be taken to protect the jobs that we
currently have.
Mr. SEPP. Last month there was an interesting study
conducted by Institute for Policy Innovation where they
reviewed reports from Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and
employment reports from the media, and they determined that the
retroactive extension of section 179 expensing was so sudden
and created a level of certainty after so much uncertainty that
it did not have its intended effect of helping investment.
There was not a measurable rise as expected at least in things
like agricultural equipment investments. It came too little,
too late.
Mr. MCGREGOR. I think the example we heard about bonus
depreciation clearly affects major purchases of capital
equipment. And it can be very damaging.
Mr. TODER. I would like to actually commend the Congress.
You have made great progress since a few years ago when you had
all the Bush tax cuts being expired or extended, and at least
you have settled on big parts of the tax code. You have these
remaining expiring provisions and I would agree bonus
depreciation is very important. Having an investment incentive
that you give after the year is over does not really do very
much for investment. So either keep it, or get rid of it, or
modify it.
Mr. KNIGHT. And I think, you know, several of the members
have hit on a couple of the items that make it very important
for us. You know, if we talk about an overhaul, I am an
optimist, and I would like to see that but I am also a realist,
that there are tens of thousands of people employed by the
government and there are close to a million people employed
that do taxes, that do preparation, that do attorney work on
taxes, and it is very difficult to do an overhaul when you are
talking about close to a couple million jobs across the
country. So I would ask that you have a little bit of an open
mind, too, when we are talking about little pieces that we can
do that will help small business especially, and we can get
them through, especially in Congress where we do not agree all
the time. And getting something that is bipartisan that moves
forward, that gets signed by the president is very important,
especially when we are talking about the entrepreneurs that are
hiring people that are expanding that are helping our economy
like no one else can. So, those are the comments that me, as a
freshman, would like to move forward with and especially the
optimism of getting something done in my first session.
So I yield back the balance of my time. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Hardy, who is chairman of
the
Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and Regulations
is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, as a small business owner myself in the past, the
opportunity to employ is a great thing. And as a business, you
want to have to pay taxes because that means you are going in
the right direction, not the other. Tax deductions or tax
losses is not a good thing.
But through that process, Mr. Sepp, you talked about
manufacturers costing them--large manufacturers costing
somewhere around $960,000 a year to prepare for those taxes.
And I know that you are correct when you talk about one and a
half or bigger for smaller businesses that employ under 50,
that it costs us more. Can you give me an idea why that is? I
know why but I would like to have you explain that.
Mr. SEPP. Well, just that there are certain inescapable
base costs to tax compliance that no business can really avoid,
has to deal with filing. If we are talking about C corps, well,
we have a variety of schedules and whatnot that have to be
filed, but the basic 1120 return takes a lot of time and
effort. If you are looking at Schedule C filers of any size,
the Schedule C might become complicated the larger the business
is, and especially if it does business abroad. But even if
there is no activity abroad, the filing of the Schedule C has a
base cost in time and money that really cannot be avoided. The
National Society of Accountants publishes a whole list of those
costs by form. Also, of course, if you are distributing the
costs over your employees, obviously, fewer employees, greater
costs per employee, that is going to run the math up as well.
Mr. HARDY. I would like to also now go back to Mr. Knight's
discussion. I think he is right on point that business has a
challenge with knowing what the Federal Government is going to
continue to do, what new creative idea they are going to come
up with the tax code. Has anybody wondered whether a lot of the
loss of those businesses over the last eight or so years, or
six to eight years, might have been because businesses invested
in some of those write-offs that they had early opportunities
to do and the change in our economy had us deeply in debt as
businesses because nobody predicted this collapse, but that
because of tax codes actually caused people to do things that
might otherwise have been more prudent to go some other
direction? Does anybody care to touch on that one?
Mr. LIPPS. It caused us to be more conservative than I
think we would have been. We are risk takers. That is the pure
heart of an entrepreneur. However, if you jump in the water and
then you do not make the necessary changes, I am still in the
water. And so I think that it has created a situation where
entrepreneurs have taken less risks. Honestly, in my opinion, I
believe that means that we have hired fewer people as an
aggregate.
Mr. HARDY. Well, along with my comment on that, I guess
back in 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, things were moving along.
You got major tax deductions trying to get the economy moving
again prior to that. You got major tax deductions on equipment
in the construction industry, mining industry, and other
industries that you wanted to utilize that opportunity when you
are spending millions of dollars in taxes and providing that
opportunity. And then the collapse came, which you still owe
that debt but you cannot even make the tax. So now you turn a
different direction. So do you believe there is any cause?
Because there is uncertainty in taxes, the direction they went,
and how they changed in that short of a time.
Mr. LIPPS. Earlier you mentioned that a lot of people did
not see it coming. The government did not see it coming. We did
not see it coming. And 2009 was the first time in our career we
ever had to lay anyone off. If I fire you, that is different.
It does not matter. You earned the right to be fired. But if we
lay you off because we missed something, it was the most
horrible situation our family ever went through because those
team members to us, that is gold. That is our number one asset.
Mr. HARDY. That is the toughest thing you will ever do.
Mr. LIPPS. It was horrible.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you. My time is expired.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Rice, who is
chairman of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and
Capital Access is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. RICE. Thank you.
I want to start with Mr. Lipps and Mr. McGregor because you
are all in business. Mr. Lipps, is your business exposed to
international competition?
Mr. LIPPS. We are really not. The mattress industry is semi
insulated. If you look at the cubic foot, the size of a
mattress product coming from a foreign country, it takes up so
much room in a cargo container that because of not necessarily
weight but because of cubic feet, we are a little more
insulated than many of our small business brethren.
Mr. RICE. Mr. McGregor?
Mr. MCGREGOR. We do a fair amount of business with
Husqvarna in South Carolina. And they buy pullies from us. And
some year we get it and other years we do not, but China is our
competitor there. And we are scheduled to lose that business.
We have not lost it yet, maybe because of the dock strike. I am
not sure.
Mr. RICE. Do you think that our tax code makes you more or
less competitive with your competition in China?
Mr. MCGREGOR. Well, I spent some time in China, and I know
their cost. I think that the tax code is definitely a factor in
our pricing. I am not sure it is enough to make a difference.
Mr. RICE. Basically, I look at the taxes, the price you pay
to keep the government open, and if you are paying more for
your government than they are paying for their government, does
that not put you at a competitive disadvantage?
Mr. MCGREGOR. Their government is putting them in business.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Sepp and Mr. Toder, define--Mr. Toder, would
you define a loophole for me? I keep hearing people throw
around the term ``loophole.'' Like every deduction is a
loophole. What is a loophole?
Mr. TODER. I do not call those provisions loopholes. I call
them tax subsidies, tax benefits, tax expenditures. To me, a
loophole is something that is enacted in the dark of night by
somebody that only a few people benefit from that most people
do not know about, sneaky things. That is why I do not use the
word loophole. I prefer to say a tax preference, which means
something which gives your form of income or your form of
activity more favorable treatment than somebody else.
Mr. RICE. Would you not say that most of these things in
the tax code are intended to promote certain activity and were
enacted with well-intentioned ideas?
Mr. TODER. Absolutely. That does not mean they are good
policy, but absolutely.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Sepp, would you agree with that? What is a
loophole in your mind?
Mr. SEPP. That is an impossible definition because a
loophole to one person is a subsidy or a tax relief provision
to another. I would say though that some things that qualify
for a tax provision being less desirable than more desirable is
it is very narrowly drawn. It is temporary in nature. It has
claw backs built into it that might specifically exclude some
industries from availing themselves of it. So those are things
to look for in formulating better tax benefits.
Mr. RICE. Is the mortgage interest deduction a loophole?
Mr. SEPP. For a write-off for housing, that is a social
goal that Congress has settled on as something that is
desirable for many people. I do not think it necessarily has to
be in the tax code if it is properly----
Mr. RICE. Is the capital gains rate a loophole?
Mr. SEPP. No. Because capital gains taxation is a form of
double taxation in many cases.
Mr. RICE. I have a question for you. Would you characterize
our tax code for us? Is it internationally competitive or
noncompetitive?
Mr. SEPP. Noncompetitive in a number of ways. We have
talked a little bit about----
Mr. RICE. I am running out of time so I have to cut you
off.
Mr. Toder, competitive or noncompetitive?
Mr. TODER. I think our system places some of our companies
at a disadvantage, but it places some of our companies at an
advantage. It is really a case by case situation.
Mr. RICE. I want to follow up with that--on that with you a
little later. I am just running out of time.
Would you characterize our tax code, Mr. Toder, as modern
or outdated?
Mr. TODER. I think it is outdated.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Sepp?
Mr. SEPP. Outdated.
Mr. RICE. Would you say, Mr. Sepp, that our tax code
promotes or stifles economic growth in this country?
Mr. SEPP. Stifles it.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Toder?
Mr. TODER. I do not think it stifles it. I think we could
have a tax code which is more friendly to economic growth, but
I do not think it is a major factor.
Mr. RICE. I think we can do a lot better. I think it
actually stifles economic activity, and I want to end my little
presentation by apologizing to all of you gentlemen that we do
not have leadership on both sides of the aisle here that are
willing to put forth bold ideas about tax reform. So I think we
could do a lot better for this country, and we could do a lot
better to promote economic activity.
Thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
expired.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Brat, is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. BRAT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you all for
coming before us today. It is a pleasure to have you with us.
I have been listening, and several things are merging. I
want you to put on your marketing hats right now. I recently
ran for federal office, knocked on a thousand doors, whatever.
My district is all small business. And you go door to door to
door, and small business says, ``No one listens to us.'' I have
got cattlemen, ranchers, farmers, a bunch of small business
community bankers are by far and away the majority, and some of
them are almost conspiracy minded in terms of the system is
rigged against them. And so at the end of this I will just give
a couple ideas and just put a few of the phrases I have been
hearing forward.
But at the end of this, if you have 30 seconds of messaging
on behalf of small business person across the country, what
would your messaging be to Congress? And a lot of the folks--
Mr. Lipps has been saying over and over and over, that most
small businesses are too busy doing their own thing to spend
significant time thinking about messaging when it does matter
in terms of getting the right policy. And you have kind of got
to get the current moving in the right direction so us
politicians can jump in later and help you, but the current has
got to be moving and it is not moving. And so I always ask my
small business people, hey, start writing in the local papers.
Not political pieces, but with this tax rate, with this
regulation, I cannot stay in business. I am going to go out of
business. My people are going to lose their jobs. Just so you
know.
I just want to get you thinking that way in terms of--I
will come back. We have been mentioning depreciation,
expensing, tax rates, what is the message? What should we be
hitting on there? I have got a tax foundation. Published a
piece on economic and budgetary effects of full expensing of
investment. Mr. Sepp was getting at that. It sounded like if
you could hit that, that was pay dirt. Found cutting corporate
tax rate 10 points would increase GDP about 2 percent, but full
expensing would boost GDP about 5 percent. I am just kind of
asking. Total federal tax revenue would be $97 billion a year.
Also, benefits accrue disproportionately to low end of the
income scale due to job growth, productivity, wages. I am just
kind of throwing those kind of three out--tax rates,
depreciation, expensing, regulatory burden, just as a set up.
Thirty seconds to everybody. Why do we not start with Mr.
Lipps? If you had to message to the country, you are going on
TV, what would you say for small business?
Mr. LIPPS. I would start by agreeing with your initial
comments, that many small businesses have thrown their hands up
and said their voice is not being heard. Earlier in our
testimony you heard someone say that there is not an outcry, an
upswell from the small business community. We are working. That
is why you do not hear that. But a lot of them will tell you
they have no say, so why are they going to invest that time
when they could have been building one more mattress. So that
is my first point.
My second point is I do not hear small businesses saying
find us loopholes or advantages. I find them saying make it
easy enough that I can understand it. I will pay my taxes and I
will go back to work and create a job. So I do not think we are
looking for advantages. I think we are looking for less
complexity.
Mr. BRAT. Good. Good. Thank you.
Mr. Sepp?
Mr. SEPP. My message would be get more involved in the
tools that are available and use them to your advantage.
Volunteer for the taxpayer advocacy panels. That is where tax
complexity is addressed at the most basic level. Also, have
more committees outside of Ways and Means Committee get
involved in tax complexity analysis. There was a requirement in
the 1998 law that we have an analysis of complexity
accompanying every major tax provision coming out of Ways and
Means or Finance. We have not adhered to that rule. We have got
to have more coordination between those panels and the IRS's
taxpayer advocate to get these suggestions into the
policymaking stream so that businesses do feel their concerns
are being taken seriously.
Mr. BRAT. Right.
Mr. McGregor?
Mr. MCGREGOR. I would echo simplicity, permanence, rates
designed for growth and acknowledged by everyone that that is
the intent. As far as expensing, I see that as more of a
deferral so I am not as excited about that.
Mr. BRAT. Mr. Toder, sorry, 19 seconds.
Mr. TODER. Okay. I agree with my fellow panelists on
simplicity. You know, I think everyone should be paying taxes
commensurate with their income, but we should make it easy for
them to do that and we should have a lower rates rather than
special benefits.
Mr. BRAT. Thank you all for being with us. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to thank our distinguished panel here, both
this morning and this afternoon, because we are afternoon now.
I think you all did an excellent job, and I think some of the
stuff we already inherently knew but you said it so well that
it is going to stick. And I think one of the things you said is
how significant it is that we not only reform our corporate tax
code but also the individual. It has to go hand in hand, and we
need to simplify it. There was consensus on a lot of things
here, and we intend on this Committee to work with Paul Ryan
and the Ways and Means Committee as we move forward on any
reform package.
And I want to thank the ranking member and minority members
of the Committee also for participating today. And I would ask
unanimous consent that members have five legislative days to
submit statements and supporting materials for the record. And
if there is no further business to come before the Committee,
we are adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez,
and members of the Committee. I am pleased to be here on behalf
of the National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB). Our
family owns Sleep Tite Mattress Factory & Showroom and has been
a member of NFIB since 1995. I also currently serve on the
NFIB-Ohio Leadership Council. Thank you for holding today's
hearing, ``Tax Reform: Ensuring that Main Street Isn't Left
Behind.'' The current tax code negatively impacts small and
closely-held businesses in several important ways, so I
appreciate the invitation to be here today to discuss these
important issues from the perspective of a small business
owner.

The NFIB is the nation's leading small business advocacy
organization. The typical NFIB member employs about 8 to 10
employees with annual gross receipts of about $500,000. All of
NFIB's members are independently owned, which is to say that
none are publicly traded corporations. While there is no one
definition of a small business, the problems NFIB members
confront, relative to the tax code, are representative of most
small businesses. A few consistent concerns are raised
regardless of the trade or industry in which the small business
is engaged.

As part of representing small business owners, NFIB
frequently conducts surveys of both the NFIB membership and the
small business population as a whole, and taxes consistently
rank as one of their greatest concerns. In the most recent
publication of the NFIB Research Foundation's Small Business
Problems and Priorities, 5 of the top 10 small business
concerns are tax-related.\1\ In fact, the February 2015 Small
Business and Economic Trends report ranks taxes as the number
one problem small business owners currently face. Right now,
taxes are a bigger problem than poor sales, the cost and
quality of labor, and government regulation.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ nfib.com/problems&priorities2012

\2\ nfib.com/sbet

I would like to spend the rest of my time telling you about
my personal experience. Sleep Tite Mattress Factory & Showroom
was founded in 1947, by Stan Rothman. In 1990, our family
founded an institutional (acute and long term care) bedding
company, HomeCare Mattress, Inc. In 1992, we merged HomeCare
Mattress, Inc with Sleep Tite. We started with 4 employees and
now have 15 full-time employees. We are currently structured as
a c-corporation, but we started as a pass-through. While often
times a struggle, we are VERY proud to offer our team-members
health insurance, a 401K program, paid sick leave, paid
vacation time, and more benefits. Aggressive tax rates, and
compliance efforts directed to fulfill intrusive regulations,
severely impact our ability to offer a full benefits package
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
that our employees need and deserve.

We are proud of Sleep Tite Mattress Factory. We think you
would be, too. As I mentioned, we strive to offer our team
members a positive work environment that offers a learning
experience, the ability to make decisions, a career opportunity
and full benefits. Beyond that, we believe community
involvement is critical. Small businesses are the ``Fabric of
the Community.'' For example, across America you will find
small businesses sponsoring school plays, peewee football
teams, cheerleading squads, and church youth group programs--
the list goes on. The small business owner works in the
community, hires in the community and LIVES in the community.
Sleep Tite Mattress has been recognized by our schools for our
involvement and won our area Chamber of Commerce Business of
the Year Award in 1999. That makes us feel good. What makes us
feel even better is seeing our employees grow and build their
lives and stay with our company for years. To serve our
employees and our community, we must have lower tax rates,
fewer regulations and a less confusing, less complex tax code.

We have been in business in our community for over 24
years. I witnessed and experienced what punitive local, state
and federal laws were doing to the business community in
Franklin, Ohio, and in our surrounding communities. So, in
1999, I did something about it. I ran for city council and won
a seat. After encouraging a few fellow business owners, and
business people, to run for the city council, I was honored to
serve two terms as Mayor of Franklin. We concentrated on fixing
the problems a bloated bureaucracy and out-of-touch government
had levied on our city.

Our Council addressed local incentive programs that
unfairly assisted large corporations but did not offer
incentives to small business. We instituted a ``Downtown
Improvement Program'' (``DIP'') that offered grants and low
interest loans to small businesses locating or expanding in our
community. We met with local zoning, planning and building
officials and redesigned zoning laws to assist businesses with
fewer or less restrictive regulations (example: sign ordinances
and requirements). Not every small business owner can run for
elected office. Instead, Congress should work to reform our tax
code in order to help small business owners get back to doing
what they should be doing: running their small business. Over
85 percent of NFIB members agree that Congress should
fundamentally reform the tax code.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ nfib.com/taxsurvey

As Congress considers tax reform, I would encourage you to
keep these most important goals in mind. Achieving these goals
will greatly enhance the ability of small and closely-held
businesses to thrive in the 21st century: 1) permanently keep
the tax rates low, 2) do not create disparity between the
corporate rate and individual rate, 3) reduce complexity, and
4) do not separate the business owner from the business. NFIB
members are willing to make the tradeoffs necessary to lower
tax rates, such as reducing or eliminating deductions, credits,
or exclusions.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ibid.

Should Congress enact comprehensive tax reform that
achieves these goals, small business owners would no longer
face one of their most consistent complaints: arbitrary and
inconsistent tax preferences, constant change and complexity in
the current federal code.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Ibid.

Small businesses truly are the engine of economic growth.
This isn't just a slogan, as small businesses created two-
thirds of the net new jobs over the last decade. Small business
owners are risk takers and entrepreneurs. They are the last
businesses to lay off employees when business declines and slow
to rehire when business picks up. The owner works additional
hours until they can take it no more. When small business hires
an employee, it is their intent to keep them on for the long
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
run.

The current tax code has become a confusing and
unpredictable challenge for the vast majority of small business
owners. Our tax laws should not deter or hinder the ability of
small business owners to create or expand their businesses.
Taxes are a MAJOR issue for ALL small business owners. Tax law
can dictate the business decisions that an owner must make,
whether it is the type of structure to adopt, whether to make
an investment in programs or machinery, to expand their
facility, or to hire employees.

After decades of patchwork changes to the tax code,
Congress needs to make major adjustments to our tax laws to
reduce complexity and confusion and encourage business growth.
I appreciate Congress taking a serious look at reforming the
tax code and urge you to keep in mind the unique challenges
that face small businesses.

Thank you again for having me here today and I'm happy to
answer any questions you may have.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

TESTIMONY BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Hearing On:

Tax Reform: Ensuring that Main Street Isn't Left Behind

Dan McGregor, Chairman, McGregor Metalworking Companies

April 15, 2015

Background

Thank you Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify today on these important topics. My name is Dan
McGregor and I am the Chairman of McGregor Metalworking
Companies (MCGREGOR) and a board member of the S Corporation
Association.

My family business began in 1965 as an investment with my
father and 3 brothers. We purchased an 8 man tool and die shop
in Springfield, Ohio. Since then, we gradually expanded to a
total of four businesses in Springfield and another located in
Aiken, South Carolina, employing a total of 375 workers spread
across both states. These are good paying manufacturing jobs,
with health insurance and retirement plans, in areas that need
employment opportunities.

MCGREGOR is primarily engaged in contract manufacturing in
the metalworking industry. We perform a wide variety of
services such as metal stamping, spinning, welding, machining
and assembly for customers in industries including locomotive,
auto, agricultural, and law and garden companies. Our customers
include General Electric, Honda, John Deere and many others.

We look at our taxes as another cost in a highly
competitive, low-margin business. Almost all of our customers
ask us for price decreases each year ranging from 1 to 3
percent. Contract manufacturing is under heavy competitive
pressure from global and internal competition within our
customer base.

Importance of the S Corporation to Family Businesses

From the beginning, MCGREGOR has been a family owned and
run business. Our current shareholders are McGregor family
members of the second and third generation. A central component
of the success of our business has been our S corporation
status.

When McGregor Metalworking was a C corporation, we paid out
few dividends to our shareholders abiding by the minimum
dividend payout rules. Growing the business was our objective
and paying double taxation did not fit with our entrepreneurial
spirit. This situation is often referred to as the ``double
tax'' since the same business income is taxed twice. The
prevalence of the double tax leading to minimization of
dividends to shareholders causes family C-Corporation
shareholders not active in the business to become less
interested in the success of the business. This is not a
healthy situation for closely held businesses being passed on
to the next generation.

In 1986, anticipating Congressional action to overhaul the
tax code, we converted to S corporation status. At the time, we
thought that the opportunity to be taxed as a ``pass-through''
to eliminate the double corporate tax would allow us to
reinvigorate our company and our shareholders. Sure enough,
after nearly 30 years as an S corporation, I am positive there
is no better way to organize a family business like my own.

So much has been written about the erosion of the corporate
tax base in recent years that an essential reality has been
lost--the business tax base is larger today than it was prior
to 1986 tax reforms. It is true the corporate base has declined
since 1986, but the growth of the pass through business sector
has made up for it and more.

According to the Tax Foundation, when my company converted
to an S corporation in 1986, pass-through businesses
contributed only 1 percent to our GDP. Today, pass-through
businesses make up 6 percent of U.S. income. As a result, the
business tax base--combining corporate and pass through
businesses--has expanded from 9 percent to 11 percent of our
national income. The United States today is more
entrepreneurial because of the 1986 tax reforms and the growth
of the pass through business sector.

S Corporation Taxation & the Fiscal Cliff

There is much confusion about how S corporations are taxed.
We pay tax on all our business income when it is earned and
regardless of how much is distributed to our shareholders.

Since the tax is paid at the shareholder level, we make
sure to distribute every quarter enough earnings for
shareholders to pay their tax estimate. And since S
corporations are allowed only one class of stock, those
distributions must be equal to the highest marginal rate faced
by any of my shareholders.

Prior to the fiscal cliff resolution, the top federal
marginal rate was 35 percent and the business as a whole had a
tax rate of about 33.3 percent taking into account federal
deductions for section 199 and the R&E tax credit as well as
state and local taxes. That meant that every quarter we would
distribute at least 34 cents of every dollars we earned to pay
the S corporation's taxes.

Following the resolution of the fiscal cliff, the top tax
rate on my shareholders increased to approximately 41.4 percent
due to the higher 39.6 percent marginal rate plus, where
applicable, the new 3.8 percent Affordable Care Act tax and the
effect of the reinstatement of the Pease limitation on itemized
deductions. As a result, today we have to distribute
approximately 42 cents of every dollar earned so our
shareholders can pay the federal, state and local S corporation
tax.

This sharp increase has hurt our ability to compete, grow,
and create jobs. Think about it this way--we are in a capital
intensive business and have two sources of capital: what we can
borrow from the bank and what we retain from our earnings.
Unlike a large multinational, we simply do not have access to
the public capital markets.

During the ``big recession'' of 2008 and 2009 our bank
added two convenants to our loans: First, a debt service
coverage ratio where free cash flow must cover bank payments by
a multiple of 1.25 and, second, a cap on our total debt to
equity not to exceed a multiple of two. In order for our
companies survive and grow, we need retained earnings, but
right now they are being depleted by our tax burden.

Prior to the fiscal cliff, we were able to retain up to 66
cents of ever dollar we earned. Those retained earnings formed
the core of our working and investment capital and over the
years we used them to grow the business from 8 workers to 375.
After the fiscal cliff, we have the option to retain only 58
cents of a dollar of earnings, depending on our annual budget
and capital needs.

I use a rough estimate that it takes between $30,000 and
$40,000 of after-tax earnings coupled with prudent bank debt to
create the investment that will justify a new hire. Having
MCGREGOR's effective tax rate rise from 34 to 42 percent means
lots of lost job opportunities.

Tax Reform

I understand Congress is struggling with the challenge of
reforming the tax code and making our approach to taxing
business income more competitive. Part of this discussion is
the need to reduce the tax rate imposed on C corporations. It's
hard to compete against foreign companies when you are paying
significantly higher levels of tax. I am sympathetic to these
concerns and I know that the S Corporation Association has been
supportive of cutting the corporate rate to something more in
line with the rest of the world.

But the same arguments that support cutting the corporate
rate also apply to pass through businesses like my own. We face
the same competitive pressures as C corporations, and we
currently pay a higher tax rate than both the company
headquartered overseas and the C corporation down the street.

Tax reform that broadened the tax base while reducing the
tax rate on C corporations only would increase this disparity.
Under the worst case scenario where MCGREGOR loses LIFO, the
R&E tax credit, and the Section 199 deduction, I estate our
effective tax rate would rise from 42 to in excess of 46
percent. No amount of expensing or other band aide provisions
would offset this hit.

A 2011 study by Ernst & Young reinforced this point. They
found that corporate-only reform would raise taxes on my
company and others like it by 8 percent per year or $27 billion
overall--and that does not include the effects of the 2013
fiscal cliff tax hike.

This recent history illustrates why the proposals for
``corporate-only'' tax reform are so troubling to me and other
owners of pass-through businesses. Rather than provide needed
rate relief to all businesses, corporate reform would reduce
rates on C corporations only, increasing the differential
between C and S corporation top rates from the current five to
ten percentage points up to fifteen percentage points and more.
It would return the tax code to pre-1986, when nearly all
businesses were C corporations and tax considerations played a
measurably negative role in their governance.

It also would leave S corporation owners with two equally
painful choices. We could remain an S corporation and attempt
to compete against domestic and foreign companies while paying
significantly higher tax rates. Or we could convert back to C
status to access the lower rate and, like most C corporations,
stop paying dividends to avoid the double tax.

This inability to share our company's earnings among family
members would strike at the very heart of our identity as a
family-owned business. Why own a private business if you are
unable to share in its success? Under such circumstances,
selling the business to a public corporation with no need to
pay dividends and a ready market for its stock would become
increasingly attractive. It would also mean that the business
decisions affecting 375 workers in Springfield would now be
made in a corporate boardroom someplace else.

As an alternative to corporate-only tax reform, the S
Corporation Association and other allied trade groups have
advocated for three key principles to be adopted in any tax
reform effort:

1. Tax reform should be simplified, comprehensive and
improve the tax treatment of individuals, pass through
businesses and corporations alike;

2. Tax reform should seek to restore rate parity for
the top rates paid by individuals, pass through
businesses and corporations; and

3. Tax reform should seek to reduce or eliminate the
double tax paid by C corporations.

These principles are articulated in a letter attached to
the back of my testimony and supported by over 100 business
groups, including the National Federation of Independent
Business, the Precision Metalforming Association, the American
Farm Bureau, and the National Restaurant Association.

Other Tax Considerations

Let me briefly mention three other tax issues of importance
to MCGREGOR.

First, as a manufacturer, MCGREGOR engages in a significant
level of research and development, and we therefore take
advantage of the R&E tax credit. The usefulness of the credit
is limited, however, by the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT). When
the advantages and disadvantages of the pass through business
structure are discussed, the role of the AMT rarely comes up,
but it is significantly negative. Not only does the AMT raise
the taxes of many of my shareholders, it also precludes them
from benefiting from the R&E tax credit, thereby diluting the
value of the credit to MCGREGOR. Allowing taxpayers paying the
AMT to access the R&E tax credit would solve this problem.
Getting rid of the AMT entirely would be even better.

Second, as a family owned business, succession and the
estate tax are a constant challenge for MCGREGOR. The outcome
of the fiscal cliff negotiations set the estate tax exemption
to $5 million and the marginal rate at 40 percent, but for a
business the size of MCGREGOR, those levels mean we still have
to deal with the effects of the estate tax as our shareholders
grow older. Any family that grows their business beyond that
exemption level must constantly made this tax part of their
family business strategy. Often tax strategy is contrary to the
best interests of the business and the family members.
Transition of ownership in privately held businesses is never
easy and the estate tax is often the death knell of family
business continuance.

Finally, there are a number of smaller tax items improving
the governance of S corporations that should be enacted and/or
made permanent, including the shorter recognition period for
built-in gains and leveling the tax treatment of charitable
donations of S corporation stock. These provisions have been
championed by Representatives Reichert (R-WA) and Kind (D-WI)
for years and have already passed the House this year.

Conclusion

McGregor Metalworking has been proud to provide quality,
high paying jobs to workers in Springfield for over 50 years. S
corporations around the country do the same thing, employing
one out of four private sector workers and contributing
significantly to our national income. The reforms enacted in
1986 helped MCGREGOR and other S corporations thrive by
allowing us to operate in a significantly superior business
structure. Any reform considered by Congress should seek to
strengthen and grow the pass through sector. With the tax
reform principles I have laid out today, I am confident that
MCGREGOR and other pass-through businesses will continue to
drive job creation and economic growth in communities like
Springfield for years to come.

Thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any of
your questions or even better I invite you to come to
Springfield to visit our plants and see the results of
reinvestment by S Corporations.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Association for Enterprise Opportunity (AEO) is
submitting testimony in support of comprehensive tax reform and
to recommend improvements to certain tax policies. AEO is the
voice of microbusiness in the United States. For two decades,
AEO and its more than 400 member organizations have helped
millions of entrepreneurs contribute to economic growth while
supporting themselves, their families and their communities.

AEO commends the Committee for convening a hearing on such
a critical topic. While many small business advocates have
shared their views on tax policy, AEO is adding the voice of
microbusiness to this important discussion. There is consensus
that our tax system should be simpler.\1\ Citing numerous
reports from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) National Tax
Payer Advocate and Small Business Administration (SBA) Office
of Advocacy, it is clear that small businesses face a tax code
that drains them of their two most valued resources: time and
money. Notably, these burdens are not uniform across company
size--big business has the resources to more easily comply
with, and even shape, the tax code.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Small Business,
Memorandum on Tax Reform: Ensuring that Main Street Isn't Left Behind
(2015), available at http://smallbusiness.house.gov/uploadedfiles/4-15-
2015
--
hearing
--
memo.pdf

Much of this is due to a tax code that is outdated. The
entrepreneurial landscape no longer aligns with our anticipated
tax system, last reformed more than 25 years ago. Businesses
now operate everywhere, including homes and shared office
spaces, and the ``independent workforce'' is growing at an
incredible pace: the number of Americans who ``primarily work
on their own'' is up 14% (1.3 million people) since 2001.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Joel Kotkin, ``Rise of the 1099 Economy,'' Forbes Magazine,
July 25, 2012.

These 21st century entrepreneurs struggle to navigate the
deductions and credits designed to spur business creation. Of
the more than 20 tax provisions supporting small businesses,
almost all require increased record keeping. This requires time
and money that could be put to better use. It is also these
entrepreneurs who hold the key to jumpstarting our economy. As
noted in AEO's Power of One in Three report, if 1 in 3
microbusinesses hired just one employee, America would be at
full employment.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Association for Enterprise Opportunity, ``Power of 1 in 3.
http://www.aeoworks.org/pdf/one
--
in
--
three.pdf

The majority of these microbusinesses are structured as
pass-through entities, allowing business owners to calculate
and pay taxes on their individual taxes. According to the U.S.
Census Bureau, for example, sole proprietorships make up a full
third (33.6%) of all pass-through businesses that pay taxes at
individual rates. For this reason, AEO urges that any reform to
the corporate tax code be accompanied by a balanced reform to
the individual code. Comprehensive tax reform is the only
option to ensure that a vast majority of microbusinesses do not
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
immediately face a significant and unfair disadvantage.

Any overhaul of the tax system should also be guided by the
basic principles of simplicity and fairness. In AEO's view, tax
compliance--while necessary--should not be a barrier to
entrepreneurship. Microbusinesses should expect a tax system
that collects revenue in a consistent manner, offering
certainty from year to year. The annual sprint to extend tax
credits and deductions, or ``extenders,'' is a prime example of
how the current system gives business owners little certainty.
Making tax expenditures that are proven to support small
businesses permanent would eliminate annual confusion over
credits and deductions.

Similarly, tax rates for businesses ought to be the same
and tax liability should not depend on how a business is
organized. American corporations only pay an effective tax rate
of 12.6%, a far cry from the statutory 35%, while small
businesses operating as S-Corps pay an effective tax rate of
nearly 27%.\4\ Conversely, tax deductions or credits should be
applicable to any form of business (e.g. the self-employed
cannot deduct health expenses, an option available to other
businesses). Reforms should address these inequities. In our
view, business is business.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Corporate Income Tax:
Effective Tax Rates Can Differ Significantly from the Statutory Rate.''
2013. Available online at http://www.gao/gov/assets/660/654957.pdf

In addition to ensuring that broader reforms take small
businesses into consideration, AEO recommends the following
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
policies that will benefit Main Street:

Expand Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Program to Assist
Microbusiness

More than 1 in 4 (27%) of microbusinesses cited tax
preparation as a problem for business.\5\ This does not have to
be the case. Already a program exists that could aid
entrepreneurs. The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA)
Program currently assists low- and moderate-income (LMI)
individuals with support from IRS-certified volunteers.
Congress and the IRS should expand the VITA Program's capacity
to help microbusiness owners navigate the tax system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Corporation for Enterprise Development, ``Microbusinesses:
America's Unsung Heroes.'' 2013. Available online at: http://cfed.org/
assets/pdfs/FactFile
--
May2013.pdf

First, the IRS Office of Stakeholder Partnerships,
Education and Communication (SPEC) Office should improve the
support that the program delivers to microbusiness owners. The
program's capacity to serve microbusiness owners is limited by
program rules that preclude VITA sites from preparing all but
the simplest Schedule C forms. The Corporation for Enterprise
Development (CFED) found that VITA sites are ready and willing
to do more for microbusiness.\6\ The IRS has the authority to
lift the restrictions on Schedule C preparation at its
discretion, without initiating the lengthy process of proposing
a regulation for public comment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Corporation for Enterprise Development, ``Innovations in
Microbusiness.'' 2014. Available online at: http://cfed.org/assets/
pdfs/Innovations
--
in
--
Microbusiness.pdf

The Entrepreneur Start-Up Growth Act (H.R. 3571),
introduced in 2011 by Committee Member Judy Chu, proposed a
pilot program to test the feasibility of expanding VITA support
to self-employed tax filers. AEO hopes that similar legislation
will be reintroduced in the 114th Congress. New provisions
could consider authorizing VITA sites to implement pay-as-you-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
go fees for the most complex tax filings.

Aiding Underserved Communities through Proven Tax Policy

The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is an important tax
credit for low-income workers and allows entrepreneurs to
reinvest their EITC back into their business. Research has
shown that the EITC promotes work, reduces poverty, and
benefits microbusinesses.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, ``EITC and Child Tax
Credits Promote Work, Reduce Poverty, and Support Children's
Development.'' (2015). Available online at http://www.cbpp.org/cms/
?fa=view&id=3793

The EITC can be strengthened to continue to aid underserved
communities. Interestingly, the current structure of the EITC
(withholding credit in U.S. Treasury) has increased savings
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
among low- and moderate-income individuals--a lauded goal.

Create and Expand Credits Needed by Microbusiness

AEO believes a New Entrepreneur Tax Credit would
incentivize business creation. Studies have consistently found
that underserved communities and individuals benefit from self-
employment and new business ventures.\8\ AEO encourages
Congress to look further at small business tax provisions
already in the tax code and how they could benefit new
businesses during its time of greatest challenge.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Brookings Institution, ``Minority and Women Entrepreneurs:
Building Capital, Networks, and Skills.'' (2015). Available online at
http://www.brookings.edu/ /media/research/files/papers/2015/03/11-
hamilton-project-expanding-jobs/
minority
--
women
--
entrepreneurs
--

--

building
--
skills
--
barr
--
final.pdf

Established microbusinesses should also be supported to
save for their retirement. The SBA Office of Advocacy found
that microbusinesses, especially those owned by minorities, are
the least likely to have retirement savings. Currently, the
Saver's Credit exists to address this issue. That credit,
however, is nonrefundable, needlessly complex and is defined by
sharp income eligibility cliffs. These shortcomings mean that
only a very small percentage of low-income tax filers qualify
for the credit, and an even smaller number actually claim the
credit. By simplifying how microbusiness owners claim the
credit and by making it refundable, Congress can improve the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Saver's Credit's ability to aid saving for retirement.

The need for action on comprehensive tax policy is clear.
In our view, addressing the corporate rate alone would be
unfair for the microbusiness community at the very backbone of
the American economy. Reforms should be enacted, based on the
ideas of a simpler and fair tax code. Finally, should a tax
overhaul not be viable this Congress, there are still small,
but important, tax changes for policymakers to consider to
strengthen the community AEO serves.

Thank you for consideration of these views and for this
Committee's efforts to support microbusiness.
About AEO

The Association for Enterprise Opportunity (AEO) is the
voice of microbusiness in the United States. For two decades,
AEO and its more than 400 member organizations have helped
millions of entrepreneurs contribute to economic growth while
supporting themselves, their families and their communities.
AEO members and partners include a broad range of organizations
that provide capital and services to assist underserved
entrepreneurs in starting, stabilizing and expanding their
businesses. Together, we are working to change the way that
capital and services flow to underserved entrepreneurs so that
they can create jobs and opportunities for all.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

On behalf of women entrepreneurs nationwide and our diverse
group of Coalition Partners, Women Impacting Public Policy
(WIPP) submits the following statement identifying the need for
tax reforms to benefit women business owners.

As the advocate for the women's business community, WIPP
has always supported a simpler and fairer tax code. Nearly 90%
of women-owned firms are small businesses that, as this
Committee has noted, face increased burdens and costs from an
outdated tax system.\1\ Most important to women business
owners, though, is the need for comprehensive reform.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Small Business,
Memorandum on Tax Reform: Ensuring that Main Street Isn't Left Behind.
2015. Available online at http://smallbusiness.house.gov/uploadedfiles/
4-15-2015
--
hearing
--
memo.pdf

In the current environment of tax reform proposals,
agreement is building on the need to lower the corporate tax
rate to be globally competitive. Doing so without consideration
for the millions of pass-through entities paying business taxes
as individuals would be unfair. Tax reform must be done
comprehensively. Raising or lowering the corporate or
individual rate independent of the other would shift the
balance between business types more than three decades in the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
making.

Change, however, is needed. Not only has the business
environment noticeably evolved since the last tax overhaul in
1986, but also the American economy. Simply put, now is the
time for reform.

WIPP believes that two overarching themes should guide a
re-write of the tax code: simplicity and fairness. The current
system is too complex, creating confusion and frustration for
women-owned businesses. The system is also unfair to the vast
majority of women-owned firms that are small businesses,
because they do not have the same capabilities and resources as
larger corporations that take advantage of the code's
complexity.

Bringing Simplicity to the Tax Code

Part of making tax reform simple is making tax reform
permanent. Tax laws changed the Internal Revenue Service's
(IRS) tax code on two different occasions in 2013, and the IRS
National Taxpayer Advocate stated that these changes often
generate taxpayer confusion.\2\ In addition, Congressional
action on business deductions on a piecemeal basis makes
planning difficult. Permanent tax reform will lead to more
certainty, and as a result, better-informed business decisions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Internal Revenue Service, National Taxpayer Advocate: 2014
Report to Congress. 2015. Available online at http://
www.taxpayeradvocate.irs.gov/media/default/documents/2014-annual-
report/volume-one.pdf

Complexity has costs for the government as well. It
increases the ability of firms and individuals to hide
revenues. A simpler code and filing system would make
perpetrators of tax evasion more obvious to an IRS struggling
with diminished resources. The annual tax gap--the significant
amount of revenue owed but not collected--is partially caused
by the code's complexity. In 2001, the most recent year
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
analyzed by the IRS, the tax gap was $345 billion.

The view of the tax code with regard to complexity is best
summarized by the National Taxpayer Advocate in its most recent
report to Congress: ``We have to face up to the fact that we
have an incredibly complex tax system that, by virtue of its
complexity, creates burden, confusion, and unfairness.'' \3\
WIPP agrees, and urges Congress to address these challenges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Internal Revenue Service, National Taxpayer Advocate: 2014
Report to Congress Executive Summary (2015), available online at http:/
/www.taxpayeradvocate.irs.gov/Media/Default/Documents/2014-Annual-
Report-to-Congress-Executive-Summary.pdf

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ensuring the Tax Code is Fair

American women-owned businesses come in all shapes and
sizes, including partnerships, S-corps, C-corps, LLCs, and
sole-proprietorships. Having different rules for different
businesses only increases complexity (see above). Such a tax
system hinders growth and discourages businesses to grow in a
way that is best suited for their efforts and development.

Whether caused by different compliance costs, business
structures, or accounting methods, the reality is,
entrepreneurs are paying more than big business. American
corporations only pay an effective tax rate of 12.6%, which is
nowhere near the statutory 35%, while small businesses
operating as S-Corps pay an effective tax rate of nearly
27%.\4\ All the while, small firms are paying 67% more in tax
compliance.\5\ Resolving this inequity should be a goal of the
next revision of the tax code.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Corporate Income Tax:
Effective Tax Rates Can Differ Significantly from the Statutory Rate.''
2013. Available online at http:www.gao.gov/assets/660/654957.pdf
\5\ Small Business Administration, ``The Impact of Regulatory Costs
on Small Firms 7-8.'' 2010. Available online: https://www.sba.gov/
sites/default/files/
The%20Impact%20of%20Regulatory%20Costs%20on%Small%20Firms%20%28Full%29.p
df

While WIPP is optimistic that the 114th Congress can lead
on tax reform, smaller tax policies can aid women entrepreneurs
without a broader overhaul. In the absence of comprehensive
reform, there are steps Congress can take to further support
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
women entrepreneurs.

Incentivize New Businesses

Both chambers of Congress search, almost annually, for ways
the tax code can support start-up companies and newly found
businesses. WIPP recommends making many of the tax credits and
deductions already proven to support small businesses available
to newly formed businesses in their first three years. In the
event of an overhaul that removes ``tax extenders,'' they could
still be offered to the newest small businesses.

Employee-owned Businesses

Businesses with employees who are financially invested in
the company's success often produce impressive results. That is
why WIPP recommends that any tax reform avoid modifying the
provisions that support Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOPs).
ESOPs have been a valuable option for employees to be rewarded
for hard work and to move on after the departure of an owner.
Even more important, they represent another way for small
businesses to access capital at low cost. These plans should
carry protections to prevent undue risk to employees, but have
also demonstrated an increase in production and profitability
of many small businesses.

Simplify and Expand Cash Accounting Method

Most small businesses operate in a pretty simplistic
manner: income and expenses run through the same bank account--
similar to a personal checking account that most Americans use.
Currently, the tax code does not reflect this practice--instead
holding many small businesses to the same accounting standards
as global corporations and publicly traded companies.

This does not have to be the case. Expanding the cash
accounting method to a larger threshold would give more women
entrepreneurs a simpler income reporting mechanism, allowing
them to run their businesses and focus on growth.

Moreover, as the Kogod Tax Center has noted, the cash
accounting method should be simplified as well. There is no
benefit to the IRS, and certainly a detriment to small
businesses, by keeping unnecessary complications in this
accounting method.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Testimony of Donald Williamson to the House Small Business
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital Access, ``Cash
Accounting: A Simpler Method for Firms?'' (2014), available online at:
http://smallbusiness.house.gov/uploadedfiles/7-10-2014 williamson
testimony.pdf.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Expand the Small Business Health Care Tax Credit

The Affordable Care Act included a tax credit for small
businesses that provided health insurance to their employees.
Currently, the tax credit is only available to businesses with
fewer than 25 employees and average wages of less than $50,000.
Moreover, to receive the full tax credit, which covers up to
50% of employer-paid premiums, businesses must have 10 or fewer
employees and average wages of up to $25,000. Women business
owners have shared with WIPP that the credit is too restrictive
to be valuable.

WIPP recommends expanding eligibility for the tax credit.
Under legislation in this Congress, the Small Business Tax
Credit Accessibility Act (S. 379), these restrictions would be
relaxed to make businesses with up to 50 employees and average
wages of up to $80,025 eligible for the tax credit.
Additionally, it would extend the number of consecutive years a
small business can claim the tax credit from two (current law)
to three years. It also removes the requirement that employers
claiming the credit must contribute the same percentage of the
cost for each employee's health insurance. Women business
owners want to provide coverage to their employees. Accessing
that help should be easy, and not limited to a few businesses.

Thank you for the consideration of these views. WIPP has
long appreciated the role of the House Small Business Committee
as an advocate for the diverse business community, including
women entrepreneurs.

[all]
