- KEEP IT SIMPLE: SMALL BUSINESS TAX SIMPLIFICATION AND REFORM, MAIN STREET SPEAKS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

KEEP IT SIMPLE: SMALL BUSINESS TAX
SIMPLIFICATION AND REFORM, MAIN STREET SPEAKS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC GROWTH, TAX AND CAPITAL ACCESS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 13, 2016
__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-054
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-833                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Emily Murphy, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Tim Huelskamp...............................................     1
Hon. Judy Chu....................................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Troy K. Lewis, Managing Member, Lewis & Associates, CPAs,
LLC, Draper, UT, testifying on behalf of the American Institute
of CPAs and the Mobile Workforce Coalition.....................     3
Mr. Mel Schwarz, Partner and Director of Tax Legislative Affairs,
Grant Thornton LLP, Washington, DC.............................     5
Mr. Robert M. Russell, Attorney--International Tax Controversy,
Planning and Policy, Alliantgroup, Washington, DC..............     6
Ms. Julie Verratti, Director of Business Development/Founder,
Denizens Brewing, Silver Spring, MD............................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Troy K. Lewis, Managing Member, Lewis & Associates, CPAs,
LLC, Draper, UT, testifying on behalf of the American
Institute of CPAs and the Mobile Workforce Coalition.......    17
Mr. Mel Schwarz, Partner and Director of Tax Legislative
Affairs, Grant Thornton LLP, Washington, DC................    26
Mr. Robert M. Russell, Attorney--International Tax
Controversy, Planning and Policy, Alliantgroup, Washington,
DC.........................................................    31
Ms. Julie Verratti, Director of Business Development/Founder,
Denizens Brewing, Silver Spring, MD........................    37
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
Statement of Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr...................    42

KEEP IT SIMPLE: SMALL BUSINESS TAX
SIMPLIFICATION AND REFORM, MAIN STREET SPEAKS

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital
Access,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Tim Huelskamp
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Huelskamp, Brat, Kelly, Chu, and
Bishop.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Good morning. I am pleased to be joined
today, or at least later by our colleague, Representative
Bishop. And he will join us later. But good morning. Thank you
all for being with us today, and I call this meeting to order.
On Monday, April 18th, Americans will once again observe
Tax Day. Small business owners across the country will be
filing their tax returns, and for many small business owners,
tax costs drive business decisions. The tax compliance costs
currently imposed on small businesses are unacceptable.
Employers with more than 50 employees face a tax compliance
burden of somewhere between $182 and $191, while the smallest
employers with one to five employees, spend between $4,308 and
$4,736 per employee. Some of this difference results from
economies of scale, but the difference is still astronomical.
We should be encouraging our small businesses and helping them
to succeed, not erecting barriers to block the way.
Every dollar that a small employer spends on tax compliance
is a dollar that could have been used to invest back in the
business or to hire another employee. Every hour that a small
employer spends on tax compliance is an hour wasted that could
have been spent on their actual business.
Today's hearing will focus on some of the most common and
egregious areas of tax complexity that hinder small businesses
in America. I expect we will also hear some recommended
solutions--I hope so--and we will seriously consider them.
I would like to thank our witnesses for coming today. I
look forward to your testimony. I now yield to Ranking Member
Chu for her opening remarks.
Ms. CHU. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
With filing day upon us, many small business owners are
sending in their tax returns or submitting requests for an
extension, but in truth, the process never really ends for
them. Constant changes to the tax code makes compliance a year-
round challenge for small employers. For small businesses,
outdated and increasingly complex rules create an obstacle to
success, rather than a means of encouraging growth and job
creation. Simplification and certainty are the driving forces
in an endless effort to reform the tax code and ease the
compliance burdens on small employers.
Through the years I have served on the Committee, we have
heard many challenges created by the Internal Revenue Code and
the major complications compliance has on business planning. We
often hear that an intense focus on the bottom line is
necessary to succeed. Small business owners know that every
dollar counts, and they accordingly devote significant
resources toward that goal.
And one area every small business owner must focus on is
complying with our tax laws. Tax compliance disproportionately
affects small businesses compared to their larger counterparts,
which often have in-house tax services. The National Small
Business Administration's Small Business Tax Survey found that
over 30 percent of small firms spent more than 80 hours each
year on tax compliance. It also concluded that nearly 60
percent of these businesses found administrative burdens to be
the greatest complication and also the highest cost.
The tax compliance burden on small businesses takes many
forms. Most notably is the complexity of the code itself. With
many forms to fill out every year, the majority of firms either
spend excessive resources and time filing their own taxes or
hiring tax professionals. One way to address this problem is by
simplifying the tax code. By reducing its complexity, small
businesses would see decreases in these fixed costs, as the
need for expert preparation and the time commitment to prepare
are both reduced.
Congress did include the extension of important tax
provisions in the PATH Act last year. By permanently addressing
provisions like section 179 expensing, the R&D tax credit, and
depreciation rules, small firms will now benefit from much
needed certainty. It also serves as a spark to the economy as
money saved now is injected back into the marketplace and long-
term business plans can be created. But more can be done to
simplify the tax code, preferably comprehensive tax reform. But
until that day comes and we can agree on a solution, we must
address some specific issues, like reducing paperwork
requirements, updating filing deadlines, and other
administrative caveats.
This hearing will give the Committee the opportunity to
examine several general compliance burdens, as well as some
specific areas that could be addressed now to make things just
a little easier for small businesses in the near term.
I look forward to today's testimony and thank the witnesses
for their participation. I yield back.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Ms. Chu.
If Committee members have an opening statement prepared, I
ask that they be submitted for the record.
I would like to take a moment to explain the timing lights
for each of you. You each have 5 minutes to deliver your
testimony. The light will start out as green. When you have 1
minute remaining, the light will turn yellow. Finally, at the
end of your 5 minutes, it will turn red. I ask that you try to
adhere to that time limit.
Our first witness is Mr. Troy Lewis. Mr. Lewis is a CPA, a
managing member of Lewis and Associates in Draper, Utah, and
chairman of the AICPA Tax Executive Committee. He is also an
adjunct professor at Brigham Young University, where he
received both a bachelor's and a master's degree in accounting.
He is testifying today on behalf of AICPA and the Mobile
Workforce Coalition. I appreciate you being with us today, Mr.
Lewis, and you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF TROY K. LEWIS, MANAGING MEMBER, LEWIS AND
ASSOCIATES, CPAS, LLC; MEL SCHWARZ, PARTNER AND DIRECTOR OF TAX
LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS, GRANT THORNTON, LLP; ROBERT M. RUSSELL,
INTERNATIONAL TAX CONTROVERSY, PLANNING AND POLICY,
ALLIANTGROUP; JULIE VERRATTI, DIRECTOR OF BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT/
FOUNDER DENIZENS BREWING

STATEMENTS OF TROY K. LEWIS

Mr. LEWIS. Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking Member Chu, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today in support of H.R. 2315, the Mobile Workforce
State Income Tax Simplification Act of 2015.
My name is Troy Lewis. I am a sole tax practitioner from
Draper, Utah; an adjunct faculty member at BYU; and chair of
the Tax Executive Committee of the American Institute of CPAs.
I am pleased to testify on behalf of the AICPA.
H.R. 2315 is an important step towards State tax
simplification for small businesses. This bill provides relief
which is long overdue from the current web of inconsistent
State income tax and withholding rules on nonresident
employees. The rules are burdensome and often bewildering to
small businesses and their employees. There are States that tax
wages even if the employee only works for one day in that
State.
Although some States provide a de minimis number of days or
de minimis earnings amount before employers must withhold on
these employees, these thresholds are not administered in any
sort of uniform manner. For example, individuals are subject to
State tax withholding after working 59 days in Arizona, 15 days
in New Mexico, or just 14 days in Connecticut; yet, other
States have a de minimis exemption based on the amount of wages
earned. In Wisconsin, out-of-state employers are required to
withhold State tax once an employee earns wages of $1,500. The
cutoff is $1,000 in Idaho, $800 in South Carolina, and $300 a
quarter in Oklahoma. Some States exempt and some do not income
earned from certain activities, such as training and attending
meetings. However, it is just not that simple. Exemptions
sometimes only cover the employer's withholding requirement.
They do not even start to address the employee's filing
requirement or their tax liability.
Now, to be fair, it is true that approximately one-third of
the States have entered into agreements under which one border
State agrees not to tax another State's residents' wages and
vice versa. However, not all States have reciprocity
agreements, and the agreements that do exist are primarily
geared towards employees who ordinarily commute a few miles a
day to particular adjoining States. For example, while Virginia
has reciprocal withholding agreements with several States,
California, Kansas, Mississippi, and New York, do not have any
reciprocity agreements at all.
As CPAs, we see firsthand small businesses on Main Street,
and their employees, getting caught up in this web of
inconsistent State income tax and withholding rules. Consider a
real estate developer whose employees visit 20 prospective
States and 20 different sites and spend less than a day each
year in those States. Or a store manager who attends a half-day
regional meeting in another State, with some of these meetings
only occurring maybe twice a year. Unfortunately, small
businesses are forced to comply with all of the variations from
State to State, and some States have extremely complicated
rules.
Let's consider Georgia for a second. Georgia requires
withholding when a nonresident employee works more than 23 days
in a calendar quarter, or 5 percent of their total earned
income is attributable to Georgia, or if the compensation for
services there is more than $5,000 a year. So the employer has
to determine and calculate each of those three separate
thresholds to determine when to withhold on each employee who
may occasionally work in that State.
The financial impact in most of these States is minimal.
After taking into consideration their costs for processing
nonresident tax returns, we believe those States receive only a
minimal benefit, if any, from forcing out-of-state employees to
file a return for just a few days' worth of work.
Small businesses currently face unnecessary administrative
burdens to understand and comply with the variations from State
to State. The issue of employer tracking and complying with all
the different State and local tax laws is quite complicated. It
takes a lot of time, not to mention the lost economic
productivity for these small businesses.
Let's keep it simple. Let's provide small businesses relief
from this egregious area of administrative complexity.
Congressmen Bishop and Johnson have reached a very reasonable
balance between the States' rights to tax income from work
performed within their borders and the needs of individuals and
businesses to operate efficiently in this economic climate.
Their bill provides a reasonable and simple 30-day de minimis
threshold which should apply uniformly across this country. We
urge you to support H.R. 2315. This legislation should be
passed as soon as possible.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Mr. Lewis. I appreciate your
testimony and your advocacy for that bill.
And I am now pleased to welcome Mel Schwarz, a partner and
director of Tax Legislative Affairs in Grant Thornton's
National Tax Office. He is both a lawyer and a CPA, so two
strikes--I am just kidding--with more than 29 years of Federal
income tax experience. He is an alumnus of the Joint Committee
on Taxation, where he worked for 6 years. He holds a B.A. from
SMU, a master's of accounting from the University of Texas, and
a law degree from the University of Michigan. Thank you for
joining us today, Mr. Schwarz, and you may begin.

STATEMENT OF MEL SCHWARZ

Mr. SCHWARZ. Thank you, Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking Member
Chu, members of the Subcommittee. I am grateful for the
opportunity to speak to you today. As the title of the hearing
says, ``Small business needs tax reform.'' And simplifying
compliance and administration for small business needs to be a
part of that tax reform. It is an unfortunate fact that the
complexity and cost of calculating many tax incentives makes it
difficult for small businesses to properly take advantage of
them. It is my experience that because of this, many small
businesses are forced to ignore these incentives. This not only
prevents the provisions from accomplishing their intended
purpose, but also results in small businesses being placed at a
disadvantage compared to their larger competitors, who are
better positioned to reap the benefits by incurring the cost of
calculation.
Now, one might say that the solution to this is to do away
with tax incentives and to simply, really simplify, the code.
When that happens that will be a wonderful thing, but until
that happens, there really is an unfairness and a disadvantage
for the small business community that is created by the
complexity and not providing them an avenue to accomplish and
to share in those incentives that for whatever reason Congress
has chosen to include. It is my experience this leads many
small businesses to believe that they have been left out, that
the incentives in the code are intended for big business only,
and that the system is simply not fair.
Now, we urge Congress to pursue tax reform that would lower
the tax rates applicable to all business regardless of the form
in which they conduct that business. Small businesses are among
the most likely to organize as pass-throughs, and it is
essential that pass-throughs, such as partnerships, S
corporations, sole proprietorships, be included in any
reduction in tax rates. But we also recognize the immense
difficulty faced in enacting fundamental tax reform. And if for
whatever reason such tax reform is not possible or is only
possible in the future, simplification for small business
should be addressed now by better focusing on methods that
simplify computation and allow the use of safe harbors that are
specific to the needs of small business.
Now, I am going to spend the rest of the time talking about
two important Federal tax incentives: the Section 41 Research
Credit and the Section 199 Domestic Production Credit. The
credit for increasing research is one of the most effective
incentives in the code. Studies have shown additional research
contributes a multiple of its cost in increased economic
activity. Now, under current law there are two methods that can
be used to calculate the credit: a traditional method, which
allows for a 20 percent credit but requires the use of data
from as far back as 1984, or what they call an alternative
simplified method. We tried a simplified method. We now need an
alternative method. The credit is only 14 percent but we only
have to use data from the prior 3 years.
Now, I talked with people who specialize in the research
credit in my firm, and they said, in their experience, there
are virtually no small- or medium-sized businesses that use the
traditional method, despite the fact that it provides a higher
credit rate. Now, in recent years, there have been numerous
legislative proposals to essentially abandon the traditional
method, use whatever revenue could be raised by abandoning that
method to increase the percentage allowed for the alternative
simplified method. Enactment of that kind of legislation would
provide a significant benefit to smaller taxpayers.
The research credit is also an example of an area where
safe harbors designed for businesses in general could be better
tailored to the needs of a small business. Example: Wages count
as qualified research costs eligible for the credit to the
extent the employee is engaged in research. Employees devoting
80 percent of their time to qualified research activities are
considered to have devoted all of their time to such
activities. Now, large businesses with significant research
staffs can generally judge whether employees are spending
substantially all of their time performing research, and then
they can use this 80 percent rule more as a cushion, which
allows them to say I feel comfortable and I feel safe with
regard to that employee. I am going to include that employee's
wage. In the case of a small business, typically each employee
has a much wider range of responsibilities. Our experience is
that this often prevents those small businesses from treating
the 80 percent rule as a cushion the way their large business
competitors are able to. Small businesses end up having to
examine the credit and examine the documents to determine
whether they qualify for the credit. If you were to reduce the
safe harbor to 50 percent for small businesses, this would
allow them to use the cushion in the same way their big
business competitors use it, and this, I think, is an excellent
example of the kind of change--by no means the only one.
My written testimony includes an example with regard to the
domestic production activity deduction. I would be happy to
address that separately, but once again, it is a complex
calculation which does have safe harbors, but has safe harbors
that fit the general business and are not specifically designed
to facilitate the needs for small business.
Thank you, and I am happy to respond to any questions.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Mr. Schwarz.
Up next, I am pleased to welcome Robert Russell. Mr.
Russell is an attorney with alliantgroup, specializing in
international tax controversy, planning, and policy. He has a
broad breadth of experience, having worked at the IRS,
Treasury, and the Joint Tax Committee. He holds a bachelor's in
accounting from Middle Tennessee University, a law degree from
Chicago-Kent College of Law, and a master of laws in taxation
from Georgetown. I appreciate you being with us today, Mr.
Russell, and you may begin.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT M. RUSSELL

Mr. RUSSELL. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Huelskamp,
Ranking Member Chu, for having me here today to address the
important issue of tax reform and simplification as it applies
to small business. Specifically, today, I will address the
challenges these businesses face when expanding and operating
overseas and the burden imposed by the tax code.
As background, the firm I am with, alliantgroup, is a
leading tax consulting firm helping American businesses grow
through the tax code. Among our clients are thousands of small-
and mid-sized businesses, including businesses from Kansas and
California, and we work with CPAs throughout our work. If there
is one message from my testimony today, it is that small
businesses are, in fact, operating overseas, and they look to
do more. However, the current tax code as written for
international provisions is made for large companies.
Today, I would like to address three issues. First, the
barriers for simple business functions that are imposed by the
tax code, including those of information reporting. Second, the
complexities in compliance costs that are in the code for these
companies. And third, the need for international tax reform,
both in the U.S. and globally.
To my first point, many of our businesses are shocked when
they go overseas by simple business functions that are
difficult because of our tax law. For instance, many of our
clients are even unable to do simple things like open foreign
bank accounts because foreign financial institutions do not
want to deal with U.S. clients because of our Foreign Account
Tax Compliance Act. For those taxpayers that do have foreign
accounts, they have to run through the gauntlet of our U.S. tax
reporting requirements. These requirements, you have to report
to multiple U.S. agencies with different definitions of what to
report, and they come with steep penalties. The hearing memo
from the Committee included some of this information, but the
penalties which were initially in place to ferret out those
with secret accounts in Switzerland or Panama are now playing a
game of ``Gotcha'' for those legitimate businesses operating
overseas. These rules should be reexamined for appropriateness
and simplicity. Furthermore, our clients tell us of
international business opportunities being turned away when
foreign partners actually tell them they take lesser quality
goods from competitors so that they do not have to deal with
the U.S. tax administrative burdens.
That brings me to my second point, that far too often in
tax reform discussions and policy debates, the cost to
taxpayers to comply is overlooked, especially when businesses
expand overseas, the compliance costs skyrocket. I would like
to give you one example from our client base. A specialty
equipment manufacturer sees a market for his good overseas. He
sets up an affiliate in this country for sales and
distributions. This simple set up comes with a whole host of
compliance costs. Under our transfer pricing rules, for this
one enterprise, each transaction between the two entities must
be evaluated for the price that would be charged on the open
marketplace. Large companies are able to employ accountants,
attorneys, economists, to provide extensive studies and
analysis to meet the reporting requirements. There are no
simplified reporting requirements for small businesses with
resource constraints. In the past, alliantgroup has met with
IRS and Treasury to try to discuss how to develop a way for
smaller companies to meet their required reporting burden
without being buried in compliance costs.
And to my final point, international reform and
simplification. Everyone is in agreement that the current U.S.
international tax code is in need of reform. I would just like
to note that small business needs a place at this table during
this discussion. With the high rate of U.S. tax, small
businesses that operate internationally, in fact, face some of
the highest effective tax rates in the world. Large companies,
we know, are able to engage in sophisticated tax planning, and
it is well known they lower their effective tax rates, and they
need to in order to compete globally. However, many small
businesses are not able to do the same.
Lastly, within the reform discussion, I would like to
mention the work globally recently by the OECD and their BEPS
project. While many of the recommendations affect larger
companies, I would just like to mention to keep an eye on the
impact of some of these recommendations on smaller businesses.
I provided a couple of examples in my written testimony, and I
would be happy to get into some of those later. Thank you for
allowing me to testify today on this important topic.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Mr. Russell. I appreciate
the testimony. I look forward to questions on that.
I am now pleased to yield to the ranking member, Ms. Chu,
so that she may introduce her final witness, Ms. Verratti.
Ms. CHU. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me also say that I have
a Judiciary Markup occurring at this exact same time, so I may
have to step out for a moment to vote, but I will be back.
But now, it is my pleasure to introduce Ms. Julie Verratti,
director of business development and founder of Denizens
Brewing in Silver Spring, Maryland. Denizens is the only women
and minority-owned and operated brewery in Maryland. Prior to
starting her business, Ms. Verratti was a presidential
management fellow at the Small Business Administration and
staffer with the Senate Small Business and Entrepreneurship
Committee. She received her undergraduate degree from Brandeis
University, and her law degree from the George Washington
University Law School. Ms. Verratti is testifying on behalf of
the Brewers Association, an organization of brewers for brewers
and by brewers. Welcome, Ms. Verratti.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. I thank the ranking member for that
introduction. Ms. Verratti, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF JULIE VERRATTI

Ms. VERRATTI. Thank you. Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking Member
Chu, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify at today's hearing.
My name is Julie Verratti. I am the director of business
development and cofounder of Denizens Brewing Company in Silver
Spring, Maryland. I am here today speaking on behalf of my
small business and the Brewers Association, which represents
more than 3,000 craft brewers. My cofounders, Emily Bruno, Jeff
Ramirez, and I, started Denizens in 2014, and we are the only
women and minority-owned and operated brewery in Maryland. We
are both a restaurant and a production brewery, which means
that we produce beer to be sold both in our restaurant and to
other retail locations. In the short time that we have been
open, our brewery has experienced solid growth. In 2015, we
produced 1,140 barrels of beer and are on track to produce
about 1,500 barrels in this coming year. For anyone who is
curious, that equals about 82,500 six-packs.
Running a craft brewery, like Denizens, is similar to
running any other small business. All the day-to-day activities
and stresses, like scheduling, marketing, health care, and
payroll, they are all amplified by a tight brewing schedule and
working to distinguish ourselves in a growing industry.
Denizens has close to 40 full-time employees, who range
from tip service positions, kitchen staff, brewing staff, and
salaried professional positions. All of our full-time employees
are offered medical, dental, and vision insurance through the
company, which is something we are very proud of.
Denizens produces beer in Maryland, and we sell our beer
both in Maryland and D.C. Our tax and compliance burdens are
significant. We collect and submit sales tax in our tap room.
We pay employment taxes, business income taxes, and on top of
that, excise taxes to both the State and Federal Governments
using their separate and individual filing systems. I spend up
to 11 hours a month working on taxes, which may not seem like a
lot of time, but it is significant when you are working to grow
your business. And in the next month, my brewery will start
distributing in Virginia, which will increase the number of tax
regulations that we must comply with. We are happy to comply,
but these tax burdens could be a deterrent for a smaller
brewery than Denizens.
Currently, breweries are required to comply with a
patchwork of Federal, State, and sometimes even county taxes
and alcohol regulations. Oftentimes, there are different
requirements about when and what to file. For example, Denizens
files taxes biweekly, monthly, quarterly, and annually,
although we have received some relief from the Federal
Government that I want to discuss further.
In many cases, we have found that even if there is a way to
file online, it is actually easier to file the forms in hard
copy. It would be significantly more convenient if the Federal
and State Governments worked together to come up with a more
streamlined process for reporting. In fact, a large portion of
my time spent on taxes is actually duplicating information from
one report to another.
The Federal Government has taken the steps to correct some
of the burdensome biweekly excise tax filing requirements. Last
year, language was included in the year-end tax extenders
package that made it so any alcohol producer that pays less
than $50,000 in annual Federal excise taxes, will no longer be
required to get a bond and will only need to file quarterly.
Another step that the government took that was beneficial to
both my brewery and others like mine, was to permanently extend
the small business expensing limitation and phase-out amounts
in section 179 when they passed the PATH Act. Because of this
change, we were actually able to save on a combination of
equipment purchased in 2015 and a carryover from 2014.
As I mentioned previously, breweries like mine pay excise
taxes on both the State and Federal level. These are additional
taxes over and above our business and payroll taxes, and one of
the major expenses that I, as a brewery owner, face.
When the Federal beer excise tax was first put into place
to finance the Civil War, excise taxes were a major source of
revenue, and most other modern Federal taxes did not exist. For
almost a decade, the Brewers Association has been working with
Congress to try and pass legislation that recalibrates the
Federal Excise Tax to reflect the makeup of the craft brewing
industry and to spur additional growth. The Craft Beverage
Modernization and Tax Reform Act introduced this Congress would
lower the Federal excise tax for the brewing industry, as well
as the wine and distilled spirits industries, and make the
alcohol beverage excise tax system more progressive for smaller
producers like Denizens. It is legislation like this that would
have a major impact on my business, as well as other craft
brewers. Denizens is a growing brewery, and if we continue at
our current trajectory, we will be at capacity within the next
2 years. If we are able to get our Federal tax lability
reduced, we will be able to produce more equipment and kegs and
hire at least two additional new full-time employees.
Knowing that we would have access to additional capital is
an incentive to continue growing and hiring, which will produce
more Federal revenue over time. A reduced Federal excise tax
liability would be extremely helpful to the craft brewing
industry and the national economy. It is no surprise that this
bill has widespread bipartisan support from not just the
alcohol industry but also agricultural and manufacturing
associations.
In conclusion, taxes and tax compliant costs are the
largest expenses that craft brewers, like Denizens, deal with
on a day-to-day basis. We are more than happy to pay our fair
share, but recalibration of the Federal excise tax would have
an extremely positive impact on small brewing businesses like
mine and also the ones that are in your home States.
Thank you again. I appreciate the Subcommittee inviting me
to testify today, both on behalf of Denizens Brewing Company,
the Brewers Association, and the many craft brewers across this
country.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Ms. Verratti. I appreciate
your testimony, each of the witnesses here today, and of
course, our topic here is tax simplification for Main Street.
And with that, I will start with a question for Mr. Lewis, if I
might.
If you were able to wave a magic wand--we do not do that
very often around here but we talk about it--what would be you
think the single most important change we could make on tax
simplification that would help Main Street businesses?
Mr. LEWIS. The single most. Well, that is, as you said, the
wand business is far from here. I would say you heard a
recurring theme up here, which is to cut out the administrative
burden. I think that is the key. I think Ms. Verratti echoed
what me and my clients say is the same thing. They are happy to
pay what they owe. They just would like to do it with a lot
less effort. There is unproductive time that is spent in
complying, and I think that goes to the issue of tax
simplification. Some of the other ones are more burrowed up
into it, but in the end, what they are really saying, what we
are hearing on Main Street is just lower the burden. Lower the
burden on administrative compliance and you will be doing a
great deal for them.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Mr. Lewis, when the IRS issues
regulations and rules, do they make estimates of tax compliance
costs or is that from the private sector?
Mr. LEWIS. There is a process by where they do try to
estimate the time to comply, but it is just like everything
else with the bureaucracy with which we live. The door only
swings one direction usually with that stuff. We just add to
the process; we do not take away. And so I am not here to
advocate to say that any one particular regulation or a new
particular thought is wrong but you just have to understand
that it adds to the existing burden that is already there. And
when you put that burden on those companies, what you are
really doing is you are having them reallocate resources from
growing their business and hiring new people and doing the
things that you want them to do from this Committee and the
things that you espouse from this Committee's level, and
instead, they just put it in nonproductive ways, like
complying.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Mr. Schwarz, you raised the issue of
safe harbors and I will say your explanation of safe harbors,
which are alternative to simplification, seem quite complex. Is
there any way we could structure, actually do that to make safe
harbors a means for simplification? I know we are trying to
target the small businesses here, but can you describe that a
little more in-depth? If you were able to change that, how
would you apply those and simplify those?
Mr. SCHWARZ. What you are looking for any time a safe
harbor is created for the Federal tax system, is to allow
taxpayers to essentially shortcut what would otherwise be a
very complex calculation. And that is where I think you want to
see an expansion of that type of activity. Ask the question
each time that a rule is put in place: is there a simple way to
address this issue so that instead of going through a detailed
calculation, instead, something that is simple, maybe something
that can be drawn directly from the financial records that are
being kept. One of the problems that small businesses face is
that unless they keep their books entirely on a tax basis,
which the banks are not always happy with, then they are
keeping two sets of books. And the more they could be allowed
to use their financial book, so long as that is a reasonable
method, then I think the simpler it would be.
Ms. Verratti has, I think, a classic example with regard to
we did not get into the domestic production activity deduction,
but because she runs--both brews beer and sells it at a
restaurant, if she just brewed beer, all of her revenue would
qualify. We would just take 9 percent off the top. But because
she has two functions, one of which qualifies, one of which
does not qualify because they did not want McDonald's to
qualify, she is faced with having to do a separation. He could
we make that separation easy? How could we put in a rule that
she would be comfortable using that would say, okay, I have got
this one statistic; I apply that statistic and I know the IRS
will accept it?
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Do you think the IRS has the capacity
to figure that out?
Mr. SCHWARZ. Yes. I think that they do.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Okay.
Mr. SCHWARZ. The question, of course, is will they?
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Yeah. Very good.
Mr. Russell, you made a pretty stunning, but I think
accurate, statement that in terms of our rules and regulations,
particularly for overseas business, they have been built for
large corporations. Is that by statute, or rule and regulation,
or simply simplification for the IRS?
Mr. RUSSELL. Well, the statute is actually very broad in
this area, and so it is left to Treasury and IRS to implement.
And they look for the information that they need; however, they
have not scaled it back to meet small business needs. And there
are some examples of other countries that have systems in place
to reduce documentation requirements for these size businesses,
which could be done. Resources are available to have this
conversation and to facilitate business.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you. I will next yield to
Representative Trent Kelly for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. KELLY. I am a southerner. We do terrible with any names
that have more than two syllables, but Ms. Verratti, thank you,
first of all, for being a woman-owned and minority industry. I
think that is so important, and thank you for your
conversations. You mentioned during your testimony that you
spend 11 to 12 hours a week--a month, which is a significant
amount. That being said, you obviously have some basis--when I
was in law school and I took Tax, what I learned was I can
recognize and identify a tax problem three out of four times
and I can solve none of them, but you obviously have some
expertise. Most people do not so they are not able to give,
even if they had 11 hours to give, they cannot. Do you have any
expertise that allows you to do the tax?
Ms. VERRATTI. I would say the expertise that allows me to
do the taxes. The way I do it is that I used to work for the
government, so I understand what government people are looking
for when filling out forms. So that is helpful to me.
Obviously, my educational background as well is helpful. I
think there are a lot of small business owners out there who do
not necessarily have--I mean, I was lucky enough to be able to
go to law school, so yes, I think that the number one thing
that is frustrating with the tax forms that we fill out--and I
say ``we'' meaning all the craft brewers across the country--is
that a lot of the language in the forms and the directions, so
to speak, that are supposed to be explaining to you what they
are actually asking, does not make any sense. There is not
enough plain language, so I think that that would actually be a
great way to explain the system, is having all the directions
in plain language. I mean, I am someone with a law degree and I
sometimes read these forms and I am like, I have no idea what
they are asking me to do. So I think that that would be a
really helpful thing to improve the system.
Mr. KELLY. And Mr. Schwarz, going to the same kind of
question here, most small business owners do not have the
expertise or the education level in that specific area of taxes
and those things. And if they are spending, someone who is a
professional and understands can spend 11 or 12 hours a month,
the expenses to a regular--and those are not paid for any other
way. I mean, that just comes down as cost to customers; is that
correct? And what would you do to improve that?
Mr. SCHWARZ. That is certainly correct, Congressman.
Mr. KELLY. What, if anything, would you do, or how do we
better simplify? You know, there are simple solutions to
complex problems. I think sometimes agencies and even
congressmen forget that, but there are simple solutions. So
what are some simple solutions that you think will help this?
Mr. SCHWARZ. Again, I will come back to the idea that to
the extent possible you want to have one set, one--you
calculate things once. And calculating however you calculate
it, whether it be using--how can we allow the tax rules to
follow something that the business is already having to do?
That, I think, would be significant. The other is to look at
each section, and not only ones that are in the law but as
things come into the law and say, okay, is there someway here
that we could allow a shortcut, that we could allow small
business to have that certainly for revenue estimation reasons
you might not be able to extend to the entire world, but for
small business to preserve their ability to deal with that
particular provision. And I would hope that this is an area
where this Subcommittee could make a real role in standing up
for the needs of small business in that kind of a context.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Chairman, I first thank all the witnesses
for being here and for your testimony, and Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Representative Kelly. Next,
I yield to Representative Chu, returned from her markup, and
you have 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. CHU. Well, I would like to ask the entire panel about
resources for the IRS and how it could better serve you. The
budget proposal for the IRS for Fiscal Year 2017 is $11.8
billion; however, the IRS requested $12.3 billion in order to
dedicate an adequate amount to resources and staff to improving
customer service and technology. Now, I understand better
taxpayer service and education leads to higher compliance
rates, and what I would like to ask about is what kind of
customer service have you experienced from the IRS, and what
are your thoughts about where improvements could be made,
especially with regards to small business.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Ranking Member Chu. It is still a
little bit early for us to have feedback at the AICPA. We do a
fairly sophisticated informal survey of our members right after
busy season ends. As you can imagine, emails are not getting
returned very quickly today by our members. They will be next
week; I guarantee that. But I would say based on my personal
experiences, they have improved year over year. Last year was
abysmal, and that is in the commissioner's words, not mine.
This year, instead of waiting 2 hours on the phone, the last
time I called it was like 12 or 13 minutes. So I have seen an
increase. And again, we have just talked a lot about the small
business inefficiencies. Do not forget that I represent CPAs
that have their own small businesses just like mine. The
inefficiencies that we heard from Ms. Verratti plague us, too.
No one wants to sit on the phone listening to the same
repetitive three-song track over and over again for 2 hours,
although as a side benefit, I have become a classical musical
fan. But it is not productive time. It is not what my clients
expect me to do, and it is not what I want to be doing.
So to answer your question, the IRS has got to be more
efficient in what they do. They have to be more effective. They
have to find the ways to help the taxpayers, but also those
that serve them, the tax professionals. I have seen it improve
in my own experience over this last year, and it is a
complicated question. It is hard to tell exactly what the
benefits all are, but I would say that it is better.
Mr. SCHWARZ. I would agree with Mr. Lewis, but I would say
that there is still work that could be done, and there is
improvement that could be made. And, unfortunately, that always
involves additional money. And I think it would benefit, in
particular small business, who may be more likely to need to
rely on direct contact with the sort of IRS phone system, that
it would be helpful if there were additional funds available.
Having said that, I think there is also, it is noteworthy
and I know that the commissioner is coming to speak to you
later this afternoon, but there are initiatives to modernize
and make more efficient the taxpayer-IRS interface,
particularly through a growing use of computer-aided and
Internet-focused activities. It is always important to remember
that for particularly the smallest of the businesses, that may
not be an efficiency that is always available to them, and the
ability for any taxpayer to access the IRS needs to always be
there, whether or not they have access to a computer.
Mr. RUSSELL. And everyone recognizes that the IRS is
stretched thin, but speaking to our CPAs and clients, I mean,
they are looking for more help from the IRS--more guidance,
more educational outreach, and additional people trained to
talk to on the other end of the phone. I will say in my
practice, I represent clients with international tax issues,
and yes, there is a little frustration, even for myself, who
has been on the IRS side examining returns. I know who I need
to talk to. I cannot get on the phone to talk to the right
person. So there is a little frustration in that point.
One point I will add is the help of the National Taxpayer
Advocate in this system. So whenever you are talking about
helping the IRS, more funds, that is one angle that is very
helpful in this, too.
Ms. VERRATTI. I will say that I am somewhat neutral in
terms of I have never really had to deal with the IRS in terms,
so I cannot really judge their customer service. I will say
another part of the government that is somewhat related is the
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, otherwise known as
the TTB. I would absolutely advocate for and encourage you guys
to fully fund them, help them get more staff, especially as the
craft brewing industry is growing in this country. It is an
industry that is booming and there are more and more people
needing more and more guidance from that agency. And more and
more labels that need to be improved. And I guess I will stop
there.
Ms. CHU. Okay, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Representative Chu. Next, I
recognize Representative Mike Bishop from Michigan. Welcome to
the Committee. Thank you for joining us, and you have 5
minutes.
Mr. BISHOP. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much
for inviting me to be a part of this Committee even though I am
not an actual member. I am grateful for your invitation, and
thank you Ranking Member Chu for your hospitality today. I also
want to thank you for accommodating my schedule. In Judiciary
we had a markup, so thank you very much for letting me wear my
track shoes today and run in this very easily navigated Rayburn
building as we all know.
I have been a business owner, a small business owner and an
attorney for more than 2 decades, and part of those 2 decades
as general counsel for a small business, so I am very familiar
with these issues. I have seen firsthand how complicated and
confusing and burdensome the State income tax system is for
businesses, especially those with employees working for
temporary periods in multiple States. This compliance burden is
even higher for small businesses because they do not have large
legal or payroll departments to help them keep track of the 40
different State income tax rules.
Small businesses and their workers should not be punished
with the complex tax reporting standards simply because our
modern economy means more work travel across State lines. Such
policies are detrimental to businesses themselves, but also to
the economy. Instead of adding jobs or reinvesting, small
business owners are forced to spend time and their resources on
complying with convoluted State income tax laws. I can tell you
firsthand as a general counsel, we spent most of our time on
compliance, looking over our shoulder to see what regulator was
going to come at us next and for what reason. And if you had
three regulators call in one day, they would all disagree with
each other or give their different opinions on any particular
rule.
One particular story from an employer that we had in
Judiciary really stands out in my mind. Last year, a gentleman
came to the Subcommittee in Judiciary. He was an employer. He
had filed 10,500 W-2s on behalf of their employees, primarily
because they had crossed State lines during the course of
business. He explained a case where one worker had to file 50
W-2s. Just imagine a small business having to file 50 W-2s. We
should not be placing that burden on our small businesses. It
really is absurd.
The bill that Mr. Johnson and I introduced, H.R. 2315, the
Mobile Workforce State Income Tax Simplification Act of 2015,
quite a mouthful, is carefully crafted legislation that creates
a simple and easy to administer system for the imposition of a
nonresident State income tax law by creating a uniform 30-day
rule to determine nonresident income tax liability. The bill
ensures employees will have a clear understanding of when they
are liable for nonresident State income tax and small business
employers will be able to better withhold these taxes. It will
save time and resources, allowing businesses to put their hard-
earned resources towards things that drive our economy forward,
such as jobs and investment. That really is the underlying goal
of the bill.
I want to thank everybody in this room because I know you
all stand for small business and you are doing everything you
can to make this a better environment. I think this is a good
bill. I would just throw out there, if I could, Mr. Lewis, for
your thoughts about how this will impact small business. Bigger
businesses have an opportunity to absorb this, may have a
better, easier way of dealing with it. Small business does not.
Can you quantify that for us and tell us the impact it is
having?
Mr. LEWIS. Sure. Thank you, Representative Bishop, and
thank you for your leadership on this important piece of
legislation and your cosponsorship. Also, the chairman as well
for cosponsoring.
I think to understand this legislation, you have to
understand two parts. The first is there is a part that the
employer has to deal with and then there is the employee. Let's
deal with the employer first. The employer has to be educated
about all the various State laws, and as I said in my opening
testimony, there are varying rules and the rules change. So
that constant educational process is taking these business
owners and these administrative people away from the function
of running their business. How hard is it? It is just as you
said; the smaller the business, the more they have to spread--
they have the least amount of ability to spread those costs. It
is incredibly burdensome.
And to the chairman's question, what is the most important
thing you do? Just cut the administrative burden. I think that
is key. But let's do not forget that there is an employee
aspect as well. Even after this employer has filed 50 W-2s on
behalf of one employee, that employee then has to turn around
and file, potentially, in all of those various jurisdictions.
Keep that in mind. So it is not just burdening the small
business but it is the employees as well. So it is incredibly
burdensome, and I think it has come time to where let's just,
as Mr. Schwarz said, let's look for a cost-benefit. Let's look
at these types of things with a cost-benefit lens. Is the
benefit really that great that we should burden these
individual employees and these small businesses? I would
suggest not, and that is why I think this legislation is a good
piece.
Mr. BISHOP. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I know we are over. May I make a request in
asking unanimous consent to submit into the record before we
leave today Representative Johnson, who cannot be here today,
his testimony? Thank you.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. I would like to thank all of our
witnesses for participating today. You have raised a number of
issues and potential solutions. I do like hearing that. That
requires serious consideration. Clearly, these are not the only
areas of undue tax complexity for small business, but putting a
spotlight on these issues is a good start. I am pleased to be a
cosponsor of our colleague, Mr. Bishop's Mobile Workforce Bill,
which I hope will help us make some headway, and I urge my
colleagues to join as well. This Subcommittee remains dedicated
to small businesses and their hard-working employees. It is
incumbent upon us to ensure that small businesses have the
tools they need to succeed and are not mired in compliance
complexities. It is a clear example where we need to get
government out of the way. If our tax code is not helpful to
our small businesses, it should at least be clear.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

INTRODUCTION

The American Institute of CPAs (AICPA) commends Chairman
Huelskamp, Ranking Member Chu, and Members of the Subcommittee
for examining the need for, and potential benefits of, small
business tax simplification and reform, including a bill that
would assist small businesses, H.R. 2315, the Mobile Workforce
State Income Tax Simplification Act of 2015. We applaud the
leadership taken by the Committee to consider this important
legislation.

The AICPA is the world's largest member association
representing the accounting profession, with more than 412,000
members in 144 countries and a history of serving the public
interest since 1877. Our members advise clients on federal,
state and international tax matters, and prepare income and
other tax returns for millions of Americans. Our members
provide services to individuals, not-for-profit organizations,
small and medium-sized businesses, as well as America's largest
businesses.

The AICPA is also an active leader in the national Mobile
Workforce Coalition, comprised of 295 businesses and
organizations that support this legislation.

H.R. 2315

The AICPA commends the Subcommittee for their consideration
of H.R. 2315, which limits the authority of states to tax
certain income of employees for duties performed in other
states. More specifically, the bill prohibits states from
taxing most nonresident employees (there are exceptions for
certain professions) unless the employee is present and
performing employment duties for more than 30 days during the
calendar year. Furthermore, employees would not be subject to
state income tax withholding and reporting requirements unless
their income is subject to taxation.

AICPA'S POSITION

The AICPA strongly supports H.R. 2315. We believe the bill
provides relief, which is long-overdue, from the current web of
inconsistent state income tax and withholding rules that impact
employers and employees.

After taking into consideration the costs for processing
nonresident tax returns with only a small amount of tax
liability, we believe states receive only a minimal benefit (if
any) from the tax revenue that results from an employee filing
a return for just a few days of earnings in that state. If
nonresident tax returns with minimal income reported were
eliminated through a standard, reasonable threshold, such as in
H.R. 2315, we think that most states would have an increase in
resident income taxes to substantially offset any decrease in
nonresident income tax revenue (assuming workers both travel to
and out of the state for work). In other words, the current
system as a whole unnecessarily creates complexity and costs
for both employers and employees, without yielding a
substantive benefit to most states. Sixteen states, such as
Kansas, would either have no or minimal revenue loss, and 18
states would, in fact, have a positive revenue gain from this
legislation. Most importantly, according to estimates of the
impact of the bill, the net change as a percentage of total
state taxes for all states is only -0.01, a $42 million net
change for all states.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Statement of Statement of Douglas L. Lindholm, President &
Executive Director, Council On State Taxation (COST), Before the U.S.
House of Representatives Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on
Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law, Hearing on H.R. 2315,
The Mobile Workforce State Income Tax Simplification Act of 2015, June
2, 2015, Exhibit C, pp. 1-2.

We believe Congressmen Bishop and Johnson have reached a
reasonable balance between the states' rights to tax income
from work performed within their borders, and the needs of
individuals and businesses, and especially small businesses, to
operate efficiently in this economic climate. Having a uniform
national standard for nonresident income taxation, withholding
and filing requirements will enhance compliance and reduce
unnecessary administrative burdens on businesses and their
employees. In addition to uniformity, H.R. 2315 provides a
reasonable 30-day de minimis exemption before an employee is
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
obligated to pay taxes to a state in which they do not reside.

H.R. 2315 is an important step towards tax simplification
for state income tax purposes for small businesses. Therefore,
the AICPA urges Congress to establish (1) a uniform standard
for nonresident income tax withholding and (2) a de minimis
exception from the assessment of state income tax as provided
in H.R. 2315. This legislation should be passed as soon as
possible.

BACKGROUND

The state personal income tax treatment of nonresidents is
inconsistent and often bewildering to small businesses and
their employees. Currently, 41 states plus the District of
Columbia impose a personal income tax on wages, and there are
many different requirements for withholding income tax for
nonresidents among those states. There are seven states that
currently do not assess a personal income tax, and two states
that do not tax wages and only tax interest and dividends of
individuals.\2\ Employees traveling into all the other states
are subject to the confusing myriad of withholding and tax
rules for nonresident taxpayers. These rules on a state to
state basis vary so much that it is impossible to predict or to
even guess what one state may hold as its own rules.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ These seven states have no personal income tax: Alaska,
Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington and Wyoming. New
Hampshire and Tennessee are the two states that do not tax wages and
only subject to tax interest and dividends earned by individuals.

Some of the states have a de minimis number of days or de
minimis earnings amount before employers must withhold tax on
nonresidents, or nonresidents are subject to tax. These de
minimis rules are not administered in a uniform manner. For
example, for 2015, a nonresident is subject to income tax
withholding in certain states based upon an entirely different
threshold, such as, after working 59 days in Arizona, 15 days
in New Mexico, or 14 days in Connecticut.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Payroll Issues for Multi-State Employers, 2015 ed.,
American Payroll Association, pp. 4-1 et seq.

Other states have a de minimis exemption based on the
amount of the wages earned, either in dollars or as a percent
of total income, while in the state. For example, for 2015,
employers generally are required to withhold in a nonresident
state once an employee earns, or is expected to earn, taxable
wages of $1,500 in Wisconsin, $1,000 in Idaho, $800 in South
Carolina, and $300 a quarter in Oklahoma.\4\ Other states that
have thresholds before nonresident withholding is required are
Georgia, Hawaii, Maine, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota,
Oregon, Utah, Virginia, and West Virginia.\5\ Some of these
states' thresholds are set at the state's personal exemption,
standard deduction, or filing threshold, which often change
each year. The remainder of the state tax income earned within
their borders by nonresidents, even if the employee only works
in that state for one day.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ibid.
\5\ Ibid.

Some states exempt, and some do not exempt, from the
withholding requirement, the income earned from certain
activities, such as training, professional development, or
attending meetings. Note that some of the states only cover
exemptions from state withholding, and as a result, they do not
address the nonresident taxpayer's potential filing requirement
and tax liability in a state or local jurisdiction.
Furthermore, only a minority of states use day or income
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
thresholds--and without any uniform standard.

It is also important to note that approximately one-third
of the states (mostly bordering each other in the Midwest or
East) have entered into reciprocity agreements under which one
border state agrees not to tax another border state's
residents' wages, and vice versa. Accordingly, the in-state
resident does not need to file a non-resident border state
return, and the employer does not have to withhold non-resident
income taxes with respect to the in-state resident, even if the
in-state resident primarily works in the nonresident state.
Some type of an ``exemption form'' is often required to be
filed in each nonresident border state.

However, not all border states have reciprocity agreements.
For example, no reciprocity agreement exists between Maryland
and Delaware. Therefore, both Maryland and Delaware require
withholding, the payment of taxes and the submission or a tax
return for a car salesman who lives and primarily works in
Ocean City, Maryland but occasionally has to drive to another
dealer in Rehoboth Beach, Delaware.

Unfortunately, the existing reciprocity collaboration
between some border states provides only patchwork relief with
two-thirds of the country not covered by such agreements.
Furthermore, the current agreements are primarily geared toward
nonresident employees who ordinarily commute a few miles a day
to particular adjoining states in which their employer is
located. For example, while Virginia provides reciprocal
withholding agreements with the District of Columbia, Kentucky,
Maryland, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia, other states, such
as California, Kansas, Mississippi, and New York do not provide
any reciprocity agreements with neighboring states. The
reciprocity rules generally do not apply to individuals who
regularly travel greater distances.

However, in today's economic environment, it has become
quite common for employees to travel for short periods of time
to other states.

TYPES OF INDUSTRIES AND TAXPAYERS IMPACTED

These complicated rules impact everyone who travels for
work. All types and sizes of businesses are impacted. Large,
medium, and small businesses all have to understand each of the
states' treatment of nonresident employee withholding and
assessment of taxes and the unique de minimis rules and
definitions. This issue also affects all industries--retail,
manufacturing, real estate, technology, food, services, etc.

Some everyday examples include a real estate developer's
employee who travels to 20 states to visit prospective sites
and spends less than a day in each state, or a store manager
who attends a half-day regional meeting in an adjoining state,
with some of these meetings occurring only twice a year. Since
there are states in which there currently is no minimum
threshold, an employee's presence in that state for just one
day could subject the employee to state tax withholding.

In addition, accounting firms, including small firms,
conduct business across state lines. Many clients have
facilities in nearby states that require on-site inspections
during an audit. Additionally, consulting, tax or other non-
audit services that CPAs deliver are frequently provided to
clients in other states, or to facilities of local clients that
are located in other states. In essence, all of these entities
(small businesses, accounting firms and their clients) are
affected by nonresident income tax withholding laws.

HYPOTHETICAL EXAMPLE

For example, assume an employee earns $75,000 a year,
resides in Maryland, and travels to work in Indiana, Kansas,
Massachusetts, and Ohio for 5 days each in a given tax year.
Assume further that the taxpayer earns a pro rata amount of
salary in each of the states of $1,500 ($75,000 * 5 days / 250
total workdays = $1,500).

Without the Mobile Workforce legislation, the employer
currently must withhold on all of the employee's income in
Maryland (the resident state) and the source income from
different jurisdictions (which for all practical purposes, will
only occur if the employer has a sophisticated time reporting
system in place and the employee correctly reports the number
of days worked in each state.)

Despite the relatively small amount of income in each of
the nonresident states, some amount of tax is likely due in
each of the states. The employer must withhold in all five
states, and the employee then must file in addition to the
federal tax return, income tax returns in Maryland (as a
resident), and as a nonresident in Indiana, Kansas,
Massachusetts, and Ohio, all of which require nonresident
withholding on the first day of work in that state. Depending
on the tax withheld, the nonresident state income tax returns
may yield a small refund or a small additional tax payment.

While the Maryland return yields a refund, it becomes
particularly complex because the employee is required to file
forms showing the credit for taxes paid to each nonresident
state, and Maryland does not always provide the employee with a
dollar-for-dollar credit when factoring in the Maryland county-
level tax required to be paid. The federal tax return also
becomes more difficult because of the numerous state tax
payments and refunds that impact deductions and adjustments for
the state tax deduction (for alternative minimum tax purposes,
for example).

The administrative burden of filing in five nonresident
states, along with the complexity of the withholding rules for
each state, would probably require utilization of a third-party
service provider that assists with processing payroll for
businesses (resulting in additional costs to the employee). The
Mobile Workforce legislation makes it significantly easier for
the employer and the employee from a compliance perspective.
The taxpayer files one state income tax return in Maryland, and
it is a more straightforward return (without calculations and
credits for nonresident state taxes paid).

CHALLENGES FOR EMPLOYERS

Employers currently face unnecessary administrative burdens
to understand and comply with the variations from state to
state. For example, employers are responsible for determining
whether to subject an employee to withholding in a state if the
employee attends out-of-state training for a couple of days, or
how to account for an employee responding to business calls and
e-mails on a layover in an airport. Employers also need to
consider whether to withhold taxes in a state for when a
employee is working on a train that travels into multiple
states and jurisdictions in the Northeast Corridor, or what
happens when an employee working at a business located close to
a state border must cross the state line for a quick mundane
task.

The issue of employer tracking and complying with all the
differing state and local laws is quite complicated. The
employer and employee need to be aware of the individual income
tax and withholding rules of each state to which that the
employee travels, including whether the state has, and if the
employee has exceeded, a de minimis threshold of days or
earnings, and if there is a state reciprocity agreement that
applies. Some states have extremely complicated rules for
determining when to withhold for a nonresident. For example,
Georgia requires withholding when a nonresident employee works
more than 23 days in a calendar quarter in Georgia, or if five
percent of total earned income is attributable to Georgia, or
if the remuneration for services in Georgia is more than
$5,000. The employer must determine and calculate each of the
three thresholds to determine when to withhold for each
employee working occasionally in that state.

The recordkeeping, especially if business travel to
multiple states occurs, is voluminous. The recordkeeping and
withholding a state requires can trigger for as little as a few
moments of work in another state. The research to determine any
given state's individual requirement is expensive and time-
consuming, especially for a small firm or small business that
does not have a significant amount of resources. Taxpayers need
to update the research, at least annually, to make sure the
state law has not changed. Of course, a small firm or business
may choose to engage outside assistance to research the laws of
the other states; however, the business will incur an
additional cost.

Many small firms and businesses use third-party payroll
services rather than performing the function in-house. However,
we understand that many third-party payroll service providers
cannot handle multi-state reporting. For example, third-party
payroll service providers generally report on a pay period
basis (e.g., twice per month, bi-weekly) as opposed to a daily
basis, which is necessary to properly report the performance of
interstate work. Due to the software limitations, employers
must track and manually adjust various employees' state income
and withholding amounts to comply with different state
requirements. The alternative is to pay for a more expensive
payroll service.

CHALLENGES FOR EMPLOYEES

Employees face many challenges with complying with the
multitude of state tax laws and requirements. When an employee
travels for work to many states, even for short periods of
time, each nonresident state tax return that is required is
usually for a minimal amount of income and tax liability.
Often, the employee is below the filing threshold, but since
withholding is required, a nonresident state tax return is
required, even if only to claim a refund of the taxes withheld.

UNIFORMITY AND DE MINIMIS EXCEPTION NEEDED

In addition to uniformity, there needs to be a de minimis
exemption. AICPA has supported the 60-day limit contained in
previous versions of similar legislation, but believes that the
30-day limit contained in H.R. 2315 is fair and workable. The
30-day limit in the bill ensures that the interstate work for
which an exemption from withholding is granted does not become
a means of avoiding tax or shifting income to a state with a
lower tax rate. Instead, it ensures that the primary place(s)
of business for an employee are where that employee pays state
income taxes. For example, employees of many small businesses
often travel to other states as part of their training,
research, or operations. A prime example is a business located
in South Carolina, which is on the border of North Carolina and
Georgia, where no reciprocity agreements exist. It is easy for
an employee to travel into three states within a few hours
timeframe. For example: a small bike shop that has to
occasionally cross state borders to buy a part, a catering
company that delivers, and a roofing company that drives to the
nearest home-improvement store (which is located across the
state line).

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The current situation of having to withhold and file many
state nonresident tax returns for just a few days of work in
various states is too complicated for both employers and
employees. The small business employers' costs to comply with
the current system have become too burdensome and are not worth
the lost economic productivity for those small businesses to
justify the states in assessing and then trying to collect the
tax. Employees are overwhelmed with the many states to which
they may have a nonresident filing and tax obligation and the
different filing criteria for each state. The AICPA urges
Congress to pass H.R. 2315 to ease our country's nonresident
state income tax withholding and compliance burdens. The bill
provides national uniformity and a reasonable 30 day de minimis
threshold. Therefore, the AICPA strongly supports H.R. 2315 and
respectfully commends the co-sponsors of this legislation for
the development of this reasonable and much needed bi-partisan
bill.

The AICPA appreciates the opportunity to submit this
written statement in support of H.R. 2315.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking Member Chu, and Members of the
Subcommittee,

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak to you today.
Small business needs tax reform, and simplifying compliance and
administration for small businesses should be part of that tax
reform. This subcommittee's concern and interest in exploring
the subject is to be applauded.

The complexity and costs of calculating many tax incentives
makes it difficult for small businesses to properly take
advantage of them. It is my firm's experience that because of
this, many small businesses simply ignore them. This not only
prevents these incentive provisions from accomplishing their
intended purpose, but also results in small businesses being
placed at a disadvantage compared to their larger competitors
who are better positioned to incur the costs of calculation.

More importantly, it leads many small businesses to believe
that they have been left out, that the incentives in the Code
are intended to only be available to larger business, and that
the system is simply not fair.

Grant Thornton urges Congress to pursue tax reform that
would lower the tax rates applicable to all businesses,
regardless of the form in which they conduct business. Small
businesses are among the businesses most likely to organize as
pass-throughs and it is essential that pass-throughs such as
partnerships and S corporations be included in any reduction in
tax rates.

We recognize the immense difficulty, however, in enacting
fundamental tax reform. If for whatever reason such tax reform
is not possible, or is only possible in the future, we believe
that the ability of small businesses to share in the incentives
provided by the Internal Revenue Code \1\ could be increased by
better focusing on those methods that are easier to compute and
the use of safe harbors specific to small businesses that would
simplify calculations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Unless otherwise indicated, all ``section'' references are to
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the ``Code'' or
``IRC''), and all ``Treas. Reg. Sec. '' references are to the Treasury
Regulations promulgated under the Code.

I will focus the remainder of my testimony on the
challenges faced by the small business community in taking
advantage of two important Federal tax incentives, the research
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
credit and the domestic production activities deduction.

Research Credits

The credit for increasing research is one of the most
effective incentives in the Code. Studies have shown that
additional research contributes a multiple of its cost in
increased economic activity. Under current law, there are two
methods are available for calculating the research credit: The
traditional method and the alternative simplified method.

The traditional method provides a credit equal to 20
percent of the amount that current qualified research
expenditures exceed a base amount that is determined by
multiplying the business' average annual gross receipts for the
prior four years by a historical ratio of research expenses to
average gross receipts that may be determined by years as early
as 1984.\2\ An alternative simplified method is available that
provides a credit equal to 14 percent of the amount that
qualified research expenditures for the current year exceed 50
percent of the qualified research expenditures for the
preceding three years.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ IRC Sec. 41(a)
\3\ IRC Sec. 41(c)(5).

It is my firm's experience that virtually no small- or
medium-sized businesses uses the traditional method. In recent
years, there have been numerous proposals to abandon the
traditional calculation method and increase the credit
percentage allowed for the alternative simplified method.
Congress could provide a significant benefit to smaller
taxpayers and enhance the use of the research credit by raising
the alternative simplified rate. Regardless of the method
chosen, the taxpayer is required to determine which of its
expenditures satisfy detailed rules and regulations to be
treated as qualified research expenses. Where the research is
performed by the taxpayer, such expenses include wages paid to
employees (or self-employment income of an owner) for engaging
in qualified research or the direct supervision of qualified
research, supplies (not including land, improvements to land,
or property of a character subject to the allowance for
depreciation), and amounts paid for the use of computers in the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conduct of qualified research.

Small businesses would significantly benefit from the
implementation of safe harbors that would simplify the process
of determining which expenses qualify and the modification of
existing safe harbors to facilitate their use by small
businesses.

An example of an existing safe harbor that may serve larger
taxpayers but does not fully satisfy the need of small
businesses relates to the treatment of wages paid to employees
with multiple responsibilities, only some of which are research
related. The general rule applicable to such employees is that,
in the absence of another method that the taxpayer can
demonstrate to be more appropriate, the wages must be separated
into qualified and nonqualified portions based on the number of
hours worked on qualified and nonqualified activities.\4\
Treasury regulations provide that an employee devoting 80
percent of his or her time to qualified research activities may
be considered to have devoted all of his or her time to such
activities.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.41-2(d)(1).
\5\ Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.41-2(d)(2).

For large businesses with significant research staffs, it
is generally possible to judge whether an employee spends
substantially all of his or her time performing or directly
supervising qualified research. In such cases, the 80 percent
rule provides a cushion and may allow for the full inclusion of
the employee's wages as qualified research expenses without
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
further examination.

Small business employees, however, typically have a wider
range of responsibilities than employees of larger
organizations. Employees that are primarily employed for the
purpose of doing research may also have a range of
administrative and other duties that do not qualify as research
under the Code and regulations. The likelihood that these other
duties might exceed 20 percent requires smaller businesses to
go through the process of examining time sheets or other
records. Reducing the safe harbor percentage to 50 percent for
small businesses would allow such businesses the type of
cushion that would simplify their determination of which costs
are qualified.

Domestic Production Activities Deduction

Subject to certain limitations, the domestic production
activities deduction of section 199 provides a deduction equal
to 9 percent (6 percent in the case of production of oil and
gas) of the net profits from producing property (including
software), providing certain utility services, or providing
services i the areas of construction, architecture and
engineering provided such property is produced or services
provided in the United States.\6\ Other types of service
income, income from the resale of items not produced by the
taxpayer, and most types of investment income, do not qualify.
For corporations paying tax at a 35% marginal rate, the
deduction is the equivalent of a 3 point reduction in the
corporate tax rate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ IRC Section 199

Although relatively simple in concept, the domestic
production activities deduction can be very difficult to
determine in practice. In some instances, only a portion of the
net income earned in an activity or even a single transaction
may qualify for the deduction. Given the difficulty in
determining the amount of eligible income, and the limited
benefit to be derived from identifying that income, many small
businesses have decided that the deduction is not worth the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
effort required to calculate it.

The Treasury has provided several safe harbors to assist
taxpayers in the calculation of the domestic production
activities deduction. One of these is the rule that allows all
of a taxpayer's gross receipts to be treated as qualified if 95
percent of its gross receipts are qualified.\7\ This allows
taxpayers with only minimal amounts of nonqualified income to
simply treat nine percent of their taxable income as their
domestic production activities deduction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Treas. Regs. Sec. 1.199-1(d)(3).

However, taxpayers who are not comfortably within the 95
percent test must still go through the process of segregating
their income into qualified and nonqualified portions, if only
to determine whether or not they satisfy the 95 percent test.
For those taxpayers, the 95 percent safe harbor may produce a
small tax savings, but it does nothing to simply the
calculation and make the benefit worth the effort required to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
obtain it.

The existing 95 percent safe harbor could be modified in
several ways to make it more practical for small businesses,
making it feasible for them to benefit from the provision in
the same manner as their larger competitors. The percentage
could be lowered, making it more likely that a small business
could satisfy the safe harbor and claim the benefit of the
domestic production activities deduction without having to
carefully segregate its income into qualified and nonqualified
portions. Alternatively, the safe harbor could be modified to
allow it to be applied solely to the active portion of a small
businesses' income by first excluding identifiable investment
income as nonqualified, and then applying the safe harbor to
the remaining taxable income. While this might result in a
reduced benefit in certain cases, it could significantly
simplify the process of calculating the domestic production
activities deduction, bringing its benefits within the reach of
small as well as larger businesses.

About Grant Thornton

``Grant Thornton'' refers to Grant Thornton LLP, the U.S.
member firm of Grant Thornton International Ltd (GTIL), and/or
refers to the brand under which the GTIL member firms provide
audit, tax and advisory services to their clients, as the
context requires. GTIL and each of its member firms are
separate legal entities and are not a worldwide partnership.
GTIL does not provide services to clients. Services are
delivered by the member firms in their respective countries.
GTIL and its member firms are not agents of, and do not
obligate, one another and are not liable for one another's acts
or omissions. In the United States, visit grantthornton.com for
details.

Grant Thornton is one of the world's leading organizations
of independent audit, tax and advisory firms. These firms help
dynamic organizations unlock their potential for growth by
providing meaningful, forward-looking advice. Proactive teams,
led by approachable partners in these firms, use insights,
experience and instinct to understand complex issues faced by
privately owned, publicly listed and public sector clients and
help them to find solutions. Over 35,000 Grant Thornton people
in more than 100 countries are focused on making a difference
to clients, colleagues and the communities in which we live and
work.

The views expressed in this document are the views of the
individuals named and are not necessarily those of their
employers or of Grant Thornton LLP. The information provided
may not and should not be construed to imply endorsement or
support by Grant Thornton LLP or other entities named.
April 13, 2016

Statement of Robert Russell

Attorney - International Tax Controversy, Planning and Policy
at alliantgroup

United States House Committee on Small Business, Subcommittee
on Economic, Growth, Tax and Capital Access Hearing on ``Keep
it Simple: Small Business Tax Simplification and Reform, Main
Street Speaks''

Mr. Chairman Huelskamp and Ranking Member Chu:

Thank you for inviting me to testify before the
Subcommittee on Economic, Growth, Tax and Capital Access on
this important topic of tax reform and simplification and
making sure that small business does not get left behind in
this discussion. I believe it is vitally important to remember
that America's small businesses have needs, interests and
resources that differ significantly from those of larger
businesses and so it is essential that hearings such as this
take place.

As background, the firm I am a part of, alliantgroup, is a
leading tax service consultant for small and medium businesses
across the country. alliantgroup has approximately 650
professionals located nationwide, focused on assisting small
and medium sized businesses avail themselves of proper and
available tax incentives, including tax credits, designed to
create jobs, promote research and investment, and otherwise
help the United States remain the leader in the global economy.
We also assist these businesses in tax planning, and we
represent them before the IRS and state tax regulators. In
providing these services, we work with the CPA firms of these
businesses.

We are uniquely positioned to speak to the issues you wish
to discuss today because of our work with over three thousand
CPA firms and tens of thousands of businesses from all over the
country in a remarkably diverse set of industries. Daily
interactions with our CPA partners and clients reveal that
cross-border business is a reality for many of our nation's
small and medium size businesses. I would specifically like to
note a few of our CPA partners, James Guthrie, Jr. of Gallina,
Dave Springsteen of Withum, and James Cordova of Windes for
their valuable insights on these issues.

Specifically, in my time today, I will speak to the
challenges facing small companies when they want to expand
their businesses across borders and of the challenges their
CPAs face in trying to assist them. Discussion both here and
abroad occurs daily on reform of international tax systems, but
much of that attention is focused on larger businesses rather
than on the difficult challenges facing small businesses.

Mr. Chairman, if there is one takeaway from my message
today, it is that although businesses of all sizes are now
players in the global economy, our rules and regulations both
in the U.S. and in foreign jurisdictions, have been built for
big corporations. Our recommendation based on our experience is
that a ``one size fits all'' approach cannot work and should be
modified to provide needed adaptability and flexibility for
smaller companies with resource constraints.

It is often cited that 95% of the world's consumers are
outside of the US.\1\ Therefore, it is too simple a view of the
world to think that small businesses are not currently engaged
in cross-border activities and are uninterested in growing
further. Simply put, when considering international tax law
modifications, small business needs and resources must be
considered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 95% of the World's Consumers Live Outside the United States,
U.S. Chamber of Commerce. (May 15, 2012) available at https://
www.uschamber.com/ad/95-worlds-consumers-live-outside-united-states

It is helpful to step back from time to time and focus on
the larger economic picture. As colleagues that practice in the
area of trade law like to quip ``Tax is nothing but a speed
bump on the superhighway of trade,'' or as you learn one day
one of Tax Law 100 in law school, ``the tax tail should not wag
the business dog''. Obviously, we are not advocating the
elimination of taxes. However, far too often we see taxpayers
shy away from expansion because of complexity and burden
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
created by the tax code.

Today, I would like to focus on three areas that create
barriers to business expansion, especially for small
businesses: (1) Barriers created by information sharing
concerns, (2) Barriers due to compliance costs that are
needlessly and excessively burdensome, and (3) The need for
real international tax reform both domestic and globally.

#1 Barriers Created by Information Sharing Concerns that
Impact Simple Business Functions and Operations

It is surprising to many small businesses that expand
overseas that there are incredible difficulties in establishing
routine business operations. Many Americans would be shocked at
activities we take for granted in this country that come with
significant consequences when crossing borders. For example,
something as basic as trying to open a bank account or create a
banking relationship in another country as a US citizen. We
have heard many stories of banks refusing to open accounts for
US citizens due to the operation of the Foreign Account Tax
Compliance Act (FACTA).

If you are able to jump through these hoops to establish
financial accounts abroad, then a small business must navigate
the overly-complex rules on how to properly report these
accounts and assets to the US Government. This information must
be reported on multiple forms to multiple agencies with varying
amounts of information to be disclosed. The requirements are
not consistent in many areas such as reporting to FINCEN versus
the IRS. This is increasingly perilous as a failure to properly
comply comes with enormous risk. Rules that were crafted to
hammer those with hidden bank accounts in Switzerland or Panama
leave legitimate businesses in an expensive and risky place--
even when they have a history of paying proper amounts of tax
and are trying to be compliant. The possible penalties are
draconian and can fairly be stated to shock the conscience. The
penalty structure for failure to report these accounts could
penalize the taxpayer 100% of the amount in the account even if
there is little or no income tax due. A fresh look at the
policies, penalties and reporting requirements from a lawmaking
perspective is overdue.

United States procedural requirements also have real world
impact on foreign businesses wanting to work with US taxpayers.
Experience in working with our clients and CPAs has uncovered
situations where, for example, foreign joint ventures have been
rejected where the foreign company admitted to using a lesser
quality competitor because they did not want to deal with the
US reporting requirements that came along with the US partner.

We also have clients who express frustration at losing
business with foreign partners due to required over-withholding
of taxes simply by administrative burdens. This is the effect
of the extreme difficulty that foreign parties doing business
with US partners have in obtaining US tax identification
numbers. While intended to prevent abuse, the practical effect
is excess tax withholding on a transaction with no practical
remedy. In reality, these transactions should be granted the
benefits of a tax treaty that was put in place specifically to
facilitate trade in this manner. Many times the difference
between the proper amount of tax withholding from a transaction
compared to the over-withholding by reason of administrative
difficulties is enough to kill many business deals for US
businesses.

#2 Barriers Created by Complexities of International
Expansion and Compliance Costs

Mr. Chairman, too many times when changes are considered to
our tax system, whether in changing the law or in issuing
guidance by the Treasury Department, the costs to the taxpayer
in time and professional fees are not adequately considered. As
could be expected, studies have shown that compliance costs
skyrocket when dealing with overseas activities.\2\ While there
are a multitude of examples we see frequently, we would like to
highlight two areas in the cross-border context where the
compliance burden, and risk for non-compliance, for small
business should be addressed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Dharmapala, Dhammika and Slemrod, Joel B. and Wilson, John
D., Tax Policy and the Missing Middle: Optimal Tax Remittance with
Firm-Level Administrative Costs (May 5, 2008), and Slemrod, Joel. ``The
Compliance Cost of Taxing Business.'' Mimeo. University of Michigan.
(2006).

The first area can be shown by a real example. In this
case, there is a small specialized equipment manufacturer
looking to expand business overseas. They set up a foreign
affiliate in the new country to distribute and sell equipment
locally. For this one enterprise with a seemingly simple setup
comes an almost debilitating compliance cost and/or risk. In
this operation there may be inter-company payments for
equipment purchased or services provided between the related
entities. There also may be distribution and service/warranty
agreements. Under highly complex transfer pricing rules, these
transactions must be analyzed in comparison to the outside
marketplace, and the mandatory documentation requirements are
simply not adapted for small businesses. Furthermore, the rules
provide for penalty protection against IRS audit if proper
analysis is completed to support the taxpayer position. Small
taxpayers and their CPAs are concerned. Transfer pricing is one
of the most audited issues by the IRS and billion dollar audit
adjustments with penalties do not only make the tax press but
also the mainstream media. Honest taxpayers looking to be
compliant with the by-the-book documentation requirements and
penalty protection must decide whether to engage economists,
lawyers and accountants at significant costs because of the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
required analysis.

Currently, there is no saving grace for small business.
There are no de minimis exceptions for low-risk transactions
where little abuse occurs, and there are no flexible
documentation applications for smaller transactions and smaller
businesses. Examples do exist in other countries where small
and medium size businesses are subject to simpler rules based
on items such as employee number, turnover or assets.
alliantgroup has met with the IRS and the Treasury Department
in the past in an effort to create Transfer Pricing guidelines
that will prevent abuse but not drive smaller companies out of
cross-border business. This idea of a transfer pricing ``lite''
would be a huge step forward for those companies with limited
resources but that want to be compliant with transfer pricing
rules.

We note that during the OECD's recent Base Erosion and
Profit Shifting (BEPS) project, consideration was given to how
developing countries could interpret transfer pricing
guidelines. It was recognized that throwing thousands of pages
of rules at them and asking the tax administrations with
limited resources to enforce these convoluted rules was
untenable. There is no reason why a similar look should not be
taken regarding the transfer pricing rules with respect to
smaller businesses here in the US.

Another example where compliance costs are not commensurate
with the value to the government arises in the area of Passive
Foreign Investment Companies (PFICs). While the policy
principles behind these rules addressing this specific foreign
activity is sound, quite simply, the reporting requirements are
not applied to the appropriate group of taxpayers. When
businesses operating overseas make investments or arrange
capital, many times they are swept into the incredibly complex
web of PFIC reporting. There are no consolidation or
streamlined filing provisions or de minimis exceptions. We have
received numerous reports from CPAs and have worked with
clients regarding the hyper-technical and excessing filing
requirements for PFIC situations. Even worse, many of these
separate forms reported very minor amounts of income and tax
owed. This is combined with significant penalties for
misreporting PFIC investments. There is a legitimate question
as to whether the PFIC reporting rules serve a useful purpose
in our tax system. There is no question, however, that as
designed they are overbroad and excessive.

This moves to the next point, everyone recognizes the IRS
is stretched thin. Speaking to our CPAs and our clients, they
are looking for more help from the IRS, including more
guidance; more educational outreach; and additional trained
people with whom to talk. Our clients and their CPAs are also
concerned the IRS systems be secure.

#3 There is a Need for Reform in Both the US and the Global
Tax Environment

It is, at this point, a truism that the US international
tax system is broken and in need of reform. While we will not
go into what reform should look like in this forum, we urge
Congress to reform the law and before doing so, consider how
that reform will impact small and mid-size businesses. A one-
size fits all rule generally makes little sense. This leads to
the simplicity part of this hearing. Simplicity is a pillar of
tax policy that is many times overlooked. For complex
transactions, sometimes complex rules may be necessary,
however, in our experience, many rules are written assuming
that well-heeled companies will be able to comply, and that
there is rampant abuse that must be guarded against. Neither
assumption is correct in all cases. We urge that the following
questions be asked in each case: (A) is the rule too
complicated for smaller taxpayers to understand and comply
with; (B) What are the compliance costs associated with the
change; and (C) Is it impossible for tax administration to
enforce?

We have discussed problems in our current system. We would
also note that our system encourages businesses to keep their
foreign profits overseas and not to repatriate them to the US
for US jobs and investment--commonly referred to as the
``lockout effect''. This is something that big corporations can
live with because of the size and scope of their global
activities, but it is an enormous challenge for small business
where every dollar of profit is needed to grow and reinvest.
This highlights the need to lower the tax rates to be
competitive globally is even more pressing for small business.
We all hear stories of large multi-national companies being
able to lower their effective tax rates to significantly less
than the headline rate. Small business, especially in the early
stages of expansion, do not have the resources to engage in
sophisticated tax planning and need for their cash back home
subjecting them to a high effective tax rate that very few
other multi-national businesses ever experience.

To this end, Congress should consider additional incentives
for small and mid-side business attempting to expand overseas.
One existing example is the highly valuable Interest Charge
Domestic International Sales Corporation or IC-DISC. This is
the last existing export incentive and is a great help for
businesses selling domestic goods and services overseas.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, I would like to place the importance
of US reform in the context of the global tax environment. In
2014, the OECD initiated the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting
Project (BEPS) where tax policy makers and administrations came
together.\3\ In 2015, the OECD issued final recommendations for
tax policy changes on 15 so-called ``Action Items''.\4\ It can
be argued that much of BEPS is the result of countries around
the globe seeing a pot of US deferred gold. Many of the
proposed rules pose cause for concern and may create yet more
barriers to small business entering or continuing cross-border
business.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ OECD (2013), Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting,
OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/97892642027190en
\4\ OECD (2015), Explanatory Statement, OECD/G20 Base Erosion and
Profit Shifting Project, OECD. www.oecd.org/tax/beps-explanatory-
statement-2015.pdf

While other countries are swiftly implementing these BEPS
measures, I commend Congress and Treasury6 for taking a slower
path. While a discussion of each BEPS Action item is beyond
this hearing, we do want to highlight one example of our
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
concern: country-by-country reporting.

Country by country reporting brings two concerns for
companies. First, is the added compliance burden (and costs)
for businesses to report additional company data. It should go
without saying, every dollar spent on compliance cost
contributes to less jobs on the assembly line. Second, there
are real data security and confidentiality concerns. We support
Treasury and Congress for holding the line on exchanging
information only through treaties and confidentiality rules
being protected against the wishes of many others. We want to
acknowledge the importance of taking action when information is
not protected by other countries. It is important to note,
while there is currently a threshold for company size on this
reporting, history has shown time and again, limits of this
type are lowered or eliminated to engulf many businesses.

Conclusion

Thank you Mr. Chairman Huelskamp and Ranking Member Chu for
allowing me to testify today on this important topic of tax
reform and simplification for small business. Far too often,
small and mid-size business concerns take a back seat in the
tax reform discussion and even more so in the international
context. I hope today I was able to highlight some real issues
facing our nation's smaller business taxpayers when conducting
cross-border business.
Written Testimony of Julie Verratti

Director of Business Development and Founder of Denizens Brewing
Company

House Small Business Committee

Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital Access

April 13, 2016

Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking Member Chu and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify at
today's hearing. My name is Julie Verratti. I am the Director
of Business Development and co-founder of Denizens Brewing
Company in Silver Spring, Maryland. I am speaking on behalf of
my small business and the Brewers Association, which represents
more than 3,000 craft brewers, 46,000 members of the American
Homebrewers Association and 1,100 industry suppliers of
agricultural commodities, brewing equipment, packaging, and
other goods and services required by modern breweries. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today.

My co-founders Emily Bruno, Jeff Ramirez, and I started
Denizens in 2014. Denizens is the only woman and minority owned
and operated brewery in Maryland and a proud member of the
Silver Spring community. We are both a restaurant and a
production brewery. We produce beer to be sold in our
restaurant and throughout Maryland and Washington, D.C. In the
short time that we have been open, our brewery has experienced
solid growth. In 2015, we produced 1,140 barrels and are on
track to produce 1,500 barrels in this coming year.

Running a craft brewery like Denizens is similar to running
any other small business. All of the day-to-day activities and
stresses like scheduling, marketing, healthcare and payroll are
amplified by a tight brewing schedule and working to
distinguish ourselves in a growing industry. Denizens has close
to 40 full-time employees who range from tipped service
positions, kitchen staff, brewing staff (manufacturing jobs),
and salaried professional positions. All of our full-time
employees who work 30 or more hours a week, whether they are
hourly or salaried, are offered medical, dental, and vision
insurance through the company.

As the director of business development for the brewery it
is my responsibility to conduct outside sales, liaise with the
state and local chamber and brewery guilds and handle all the
licensing and tax issues that arise. Denizens produces beer in
Maryland and we sell our beer in Maryland and the District of
Columbia. Our tax and compliance burdens are significant as we
must collect and submit sales tax in our taproom, pay
employment taxes, business income taxes, and excise taxes to
both the state and federal governments using their separate and
individual filing systems. I spend up to 5 hours a month
working on taxes, which may not seem like a lot of time but is
significant when you are working to grow your business. In the
next month my brewery will start distributing in Virginia,
which will increase the number of tax regulations that we must
comply with. Any way that the government could help to
streamline and decrease this burden would be extremely
beneficial to craft breweries like mine and smaller breweries
that want to grow but don't have the manpower and funds to do
so.

The Brewers Association defines a craft brewery as any
brewery that is ``small,'' with an annual production of 6
million barrels of beer or less (the 6 million threshold is
approximately 3 percent of U.S. beer sales, but the vast
majority of craft breweries are closer in size to mine in the
1,000-10,000 range); ``independent,'' less than 25 percent of
the craft brewery is owned or controlled (or equivalent
economic interest) by an alcoholic beverage industry member
that is not itself a craft brewer; and ``traditional,'' a
brewery that has a majority of its total beverage alcohol
volume in beers whose flavor derives from traditional or
innovative brewing ingredients and their fermentation.

There are more than 4,000 craft breweries in the United
States. To provide some perspective, Denizens brews less than
2,000 barrels a year. Yet we are larger than 70 percent of the
craft breweries in the country. I am lucky that I have the
tools, knowledge and support to navigate the complex tax codes.
A craft brewery that does not have a similar infrastructure is
going to find the same tasks much more difficult. Currently
breweries are required to comply with different federal and
state excise taxes and alcohol regulation agencies. The Alcohol
and Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB), the IRS and the Maryland
Comptroller. Oftentimes, there are different requirements about
when and what to file. Denizens is required to file different
taxes bi-weekly, monthly and quarterly with both the federal
government and the state of Maryland, although we have received
some relief from the federal requirement that I will discuss
below.

In many cases we have found that even if there is a way to
file online, it is easier to file the forms in hard copy. I
tend to do the work for my filings online and then print them
out to mail them in. It would be significantly more convenient
if the federal and statement governments worked together to
come up with a more streamlined process for reporting. A large
portion of my time spent on taxes is duplicating information
from one report to another. As Denizens continues to grow,
which we plan on doing, we will likely expand sales and
distribution to other states. To do so means that we will nee4d
to file excise taxes or sales reports to comply with each
state's alcohol beverage laws. We are happy to comply, but
these tax burdens could be a deterrent for a smaller brewer.
There are breweries like mine that have the demand for their
product and the desire to grow but don't have the personnel or
capital to do so.

The federal government has taken the steps to correct some
of the burdensome biweekly excise tax filing requirements. Last
year, language was included in the year-end tax extenders
package that made it so any alcohol producer that pays less
than $50,000 in annual federal excise taxes will no longer be
required to get a bond and will only need to file quarterly.
The cost savings is small, but substantial time will be saved
by businesses and the TTB as thousands of biweekly returns will
be eliminated. This is a perfect example of businesses working
with Congress and the Treasury Department and the Alcohol and
Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau to come up with a solution that is
beneficial to both parties. I hope that we will be able to
accomplish other process improvements to facilitate the growth
of the craft brewing industry and to improve the efficiency of
routine federal approvals and the excise tax collection
process.

With 4,269 breweries in the United States and more opening
at a rate of 1.9 per day the craft brewing industry is the
largest it has ever been in this country and it is continuing
to grow. Craft brewing now represents 12% of the US beer market
by volume and 21% in final retail dollar sales. There is still
room for growth, something we would like to work with Congress
to accomplish.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

As I mentioned previously, breweries like mine pay excise
taxes on both the state and federal level. They are additional
taxes over and above our business and payroll taxes, and excise
taxes are one of the major expenses that I, as a brewery owner,
face. In 1976 Congress wanted to help encourage the growth of
American craft brewing. The Internal Revenue Code was changed
to stipulate a demarcation point for any domestic brewer that
produces less than 2 million barrels of beer a year. Brewers
below that threshold pay $7 per barrel in federal excise taxes
on the first 60,000 barrels and $18 per barrel on anything over
that. When the federal beer excise tax was first put into place
to finance the Civil War, excise taxes were a major source of
revenue and most other modern federal taxes did not exist.
Today, brewers pay all of the same individual and corporate
taxes paid by all businesses as well as payroll taxes on behalf
of our employees. Brewers also pay excise taxes to their states
and in some cases to local governments.

For almost a decade the Brewers Association has been
working with Congress to try and pass legislation that
recalibrates the federal excise tax to reflect the makeup of
the craft brewing industry, and to spur additional growth. In
the 114th Congress, this legislation is the Craft Beverage
Modernization and Tax Reform Act (S. 1562/H.R. 2903). The
Senate version was introduced by Senators Wyden (D-OR) and
Blunt (R-MO), and the House version was introduced by
Representatives Paulsen (R-MN) and Kind (D-WI). This
legislation would lower the federal excise tax for the brewing
industry as well as the wine and distilled spirits industries,
and make the alcohol beverage excise tax system more
progressive for smaller producers and it has broad industry
support.

For craft brewers, in particular, this bill would reform
the federal excise tax structure on beer by:

Reducing the federal excise tax to $3.50 per
barrel on the first 60,000 barrels for domestic brewers
producing fewer than 2 million barrels annually and
reducing the amount brewers pay from 60,001-2 million
to $16 per barrel.

Reducing the federal excise tax to $16 per
barrel on the first 6 million barrels for all other
brewers and all beer importers.

It is legislation like this that would have a major impact
on my business, as well as other craft brewers. Denizens is a
growing brewery and if we continue at our current trajectory,
we will be at capacity within the span of a year. Legislation
like the Craft Beverage Modernization and Tax Reform Act would
benefit us greatly. If we are able to get our federal tax
liability reduced we will be able to purchase more equipment
and kegs to produce more beer and hire at least two additional
new employees.

Knowing that we would have access to additional capital is
an incentive to continue growing and hiring, which will produce
more federal revenue over time. Whether it is additional
payroll taxes for newly hired workers, or expanding production
to enter a new state market, a reduced federal excise tax
liability would be extremely helpful to the craft brewing
industry and the national economy. In fact, economists predict
that just the beer portion of the bill would create an
additional 9,000 jobs in the first 12-18 months after it is
implemented and an additional $320 million in economic growth.
The Craft Beverage Modernization and Tax Reform Act would be
good for the country and help to ensure that brewers can
continue to compete with larger brewers and foreign
competitors.

It is no surprise that this bill has widespread support
from not just the Brewers Association and the Beer Institute,
but also groups like the Wine Institute, Wine America, DISCUS,
the American Craft Spirits Association, the National Barely
Growers, the Can Manufacturers Institute and more. The
legislation will have a widespread impact on a range of
different industries from agriculture to retail. Every dollar
saved in relief mean nearly $8 of growth for the U.S. Economy.
The bill also updates tax administration.

With craft producers in every state and Congressional
District across the country strong bipartisan support exists
for the Craft Beverage Modernization and Tax Reform Act. The
legislation has 172 co-sponsors in the House and 33 in the
Senate (as of 4/11/2016). There is broad bipartisan support to
help encourage the growth of the craft brewing industry and
continue to create good manufacturing and service industry jobs
across our country.

In conclusion, taxes, and tax compliance costs, are the
largest expenses that craft brewers like Denizens deal with on
a day-to-day basis. We are more than happy to pay our fair
share, but a recalibration of the federal excise tax would have
an extremely positive impact on small brewing businesses like
mine and the ones in your home states.

Thank you again, I appreciate the subcommittee inviting me
to testify today on behalf of the Brewers Association and craft
brewers across the country.
Statement of Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson, Jr. for Hearing on ``Keep It
Simple: Small Business Tax Simplification and Reform, Main Street
Speaks

April 13, 2016

H.R. 2315, the Mobile Workforce State Income Tax
Simplification Act of 2015, is an important, bipartisan bill
that will help workers across the country. It will also help
small and multistate businesses.

As a proud sponsor of this legislation in both the 110th
and 111th Congresses, I am very familiar with this issue. I
welcome my colleague Congressman Bishop's leadership on this
bill in the 114th Congress. With 134 cosponsors this Congress,
it's clear that Mobile Workforce is an idea whose time has
come.

H.R. 2315 would provide for a uniform and easily
administrable law that will simplify the patchwork of existing
inconsistent and confusing state rules. It would also reduce
administrative costs to the state and lessen compliance burdens
on consumers.

For example, AcuityBrands is a leading lighting
manufactures that employs over 1,000 associates in my home-
state of Georgia and has over 3,200 associates nationwide who
travel extensively across the country for training,
conferences, and other business. In a letter in support of H.R.
2315, Richard Reece, Acuity's Executive Vice President, writes
that current state laws are numerous, varied, and often
changing, requiring that the company expend significant
resources merely interpreting and satisfying states'
requirements. He concludes that ``[u]nified, clear rules and
definitions for nonresident reporting and withholding
obligations would undoubtedly improve compliance rates and it
would strike the correct balance between state and sovereignty
and ensuring that America's modern mobile workforce is not
unduly encumbered.''

We should heed the calls of Acuity and numerous other
businesses across the country by enacting H.R. 2315 into law.
In closing, I thank Chairman Chabot for calling today's
hearing, and I urge my colleagues to support this bill so that
it can come to the floor for a vote soon. This country's
employees and businesses deserve quick action.

[all]
