- MODERN TOOLS IN A MODERN WORLD: HOW APP TECHNOLOGY IS BENEFITTING SMALL BUSINESSES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MODERN TOOLS IN A MODERN WORLD: HOW
APP TECHNOLOGY IS BENEFITTING SMALL
BUSINESSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 23, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-021
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-579                     WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
TOM RICE, South Carolina
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Stephen Dennis, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen...............................     1
Hon. Seth Moulton................................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Morgan Reed, Executive Director, ACT / The App Association,
Washington, DC.................................................     4
Mr. David Barrett, CEO, Expensify, San Francisco, CA.............     6
Patricia G. Greene, Ph.D., Paul T. Babson Chair in
Entrepreneurial Studies, Babson College, Babson Park, MA.......     7
Ms. Cassie Gray, Owner, ShopClementine, Ashfield, MA.............     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Morgan Reed, Executive Director, ACT / The App
Association, Washington, DC................................    15
Mr. David Barrett, CEO, Expensify, San Francisco, CA.........    31
Patricia G. Greene, Ph.D., Paul T. Babson Chair in
Entrepreneurial Studies, Babson College, Babson Park, MA...    40
Ms. Cassie Gray, Owner, ShopClementine, Ashfield, MA.........    45
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

MODERN TOOLS IN A MODERN WORLD: HOW APP TECHNOLOGY IS BENEFITTING SMALL
BUSINESSES

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 23, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Health and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Aumua Amata
Coleman Radewagen [chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Radewagen, and Moulton.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. Good morning. I call this meeting to
order.
Good morning. I want to welcome all of you to this hearing
of the Small Business Subcommittee on Health and Technology. It
is an honor to chair this Subcommittee, and I look forward to
continuing the work we are doing to improve opportunities and
growth for the nation's small businesses.
Today, we will be examining apps which are applications of
technology accessed on smartphones and other portable handheld
devices. U.S. demand for mobile data grew by 63 percent in
2014, and is expected to increase sevenfold by 2019. Since
2007, the United States has seen more than 750,000 app economy
jobs created. An astonishing 77 percent of the apps are made by
startups, or small companies, and nearly 80 percent of these
companies are located outside of Silicon Valley. And this
industry is steadily growing. Findings predict that the app
economy will reach 151 billion by 2017.
App technology provides businesses and consumers with fast,
viable solutions to everyday problems, and research shows it is
the entrepreneur due to an ability to remain flexible in a
quickly changing market environment who is leading the
development of these innovative apps. Developers are producing
apps that integrate home automation systems, track and monitor
health statistics, offer budget and financial transaction
tools, and allow consumers to have their groceries purchased
and delivered.
The continued impact that the app industry will have on the
United States' economy are significant, and we must help foster
that growth. In fact, more than 20 percent of all apps sold in
China were developed by American businesses. This is a perfect
illustration of the potential growth for the industry.
I also want to touch on the implications app technology
provides for underserved regions, such as my district, American
Samoa. Entrepreneurs in the farthest corners of American can
tap into the app industry, and our residents are among the
innovators. For instance, a Pago Pago native from my district
developed a photo app that allows users to add Polynesian
cultural filters and designs to their photos before sharing
them.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today to help
us examine and further understand the implications app
technology can have on the economy.
I now yield to the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you, Chairman Radewagen, for holding
this important hearing. Thank you also to our witnesses,
especially Cassie Gray, a small business owner who traveled
from Massachusetts to be here today. Creative entrepreneurs
like Cassie make our economy stronger, and we need their input
to ensure the laws we make are working for every day Americans.
There is no question that technology has changed every
facet of the American economy. Think about it. Only a few years
ago it would be hard to imagine how much we could accomplish
from a device that fits comfortably in our pockets. This
hearing comes at an appropriate time. Research shows that
entrepreneurship among Americans is declining, an alarming
trend. In her testimony, Ms. Gray describes the Etsy platform
as a ``onramp to entrepreneurship.'' For our economy to truly
improve, we need more onramps to entrepreneurship, and
technology, like mobile apps, can help lead the way.
Today, entrepreneurs are building entire business models
around smartphone applications. New forms of commerce are
emerging daily as the web becomes an increasingly mobile
platform. Small business owners use social networks, like
Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter, to market their products.
Americans now use smartphones, tablets, and other handheld
devices to do everything from ordering groceries to booking
travel arrangements, to sharing photos, to monitoring their
health and fitness. Our economy is stronger and more efficient
as a result of these innovations.
Not only are entrepreneurs developing innovative apps, but
more traditional businesses are harnessing wireless technology
to reach new markets and serve existing customers more
efficiently. Nearly two-thirds of small businesses now say it
would be difficult to continue operating without the use of
wireless technology. Thirty percent of firms with fewer than 20
employees utilize mobile applications as part of their business
model, and small companies are saving 275 million employee
hours a year through the innovative uses of wireless
technology.
As mobile web platforms become more integral to the
American economy, Congress, the FCC, and other agencies will
encounter a number of regulatory challenges that must be
addressed. As Cassie will demonstrate in her testimony, one of
the most basic challenges is ensuring widespread access to
broadband. Today, the Federal Communications Commission reports
that 95 percent of small firms have broadband connectivity.
This constitutes important progress but more work must be done.
In particular, there remains a significant gap between rural
areas like western Massachusetts and large cities.
Ensuring universal broadband access is vital to promoting
commerce. In that regard, programs like the Rural Utility
Service and the Universal Service Fund will remain critical to
economic development in traditionally underserved communities.
This Committee has an important role to play in ensuring that
as those initiatives evolve and are reformed, the needs of
small and micro businesses are kept in mind.
Entrepreneurship and innovation are two traditions that
have always made our country an economic leader. That remains
the case today as small businesses are on the leading edge of
developing new apps and utilizing them to expand their market
share and find new efficiencies. As always, this Committee has
an important role to play in ensuring that policy changes in
this area provide the appropriate degree of regulation and
consumer protection, while allowing the space for maximum
amount of innovation and growth.
Before I close my remarks, I want to take a moment to
acknowledge another witness, Patty Greene. Ms. Greene is the
academic director of the Goldman Sachs 10,000 Small Business
Program at Babson College in Massachusetts. This program has
benefitted small business owners throughout the country,
throughout Massachusetts, and throughout the Sixth District. It
is wonderful to have her with us here today.
On that note, I would like to thank all the witnesses for
being here to share their valuable perspectives, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. I would like to take a moment to
explain the timing lights for you. You will each have five
minutes to deliver your testimony. The light will start out as
green. When you have one minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. Finally, it will turn red at the end of your five
minutes. I ask that you try to adhere to that time limit.
Our first witness this morning is Morgan Reed, executive
director at ACT, The App Association, where he specializes in
application development issues. Mr. Reed has testified in both
the House and Senate chambers, and has authored several white
papers on app development. He also serves on the Advisory
Council of the Mobile Health Information Management Systems
Society.
Our next witness is Dr. Patricia Greene. Dr. Greene is the
Paul T. Babson chair in Entrepreneurial Studies at Babson
College. Before joining Babson, she chaired entrepreneurial and
leadership programs at the University of Missouri, Kansas City,
and Rutgers University. She is also a member of the National
Advisory Board for the Small Business Administration's Small
Business Development Center.
Next, we have David Barrett, the founder of Expensify, a
complete online expense management service. He started
programming when he was six-years old, and it has been his
primary activity ever since. With a brief hiatus for project
management, technical writing, and world travel.
Finally, we have Ms. Cassie Gray, owner of ShopClementine,
an Etsy shop that she runs out of her home in Massachusetts.
Ms. Gray creates minimalist jewelry using recycled silver,
reclaimed gold, and gemstones, and diamonds. What started as a
hobby has developed into a nine-year-long career through online
sales. Ms. Gray, thank you for being with us today.
Mr. Reed, you have five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF MORGAN REED, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ACT/THE APP
ASSOCIATION; PATRICIA G. GREENE, PH.D., PAUL T. BABSON CHAIR IN
ENTREPRENEURIAL STUDIES, BABSON COLLEGE; DAVID BARRETT, CEO,
EXPENSIFY; CASSIE GRAY, OWNER, SHOPCLEMENTINE

STATEMENT OF MORGAN REED

Mr. REED. Thank you.
Chairwoman Radewagen, Ranking Member Moulton, and
distinguished members of the Committee, my name is Morgan Reed,
and I am the executive director of ACT, The App Association. I
thank you for holding this important hearing on the impact of
the app industry on mobile innovation for small businesses.
We represent more than 5,000 companies that create the apps
used on smart devices around the globe. My goal today is to
highlight the remarkable growth of the app industry and where
it is headed.
We have three key findings for the Committee. First, app
companies are succeeding in every region of the country, as you
have all pointed out. Two, the growth of the app economy
provides access to technology previously out of reach from many
small business owners in rural and underserved communities. And
three--here is where I am going to predict the future a little
bit--the future of the app economy, including in your
districts, will be in financial, enterprise, and in health.
In 2008, The App Store launched with only 500 apps. In
seven years, the number of apps now exceeds four million across
several different platforms, and the app economy has emerged as
a $120 billion marketplace. Our industry research has
consistently found that more than three-quarters of the top
grossing apps are made by small companies, and 80 percent are
based in the U.S. And as you noted, 77 percent are based
outside of Silicon Valley. And while we all love Silicon
Valley, I think it is a very important thing, especially as we
are sitting on this Committee, to understand that spread and
that capability that the app economy is producing.
But, you know, those are just numbers, so let us get a
little bit more specific.
Chairwoman, you have already mentioned the app is called
Kavagram, and it is done by a gentleman, Sonny Stevenson. And
he did it, as you pointed out, to spread Polynesian artwork,
allowing you to edit photos, decorate them with designs and
images. It really borrows from the Instagram theme, and it has
really been a huge hit. Several NFL players have been using it
and putting out some pretty amazing photos using the app from
Sonny.
Ranking Member Moulton, you have one of my favorite app
companies in your district. It is called Playrific. With more
than 50 employees, Playrific builds amazing kids' apps, like
Pink Chillies, the Magical Elephant Game, which lets you build
puzzles, test your memory. They are doing just a great job in a
really safe environment for kids, and it is worth pointing out,
50 employees is a real job creator.
More importantly, every single one of your districts has a
bricks-and-mortar small business that is using mobile to manage
their point of sale, to manage their expenses, to help with
customer relations, and improve customer service in the field.
Now, the future of that mobile app economy is not
necessarily just in those apps in the store but in the apps
being used in your place of business. If you think of it this
way, your mobile device then becomes the place in the
repository for all of your information on your customer,
something called customer relations management. It tells you
when you last met with them, what was your sale. When you go
into that meeting with a customer, you possess in your hands
for the first time what did they last buy? When did they last
talk to you? All of that information that makes for rich
customer relations can be right in front of you on your mobile
device. Your training documents, and as we say most
importantly, your sales material for that next big deal.
Now we step to the next place in health. Right now, we all
know about wearables. I think at least three of the four of us
have wearables on right now. And what we know about them is
that your wearable device collects amazing information. But
your next step is your doctor is going to speak to you through
an app, and they are going to be able to see in near real time,
the information off your wearable. And God forbid you are in an
ambulance. The ambulance will be able to send information to
the emergency room via an app called Airstrip, which is already
in the market, to keep tabs on your vitals, to make sure your
emergency room is ready the moment you land.
Well, what makes these apps possible? There is some obvious
stuff--the network, devices, storefronts--but I would say the
biggest element is trust. Cloud technology that provides remote
data storage is the lifeblood of the mobile economy. It allows
users to access and share from any location.
And if trust is a key building block, then loss of trust is
the destructive kryptonite. Small businesses must be able to
protect the data of their customers whose trust they have
worked so hard to earn, so strong encryption, something, by the
way, OPM did not have, is critical. We ask that you take
seriously any government efforts to weaken security measures.
Just as troubling, the Department of Justice is currently
requiring American companies to break the law overseas, forcing
them to give data stored on foreign nationals at datacenters
abroad without approval of the host country. We encourage you
to support the LEEDS Act, which would provide a clear legal
framework for law enforcement agencies.
And finally, while small businesses must have the ability
to protect their intellectual property, they also need help
pushing back on patent abusers. H.R. 9, the Innovation Act,
restores trust by including strong measures to ensure
transparency in patent ownership, clarify what is and is not
infringement, and allow defendants to recover legal costs.
I thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I
look forward to your questions.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. Now, Mr. Barrett.

STATEMENT OF DAVID BARRETT

Mr. BARRETT. All right. Hello, everyone. I am going to be
the least slick speaker here. I have never done this before,
but it is quite exciting. Thank you so much for having me here.
I am David Barrett, the founder and CEO of Expensify. We do
expense reports that do not suck. It is a bold division, but we
are improving the world one expense report at a time.
So what I am going to talk about here is probably highly
overlapping, so I am going to be more anecdotal here about the
rise of the app stores. And I would say in my mind, the app
economy started with actually a little known phone called the
Danger Hiptop. I think I was only person who liked this phone.
It was the first phone to actually have its own integrated app
store, meaning that you could actually download and expand the
functionality of the phone itself. This phone launched in 2002,
but the app economy did not really typically take off until
about 2008 with the iPhone App Store. And at six years, nothing
happened. And I think the important reason why nothing happened
is because the Hiptop was not backed by Apple, and thus, did
not have the power to convince AT&T to allow applications to be
installed on their phones. And so for about six lost years, we
had the potential for an app economy but it simply did not
happen. And I think that really drives home the importance of
having open access to the technology, the Internet, and the
users, in order to actually enable the technology of an app
store to work.
Secondarily, I would say in addition to the app store, what
makes this whole revolution possible is the sheer power of
these phones. I am trying to think of ways to sort of summarize
how powerful these phones are, so to give some examples, the
first portable computer that I can think of would probably be
the Apollo Command Module, 1969. It had about 64 kilobytes of
memory, 43 kilohertz of processing speed. To put it into
comparison, a single iPhone can process about 16,000 times more
data, about 33,000 times more fast. So that is basically a
single iPhone has more power than the entire Apollo mission
combined. All of NASA at that time could be powered by a single
iPhone easily.
Maybe more recent is 1997. IBM had a computer called Deep
Blue. It was the first computer to ever beat a world champion
in chess. A single iPhone is about 10 times more powerful than
that computer, and that was just 1997. Or maybe a more recent
IBM computer is Watson. In 2011, it beat Jeopardy for the first
time. And so it was hailed at the time as being the smartest AI
ever created. It is about 2,500 iPhones, which means in about
seven years, due to Moore's Law, which means that basically
computing power doubles every 18 months. In about three terms,
every one of your constituents is going to have a phone in
their pocket more powerful than today's smartest AI. And so
that is pretty astonishing I would say. It is not totally
accurate to say that every smartphone is as powerful as a super
computer, but it is pretty darn close. And any policy you put
in place today is probably going to be applied to super
computers by the time it is actually out in the real world.
And so how this sort of works as a real world example.
Expensify, as I said, we work in the ever-so-exciting field of
expense report management, and what we do is we have an app
where you take a picture of the receipt and a technology called
Smart Scan will read the information off that receipt
automatically without any typing involved, put it on the right
expense report, and submit it for you. And so I would say in
our world, the availability of a telephone platform with an
integrated smartcam can enable this sort of scanning technology
to bring extreme productivity to small businesses that are
doing mobile travel on the road.
And so I would say the app evolution is not going to sort
of appear like HAL 9,000. Artificial intelligence is not going
to sort of appear in this personal form. It is first going to
start off with applications highly optimized for certain
problem demands, like Expensify.
And so I think that an exciting thing about this, as we are
getting these more powerful automation platforms, they are not
going to appear typically like in the enterprise or in the
factories and trickle down to the people. The exciting thing
about this environment is because of the sheer affordability of
this platform, it affects everyone all at once. The entire
world is benefitting from these sort of small business
applications, starting with the individuals and moving on up.
And so this sort of bottom-up adoption of this technology I
think is really a major change for how technology has
historically been adopted.
So I would say maybe a final point, I have heard real
broadband mentioned. I think that an amazing component of the
app technology is it enables rural areas to actually contribute
to a global economy. I know that our Smart Scan Technology
employs about 150 contract workers throughout actually rural
Michigan, where we have one of our offices. And so unlike a
typical Silicon Valley business, which is just based around San
Francisco, we actually employ a global workforce and bring jobs
actually back from around the world to rural America.
And so I think that the smartphone technology, sort of
powered by this global Internet economy, is bringing rural
economy into the global economy as well. And so I think there
is a wide variety of things it can do. All sorts of information
in my notes here. But most importantly, things are really great
right now, and I would say the most important thing we should
work on is let us not screw it up. Things are actually really
awesome. We do not need a ton of help. I would say patent
reform, innovation reform, even tax reform things could help,
but by and large, the main thing is let us just keep the party
going. So thank you so much.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. And now Dr. Greene?

STATEMENT OF PATRICIA G. GREENE

Ms. GREENE. Thank you, Chairman Radewagen, Ranking Member
Moulton, members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify. It really is an honor to be here today.
I am going to base my testimony largely on that as an
entrepreneurship educator, but also as the owner of a small
business, a store in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
I am also very pleased with the topic of the hearing today.
As much of the public discussion around entrepreneurship and
technology is really driven on a very thin slice of actual
businesses in the United States, those that use or sell
technology, and I would like to focus today that we are also
looking at the other side of the equation. How do small
businesses use and benefit from technology?
If we consider that fewer than 10 percent of all U.S.
businesses have more than four employees, we are a country of
microbusinesses. There are 25 million businesses that fit into
this territory of how do we actually learn again and use about
this. The fact that apps can be helpful I take as a given. The
question is how? How do these small businesses get access to
the apps? How do they learn about them? How do they integrate
them into their actual operation so that they can be tools for
productivity?
For evidence, I am going to use a couple different things.
One is a piece of research that was done last year by AT&T with
the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Council, and finding
that 94 percent of the polled small businesses use smartphone
technology, two-thirds of them are using mobile apps, and they
do save up to 150 hours each. However--and I think this is an
important however--73 percent of them are using them for social
media and marketing; only 18 percent of them are using them for
point of sale, those types of activities; and only 18 percent
of them are currently using apps to improve their operations.
There is a huge opportunity to work with our small businesses.
The rest of my evidence I am really going to draw from the
Goldman Sachs 10,000 Small Businesses Program. This is a half
billion dollar initiative to help small businesses. We
currently operate in 13 sites across the country in some of the
territories, and we are working with businesses that do have at
least four employees, so they are growth-oriented countries.
The companies today reflect over $3 billion in revenues.
The important part about that is the diversity of the
businesses and the diversity of the people. So for the
businesses, no single industry represents more than 10 percent
of the businesses in the program, the professional services is
34 percent. Everybody else is under 10 percent. And the
business owners are important, too, in thinking about who is
actually using the technology tools. The median age in the
10,000 Small Businesses is 46 years old. The range goes from 22
to 75. And please remember that these are, by definition,
growth-oriented businesses fairly split as to gender with 46
percent of the businesses are owned by women and a very broad
array of educational backgrounds ranging from some high school,
possibly a GED, to multiple graduate degrees. So when we are
thinking about who is using apps in growing their businesses,
we are looking at all kinds of people in all kinds of
businesses.
Within the program, we teach about technology in three
different ways. The first one really is it is embedded into the
curriculum, so we actually do have teaching notes for our teams
to use as to how do they expand and learn about technology. We
work with peer learning, so how do they actually learn from
each other, which is a huge way to learn about apps, and we
also have a tech clinic where we actually teach them not about
the apps themselves but about how do I identify what technology
is available, how do you evaluate it, how do you know what to
pay for it, and most importantly, how do I bring it back into
my company and teach others how to use it?
The app technology piece is really probably the most
critical question in the how to use it. So the pricing is
rarely the big challenge. It really is about a fear of
inappropriate adoption. If I bring it in, will it work? And
what is the cost if it does not work for me to have to go back,
as these businesses generally have a very slim margin for
errors.
The question of app is also related to how they train their
employees, and within the 10,000 Small Businesses, we have got
86.4 percent of the business owners report that they are
providing on-the-job training, and again, these are very small
companies with 62.6 percent using some version of online
learning. Again, another opportunity for apps in general.
I would like to close with one short example actually from
a woman in another Massachusetts, Victoria Amador, of
Tremendous Maids, who basically learned about an app to
organize communication across her company from another person
in the program. She reports that using--in this case she is
talking about Google Voice--saves her thousands of dollars. He
recommended to her when they met during the online portion and
therefore, she becomes an example of using technology to enable
working with others to learn about technology.
Thank you very much.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. And now Ms. Gray.

STATEMENT OF CASSIE GRAY

Ms. GRAY. Good morning. My name is Cassie Gray, and I am
the owner of Clementine, a handcrafted jewelry business. Thank
you, Chairwoman Radewagen, and Ranking Member Moulton, for the
opportunity to testify.
My road to entrepreneurship was anything but fast or
predictable. I moved to New York after graduating from college
and joined the publishing industry, working my way up from
assistant to senior copywriter. But I developed something like
a restless hand syndrome. I just wanted to make something
tangible, and I found my way to beading and jewelry making in
my spare time.
About 10 years ago, my personal life was influx and I left
New York to move back to my hometown of Ashfield,
Massachusetts. In this rural hill town, I had to cull together
a living from whatever I could--freelance writing, waiting
tables, and making my jewelry. I opened ShopClementine on
Etsy.com in January 2006. When I got my first sale, I literally
jumped for joy. For the first few years, revenue was quite
modest but I had fallen in love. While I was still working
other jobs, I devoted myself to learning all I could about
jewelry. I took a series of intensive metalsmithing courses,
which gave me the confidence to expand my line and focus on
attracting new customers.
Through it all, Etsy has remained my main venue. The Etsy
platform allows me to directly talk to my customers, making the
shopping experience truly personal. Now, I work 50-60 hours a
week on my business, and yearly business is more than $130,000.
While my store is particular to my personal circumstances, my
experience is similar to other Etsy sellers. Just today, Etsy
released a new report about U.S. Etsy sellers, which reveals
that they are business owners in their own right, and the
income they earn on Etsy through the website and mobile apps,
matters to their lives and the broader economy. Like me, most
Etsy sellers are women, 86 percent. Many are parents with
children at home. Just under a fifth are low income. And 39
percent live in rural areas. Nearly half of all sellers had
never sold their goods until they joined Etsy, demonstrating
that Etsy functions as an onramp to entrepreneurship.
And while some might be inclined to write our community off
as hobbyists, income from these creative businesses matters.
For 30 percent of Etsy sellers, their creative business is
their sole occupation. For the rest, their creative business
supplements other jobs, contributing an average of 15 percent
to total household income overall.
The Internet and mobile technologies have opened up
incredible new opportunities to people like me. To operate my
shop, I use the website and two mobile apps Etsy offers. As of
December 31, 2014, Etsy's mobile apps have been downloaded 21.8
million times. The Sell on Etsy app is indispensable in my day-
to-day routine. When I am working at my jewelry bench, I check
orders and communicate with customers via the app. If I go to
make a hammered ring but I cannot remember what gauge the
silver should be, I check the listing details via the app. If I
get a message from Etsy alerting me that one of my items has
been featured editorially, I can increase the quantity
available so that item does not sell out. I also do most of my
business's social media interaction via apps--Instagram,
Pinterest, Twitter.
Mobile app technology enhances how entrepreneurial Etsy
sellers, like me, reach customers and make a living. And it is
only the beginning. Already more than half of Etsy's traffic
comes from mobile devices. The fact that I can use my phone at
all to do these things is a bit of a miracle; however, we still
have a long way to go to getting access to technology to those
who need it.
I live and work in Franklin County, which is the poorest
county in Massachusetts. Most of Ashfield, where I live, is
completely without cellphone reception. In my house, high on
the hill, I get just one bar of 3G. There is no broadband or
cable available, so I use a satellite to connect to the
Internet. It is slow and it involves me having to go out in the
middle of winter storms with a kayak paddle to whack the
accumulated ice off the dish.
This gap in accessibility harms entrepreneurship and
business. Policymakers have an opportunity to support
businesses like mine. In addition to expanding broadband to
rural areas, lawmakers should focus on the needs of the self-
employed and microbusinesses. Most Etsy sellers work alone and
face very different challenges from even a 10 or five person
business. They are part of a growing trend towards self-
employment in the U.S., which offers both new opportunities and
new challenges.
For example, new administrative burdens impact
microbusinesses dramatically. The newly introduced Remote
Transactions Parity Act would require all Etsy sellers,
regardless of size, to collect and remit sales tax in every
state. Proposals like this threaten to undermine businesses of
one who simply do not have the time or resources to comply with
such requirements.
Overall, I believe the Internet and mobile apps are
creating incredible new opportunities for entrepreneurs around
the country. I urge Congress to enact policies that support
independent, creative businesses, enabling the broader maker
market to thrive.
Thank you.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. I want to thank the panel for your
testimony. And now I will give myself five minutes to ask some
questions.
Mr. Reed, you note that there are three billion different
apps on the Apple store site. This is tremendous growth in just
seven years. Do you expect the industry to continue growing
exponentially or do you believe it will taper off?
Mr. REED. Oh, I am confident that it will continue to grow
exponentially simply because look at the number of devices that
people have. This last year, we reached a point where connected
devices in the United States exceeds the population of the
United States. One of the things to realize is that the next
generation of cars will all be connected devices. You have
heard of the whole connected car movement. Well, now, every
single car is going to come with its own series of applications
and its own connection. So there is no question that the
explosion is going to happen.
What I think is more exciting is, as much as I love cool
games, and we have a ton of members making cool games, I think
it is really the way that mobile devices are going to empower
Ms. Gray and others are the place where that exponential growth
is going to be the most significant.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. You mentioned that some small
businesses are using apps for inventory tracking instead of
expensive software programs. How do these apps compare in terms
of the quality, features, and ease of use as compared to a
program used on a desktop?
Mr. REED. Well, it is a great opportunity to sit here next
to Mr. Barrett, who is, in fact, one of those generating an
application, as he said, that completely alters the paradigm.
That is what is so amazing.
So as you know, before, you would sit down at your desktop
computer. You would have your stack of expenses, and you would
sit there typing away. Well, with a product like Expensify--I
am going to be your salesman today--you literally take your
phone, you click it, and it shows up. So the idea of how it
changes--and I thought Dr. Green, her point was exactly right--
the fact that that is only still at somewhere under 20 percent,
that is this hockey stick growth that we are going to see,
because an app like his does not just do better or cheaper than
the desktop equivalent; it literally changes the paradigm by
adding features, like the ability to take a photograph, the
ability to combine it together, and then move it to a desktop
product that allows you to file your taxes, that allows you
to--hopefully not independent state sales tax in 7,000
districts--but that is where you really see that hockey stick
growth. It is right there. It is from products like his, and
from what Dr. Greene talked about, and the way that Ms. Gray
said that she would like to incorporate them in her practice.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Reed.
Dr. Greene, what do you consider to be the major hurdles to
small businesses utilizing apps in a constructive manner to
increase a small business's efficiency?
Ms. GREENE. I think there are two parts to that. The first
is knowing what is out there. They do know about a lot of the
social media, but especially in underserved areas, I am finding
that they only know about a small slice of what is really
possible. So just knowing what is actually possible. And then
the second is being able to undertake what they do see as a
risk of incorporating this because they are afraid of getting
it wrong, they do not have a lot of resources available to
correct mistakes, and they think they may be doing okay as they
go and not necessarily seeing the opportunity of what they
could really accomplish with using these new types of tools.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. Mr. Barrett, could you please
elaborate on the impact your business in particular has had on
the state and local community at your location in Michigan? How
did you choose this location?
Mr. BARRETT. Sure. Well, actually, I just flew from there
yesterday, and it is in rural Michigan, in the middle of
nowhere, surrounded by trees and one ski hill. It happened
randomly. We had a contractor that we hired remotely, and then
we had a problem. And we were like, ``Hey, we need the guy to
do this.'' And he was like, ``I know a guy.'' And then that
became two people, then it became four, and now it is like
basically hundreds.
And so I would say we have brought millions of dollars of
economic activity to this tiny town. We are working with the
local government, with the mayor and the city developers there,
and so I would say we view Ironwood, Michigan, as a true
partner in the business, and a really critical sort of secret
weapon that we employ to compete aggressively with our Silicon
Valley peers, but also the enterprise incumbents.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. Dr. Greene, in your testimony, you
state that peer learning about technology tools for small
businesses is critically important. What recommendations would
you make to policymakers to encourage the use of these tools,
specifically mobile technology, such as apps?
Ms. GREENE. I think that is a difficult one from a policy
perspective on how do you drive peer learning. The part I would
probably go to comes back to my experience working with the
SBDCs and the SBA, in making sure that there are arenas in
those funded parts of the program where these kinds of programs
can happen. Probably the most important part of that though is
to make sure that anyone that teaches in any kind of program
that is supported by the government actually does understand
technology, is able to teach about technology, and age cannot
be an excuse. These programs are really for everyone, so no
matter the age of the instructor or the student, there has to
be an openness there to try new things.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
And now I yield to Ranking Member Moulton.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you, Chairman.
Ms. Gray, what can Congress do to help promote the
development of apps for small business?
Ms. GRAY. Well, I would say the most important thing is to
continue to keep it free and open, to not put any barriers.
Your work on the net neutrality was really helpful. I think
that in order to really tap into entrepreneurship and
technology, we need to keep a level playing field for everyone
involved so that no single party or entity has an advantage.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you very much.
Mr. Reed, would you like to add some comments?
Mr. REED. I think one of the things that I think she
mentioned, that this committee of particular jurisdiction has
some interesting efforts on a very good story about figuring
out how do you get mobile apps to be built? When we had our
fly-in, we had a person come who had tried to reach out for an
SBA small business loan, and he went through a process where he
went to, I think, 19 banks. He is a great entrepreneur,
incredibly successful. One of the banks said something I
thought was amazing. Said, ``You know what? You are a great
guy. We know you will be successful. If you were coming here to
build a gas station, I would write you a check. But because I
do not know how within the confines of the SBA to properly fund
your clearly, likely to be successful mobile application, I
cannot give you the money.''
And so while I completely agree with Ms. Gray that barriers
to entry are a huge part of it, the government has the ability
to write a check. And when it says I will write a check for a
gas station but I will not write it for an app that will grow
and employ 150 people, that is when I have a problem.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you very much.
Mr. Barrett, I am a former Expensify user myself. I ran a
small business before running for Congress. I appreciate it.
You certainly made things a lot easier for us as we were trying
to get our company off the ground.
Mr. BARRETT. Happy to help.
Mr. MOULTON. You mentioned immigration reform. I wonder if
you could comment on that and what a difference it would make
and why you feel it is important to the small business economy.
Mr. BARRETT. Sure. I think there are sort of two aspects of
immigration reform. One is that immigrants are historically
much more likely to start businesses than nonimmigrants. I
think 40 percent of the Fortune 500 has been founded by
immigrants or children of immigrants. And so I think if we are
trying to drive the growth in the small business economy, the
number one thing we can do, Trump's comments notwithstanding,
is to encourage legal immigration, because legal immigrants are
the best and the brightest. And so we want to encourage this.
Secondarily, I would say the truly best and the brightest
are H1B visa holders. These are basically the finest people
that we can find around the world. If we are going to let
anybody in, that would be the people that we should definitely
emphasize. And I know that as a small business, we compete very
aggressively with, again, our peers and our incumbents. And the
number one tool that we have in doing that is hiring. And so I
think that hiring is, as I mentioned, rural Michigan for us is
really key because we find the right people for the right
position, but also, we search around the world for the best
people. And so I think improving or raising the cap on H1Bs can
help not just Silicon Valley, but I think many businesses,
compete more aggressively. In addition to just increasing
immigration overall, I think we will drive more small business
growth.
Mr. MOULTON. Great. Thank you.
And Dr. Greene, would you be willing to add to that and
offer your own perspective on the value of immigration reform,
or whether it is valuable or not, frankly, to small businesses?
Ms. GREENE. I think Mr. Barrett covered that quite well.
There are two ways to look at that in entrepreneurship, too.
There is a long history of certain immigrant groups also being
very strong in creating businesses. Not all immigrant groups
but certainly quite a few of them. So not only for the best and
the brightest coming in, and I think there are a lot of best
and brightest here, too, that they can all work together with,
but also looking at who is going to start and grow the next
round of businesses comes into play as well.
The woman that I mentioned from Massachusetts as an example
of using apps actually is an immigrant to the United States and
has received several awards as an immigrant-owned business.
Mr. MOULTON. Thank you very much.
Thank you all very much for appearing before the Committee
and for testifying. I certainly have learned a lot, and I yield
the balance of my time.
Chairwoman RADEWAGEN. I want to thank all of the witnesses
for taking time away from their businesses and families to
participate in today's hearing.
I now ask unanimous consent that members have five
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:43 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Testimony from Dr. Patricia G. Greene

Paul T. Babson Chair in Entrepreneurial Leadership, Babson
College

Academic Director, Goldman Sachs 10,000 Small Businesses and
10,000 Women

Co-Owner: Artworks, Gettysburg, PA

Investor and Advisor: Portfolia, San Jose, CA

House Committee on Small Business

Subcommittee on Health and Technology

Modern Tools in a Modern World

July 23, 2015

Chairwoman Radewagen, Ranking Member Moulton, Members of
the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
before the Subcommittee on Health and Technology on the topic
of Modern Tools in a Modern World, or more explicitly for
today, how apps, which I interpret as mobile computing tools,
``improve businesses' day-to-day operations, make them more
efficient, assist their marketing and outreach capabilities,
and, ultimately, stimulate revenue and job growth''.

I'm going to base my testimony largely on my experience as
an entrepreneurship educator with Babson College, as the
academic director and lead designer of the Goldman Sachs 10,000
Small Businesses and now 10,000 Women programs, as a federal
appointed member of the SBA Advisory Board for the SBDC
programs, as co-owner of Artworks, a store in Gettysburg, PA,
and most recently, as investor and advisor to Portfolia, an
equity based crowdfunding platform focused on women-led
businesses and women investors.

I'm very pleased with the topic of this hearing today as
much of the public discussion around entrepreneurship is very
technology driven, but it's often driven to a tiny slice of
businesses, those that exist to advance the use and/or sell
technology. It's gratifying that today we are looking at the
other side of the equation, how small businesses can use and
benefit from technology.

Our economy is one of small businesses, with less than ten
percent of all U.S. businesses having more than four employees.
This means there are more than 25 million very small businesses
either creating jobs, or providing the owner a job, and
approximately an additional two million with between 5 and 499
employees, all trying to find the best tools to survive and
thrive.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.census.gov/econ/smallbus.html. Accessed July 21,
2015.

10,000 Small Businesses, or 10KSB, is a $500 million
initiative to help small businesses in the United States by
providing entrepreneurs an integrated program of practical
business and management education, business support services,
and the opportunity to access capital. Babson College is the
academic partner for the program and is responsible for the
education and advising components, the training for all those
who deliver the program, the measurement and evaluation system,
and the national alumni program. To date the program has served
nearly 5,000 small businesses who represent nearly 100,000
employees across the US and the UK, including 49 states, D.C,
and Puerto Rico and collectively have over $3 billion in
revenues. We deliver the program through twelve community
college sites and one blended (on-line and face-to-face) model
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
housed at Babson College.

The 10,000 Small Businesses alumni provide a highly useful
context for considering the questions of this subcommittee
today, how do, or how can, apps help them run more efficiently.
The entrance requirements are for the business to be at least
two years old, have at least four employees, and have revenues
of at least $150,000. The program alumni are a broad cross-
section of U.S. small businesses, with one unifying criteria,
they all explicitly want to grow their businesses. They are
largely mature businesses. The typical business comes into the
program with $692,000 in revenues, 11 employees, and having
been in business for 11 years. Professional, scientific and
technical services is the only industrial category that
includes more than ten percent of the businesses and all
industrial categories are represented in one way or another.

The owners themselves are also important to consider when
thinking about the use of technology tools. The business owners
are most often around 46 years old, with a range from 22 to 75.
They are fairly evenly split as to gender, with 46% of the
businesses owned by women. And they have a very broad range of
educational backgrounds, ranging from some high school to
multiple graduate degrees.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.goldmansachs.com/citizenship/10000-small-businesses/
US/about-the-program/impact-of-10ksb/index.html. Accessed July 21,
2015.

Given my background, my focus is more on how small
businesses actually learn about technology tools. Most
entrepreneurial education programs focus on planning, and very
few actually focus on how to operate the business. I do take
10,000 Small Businesses as an exception. The use of technology
by the businesses is primarily addressed in three ways in this
program. First, we train all instructors to have an area of
their classroom dedicated to a technology flip chart. Each
business owner is asked to list the tech tools they use in
running their businesses, with an emphasis on apps. This
approach is particularly used during the Operations and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Processes module.

Second, the program is built on peer learning and the
business owners are organized into Growth Groups to work with
each other. These sessions include both formal and informal
exchanges of information about tools used. Notably, we avoid
organizing any business owner group by industry to promote
cross boundary learning about tools.

And third, we created a technology clinic for alumni of the
program that is focused on learning how to identify what
technology exists, how to decide what apps are relevant, how to
price them, and very importantly, how to integrate them into
the company, including training employees on their use.

I'd like to briefly expand on each of these techniques.
First, too often technology, particularly apps, is thought of
in very small buckets, applied to only specific areas. So the
push toward discussing apps in every module is designed to both
encourage the use of apps where appropriate, but to also
demonstrate to others the range of possibilities from note
taking and collaboration to the more specific marketing or
scheduling. This approach does mean that you need
entrepreneurship and small business instructors who are
actually current and adept in using these apps. Age is not an
excuse for avoiding technology.

Peer learning about these tools is important, while
potentially limited as to scale, especially when conducted
outside of any organized program such as 10KSB. The use of
technology, particularly mobile technology such as apps, needs
to be integrated into regular training about starting and
growing businesses, and decidedly not segregated into separate
courses or offered only to certain types of businesses. We do
not serve our small business owners well if we ``protect them''
from technology. By this I mean a practice I have seen in a
number of other small business service programs of deciding
beforehand who is likely to grow, who is amenable to the use of
technology, and therefore who would benefit from more exposure
to and instruction about technology tools.

The technology clinic proved to be a learning experience
that we are now scaling across the country. For the pilot we
included speakers from Square, largely focused on facilitating
point of sale operations, Dropbox, for file sharing and
storage, and Alignable, a social media collaboration tool. The
intent was to demonstrate the range of tools available to the
small business owners, while delving more deeply into the
general technology selection and usage questions. The questions
raised most often by the business owners were those that moved
beyond selection, to training, and particularly about how to
learn to connect across apps for increased efficiency. While
not called this by the business owners, the desire was for an
integrated portfolio, without being tied to any particular
product or brand.

For apps, the actual price of the app is generally less of
a concern due to most pricing structures. The cost comes in the
time spent on adoption, including the learning necessary to
make the usage decision, and then to roll it into the company.
There is also the fear of inappropriate adoption, the situation
when the app doesn't perform as expected, or just isn't a fit
for the business. Changes in technology are difficult for any
size company; however, smaller companies generally have less
budgetary room to make mistakes. While adopting an app may seem
like a small download decision, the potential impact of that
decision on their company often drastically slows down making
the actual decision.

The question of app adoption is also related to how small
business owners train their employees, in this case, about the
use of technology. This again is often something that could
often be better addressed in small business start-up or growth
programs. The need to do this is included in 10KSB and at 18
months after the program, 86.4% of the business owners report
that they are providing on-the-job training, with 62.6 percent
using some version of on-line learning, which actually then
suggests employee training and developing as another app use
for small businesses.

Much of the question about the use of apps and small
businesses therefore comes down to learning. Learning about
what is available, what makes sense, and how it can be used to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of any business.
Overall, apps can make business life easier, and make small
businesses more competitive. To also be considered, time is the
small business owners' most precious resource and appropriate
app selection and deployment takes time.

I'd like to close with one general and one more specific
example of learning and using apps in 10KSB:

One of the most striking memories I have from my
experience in this program comes from New Orleans where
early one morning before class I noticed one of the
more senior business owners in the class sitting down
with the youngest member of the class in order to
unpack his new iPad and learn from her about the apps
and tools she was using to organize and operate her
business. This actually is peer learning at its finest,
recognizing that every business owner has both
something to learn and to teach.

More specific is the example of Victoria Amador, co-
founder and CEO of Tremendous Maid, Boston, MA.\3\
Tremendous Maid provides residential and commercial
cleaning in the greater Boston area. The business was
awarded Small Business of the Year from the City of
Boston--Main Street District for Hyde Jackson and
recognized by Governor Deval Patrick during Immigrant
Entrepreneurship Month in 2013. Tremendous Maids was
also named the 2014 Neighborhood Business of the Year
by the Immigrant Learning Center Organization. Ms
Amador uses technology tools ranging from basic CRM to
sophisticated scheduling programs and free tools such
as Google Voice. She explains that she sees these tools
as a better way to serve her clients and communicate
much more effectively with her team. She reports that
the ability to maintain clear communication is
paramount to her industry in order to serve high end
clients. She credits Google Voice with saving her
thousands of dollars. She learned about Google Voice
from a discussion with another 10KSB business owner. He
recommended it to her when they met during the on-line
portion of the national blended cohort. Ms Amador's
example therefore becomes one of using technology to
enable working with others to learn about technology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ http://www.tremendousmaid.com/about/. Accessed July 21, 2015.

Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you
today.
U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Small Business

Subcommittee on Health and Technology

Testimony on ``Modern Tools in a Modern World: How App
Technology is Benefitting Small Businesses''

Presented by:

Cassie Gray, Founder, Clementine

July 24, 2015

Good morning, my name is Cassie Gray and I'm the owner of
Clementine, a handcrafted jewelry business. I'm so honored to
have been invited to speak with you today. Thank yo Chairwoman
Radewagen and Ranking Member Moulton for the opportunity to
testify.

My road to entrepreneurship was anything but fast or
predictable. I graduated from Haverford College with a BA in
English in 1997 and promptly moved to New York and joined the
publishing industry, where I worked my way up from assistant to
senior copywriter. But I developed something like restless hand
syndrome; I just wanted to make something tangible. I started
sewing again, then rediscovered beading and jewelry making--all
things I hadn't done since I was a child.

About ten years ago, my personal life was in flux, and I
left New York to move back to my hometown of Ashfield,
Massachusetts. In this rural hilltown, I had to cobble together
a living from whatever I could: freelance writing, waiting
tables, and selling my jewelry. I opened ShopClementine on
Etsy.com in January 2006. When I got my first sale I literally
jumped for joy. For the first few years revenue was quite
modest, but I'd fallen in love. I spent hours each day in the
Etsy community forums, chatting with other makers from across
the country and the globe.

While I was still waitressing and freelancing to get by, I
devoted myself to learning all I could about jewelry. I
attempted to teach myself to solder, but soon realized that a
propane camping canister and tin plumbing solder probably
weren't going to give me the results I was looking for. I took
a series of intensive metalsmithing courses at several
different craft schools, which gave me the confidence to move
in new directions, expand my product line and focus on
attracting new customers who were willing to spend more for
high quality handmade jewelry. Through it all, Etsy has
remained my main retail venue. The Etsy platform allows me to
talk directly to my customers, making the shopping experience
truly personal. Now, I work 50-60 hours a week on my business,
and yearly revenue is more than $130k.

While my story is particular to my personal circumstances,
much of my experience aligns with that of other Etsy sellers.
Just today, Etsy released a new report on the US Etsy seller
community, which reveals that Etsy sellers are business owners
in their own right, and the income they earn on Etsy--through
the website and mobile apps--matters to their lives and to the
broader economy.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ www.etsy.me/sellercensus

Like me, most Etsy sellers are women--86% in fact. Many are
parents with children at home and just under a fifth are low-
income, with annual household income under $25,000. 39% of Etsy
sellers live in rural areas, compared to 21% of the general US
population. Nearly half of all sellers had never sold their
goods until they sold them on Etsy. In this way, Etsy functions
as an on-ramp to entrepreneurship, creating opportunities for
many people who might not otherwise have started a business and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
removing traditional barriers.

And while some might be inclined to write our community off
as hobbyists, income from these creative businesses matters.
For 30% of Etsy sellers, their creative business is their sole
occupation. For the rest, their creative business supplements
other jobs, contributing an average of 15% to total household
income overall. This money makes a difference--44% use it for
necessary household expenses.

Etsy sellers are also self-reliant. Like me, most Etsy
sellers manage every part of their business themselves. The
vast majority of sellers work alone from home, and most are
self-taught. Of the 65% who required capital to start their
businesses, 83% relied on their own personal savings, and only
1% obtained a loan.

The Internet and mobile technologies have opened up
incredible new opportunities to people like me. To operate my
Etsy shop, I use the website and the two mobile apps Etsy
offers, including one designed specifically to help sellers
manage their shops, called Sell on Etsy. As of December 31,
2014, Etsy's mobile apps have been downloaded 21.8 million
times.

The Sell on Etsy app is indispensable in my day-to-day
routine. When I'm working at my jewelry bench, I check orders
and communicate with customers via the app on my phone. If I go
to make a hammered ring, but can't remember what gauge the
silver should be, I check the listing details via the app. If I
get a message from Etsy alerting me that one of my items has
been featured editorially, I can go to the app and increase the
quantity available so that item doesn't sell out. I also do
most of my business's social media interaction via apps:
Instagram, Pinterest, Twitter, and Facebook. There are apps
that let you enhance photos with text to easily create
promotions, apps that let you tie all your social media outlets
together so posting to one automatically populates the others.
If I see that I'm running low on 14k gold wire, I can check the
metals market app for the spot price of gold and decide whether
to place an order today or wait for the price to come down.
Mobile app technology enhances how entrepreneurial Etsy sellers
like me reach customers and make a living. And, it is only the
beginning. Already, more than half of Etsy's traffic comes from
mobile devices.

The fact that I can use my phone at all to do these things
is a bit of a miracle. However, we still have a long way to go
getting access to technology for those who need it. I live and
work in Franklin County, which is the poorest county in
Massachusetts. Most of Ashfield is completely without cell
phone reception; in my house high on a hill, I get just one bar
of 3G.

There is no broadband or cable available, so I use a
satellite to connect to the internet; it's slow and involves me
having to go out in the middle of winter storms with a kayak
paddle to whack the accumulated ice off the dish. Technology is
sprinting ahead, but there are rural areas that are at a
disadvantage. This gap in accessibility is a huge hindrance to
entrepreneurship and business.

Policymakers have an opportunity to support Internet-
enabled businesses like mine with hearings like the one today
focusing on the benefits of the mobile app economy. There are
other needs as well. In addition to fostering greater broadband
deployment in rural areas, policy makers should adopt policies
that specifically target the self-employed and micro-
businesses. Most Etsy sellers are businesses of one, and face
very different challenges from even a five- or ten-person
enterprise. They are part of growing trends towards self-
employment in the US, which offer both new opportunities and
new challenges.

For example, members of our community often struggle to
learn about and comply with the regulations that govern their
businesses and products. Regulatory agencies should establish a
Micro-Advocate to conduct direct outreach to micro-businesses,
create user-friendly educational tools, and make formal
recommendations to ease compliance burdens.

Further, policymakers should not increase the
administrative burdens our community faces. For example, the
newly introduced Remote Transactions Parity Act would require
all Etsy sellers, regardless of size, to collect and remit
sales tax in every state. Proposals like this threaten to
undermine businesses of one, who simply don't have the time or
resources to comply with such requirements.

Finally, many Internet-enabled businesses sell their goods
worldwide, yet trade laws have not kept up with the advent of
global e-commerce, and most independent, creative businesses
lack the infrastructure and information to navigate complicated
international trade rules. Customs and duties vary by country,
and packages are often delayed at the border or subject to
unforeseen import taxes, leading buyers to reverse transactions
or demand refunds. De minimis customs exemptions offer a great
opportunity to reduce these barriers. We appreciate efforts by
this Congress to increase the U.S. de minimis to $800, and are
hopeful that Congress can continue to pressure the
administration to prioritize this issue in ongoing trade
negotiations.

Overall, I believe the Internet and the mobile app economy
are creating incredible new opportunities for entrepreneurs
around the country. I urge Congress to enact policies that
support our efforts to start and grow our creative businesses,
enabling the broader maker-economy to thrive.

[all]
