- SBA MANAGEMENT REVIEW: OVERSIGHT OF SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT OFFICES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SBA MANAGEMENT REVIEW: OVERSIGHT OF SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT
OFFICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC GROWTH, TAX AND CAPITAL ACCESS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
FEBRUARY 2, 2016

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-039
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
99-714 PDF            WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Emily Murphy, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Tim Huelskamp...............................................     1
Hon. Judy Chu....................................................     2

WITNESSES

Ms. Tameka Montgomery, Associate Administrator, Office of
Entrepreneurial Development, Small Business Administration,
Washington, DC.................................................     3
Ms. Barb Carson, Associate Administrator, Office of Veterans
Business Development, Small Business Administration,
Washington, DC.................................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ms. Tameka Montgomery, Associate Administrator, Office of
Entrepreneurial Development, Small Business Administration,
Washington, DC.............................................    20
Ms. Barb Carson, Associate Administrator, Office of Veterans
Business Development, Small Business Administration,
Washington, DC.............................................    25
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
Ken Yancey, Chief Executive Officer, SCORE Association.......    28

SBA MANAGEMENT REVIEW: OVERSIGHT OF SBA'S ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT
OFFICES

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital
Access,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Tim Huelskamp
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Huelskamp, Brat, Radewagen, Kelly,
Chu, Hahn, Payne, and Clarke.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Good morning. Thank you all for being
with us today. I call this hearing to order.
On this Subcommittee, we understand that small businesses
are instrumental in strengthening our economy and restoring
economic prosperity. Given the importance of small businesses,
the Small Business Administration has been given the noble
mission of aiding and counseling our entrepreneurs as they seek
to start or grow their company. Because small businesses are
the lifeblood of the local economy and my home district,
Kansas's ``Big First,'' I want to stress how important this
mission is and note as chairman of this Subcommittee, I look
forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle and the SBA moving forward.
Last month, we began a series of hearings to examine the
SBA's management deficiencies within various offices, and
today's hearing will focus on the Office of Entrepreneurial
Development and the Office of Veterans' Business Development.
Together, these two offices are primarily responsible for the
entrepreneurial development programs meant to propel our small
businesses. These efforts include statutorily authorized
programs, such as Small Business Development Centers. I believe
we have some representatives here from those entities, SCORE,
Women's Business Centers, and Veterans' Business Outreach
Centers. In addition, these offices also oversee a plethora of
SBA-created initiatives, including regional clusters, Boots to
Business, and entrepreneurial education.
The necessity of unauthorized SBA-created initiatives has
frequently been questioned on a bipartisan basis by this
Committee. In the wake of the recent GAO report detailing SBA's
management challenges, I am concerned that SBA is continuing to
prioritize its wish list rather than ensuring taxpayer dollars
are carefully spent on programs with proven performance
records.
Today we will hear from both the associated administrators
of both these offices as they outline their resource
management. This will allow us to examine how changes within
these offices can ensure the SBA is effective in helping small
firms without wasting Federal funds on duplicative programs.
Thank you ladies for both being here, and I will now yield
to the ranking member for her opening remarks.
Ms. CHU. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
One of the most vital roles performed by Small Business
Administration offices is providing aspiring entrepreneurs and
existing businesses with valuable counseling and other
technical assistance. The agency's portfolio of entrepreneurial
development can provide critical resources to entrepreneurs in
this regard. Whether it is creating a business plan, advice for
navigating the procurement process, help marketing a new
product, assistance with international trade or any other
myriad of topics, the SBA's entrepreneurial development
programs can be invaluable for many small firms. It is so
important these initiatives are functioning at their best to
provide the highest quality of resources and services to small
businesses across the country. The cornerstone of these
programs is the agency's network of Small Business Development
Centers, or SBDCs, spread throughout the nation. SBDCs offer
small businesses with a broad range of entrepreneurial
development services. Sixty-three lead centers manage 900
outreach locations throughout the country. SBDCs are located at
colleges, universities, chambers of commerce, and local
economic development corporations, allowing them to harness
local community resources.
In a single year, small business development centers have
helped 13,400 entrepreneurs launch new businesses, an average
of 36 new businesses per day. 194,000 businesses received
advice from SBDC, while 290,000 participants attended training
sessions. In my district, we are fortunate enough to have two
of these amazing centers servicing the San Gabriel Valley of
Southern California. Clearly, SBDCs are leaving their mark as a
vital part of our nation's entrepreneurial ecosystem.
The SBA has also established efforts to connect young
entrepreneurs with more experienced business men and women. The
Service Corps of Retired Executives program, or SCORE, uses a
network of volunteers to provide time, mentoring, and expertise
as business counselors. Traditionally, retired former
executives have provided most volunteer counseling services,
but there has been a recent trend towards diversification
within this program. Lately, involvement from young business
owners has greatly increased, and I am hopeful that this trend
strengthens the program for the future.
Small businesses are diverse as the makeup of our nation.
As such, many of the SBA's counseling initiatives are targeted
toward specific demographic groups in our entrepreneurial
community. For instance, there are over 100 women business
centers spread throughout the country. In 2014, the centers
reached 130,000 clients and helped 700 new businesses get up
and running. It is critical that this program remains robust
and continues to flourish.
Even though female entrepreneurship is on the rise, there
remains significant gaps between men and women-owned
businesses. One recent study found businesses owned by men
averaged 726,000 in receipts, versus 239,000 for women-owned
firms. As more women turn to entrepreneurship as a career path,
it is critical that this initiative remains in place to close
gaps like this.
Similarly, there are a number of SBA programs targeted to
veterans. Most notably, the Veterans' Business Outreach
Centers. 78,000 of our veterans tapped into this initiative in
a single year. As our brave service members separate from
service and look to launch new enterprises, the VBOC, along
with Boots to Business and other veteran-oriented initiatives,
can provide an important boost. With all of these programs, it
is vital that taxpayer resources are being used to their
maximum effect for our entrepreneurs.
In its recent management review, the Government
Accountability Office mad recommendations for process
improvements at the SBA, including with the entrepreneurial
development initiatives. I hope to hear today how SBA is making
progress in that regard.
I look forward to learning about the work SBA is doing to
ensure all of these programs can be most impactful in
connecting businesses in our communities with valuable
resources. Entrepreneurs deserve all the help that they can get
at SBA, and it can be instrumental in meeting that need.
I would like to thank the witnesses for being here and
offering their insight, and I yield back.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Ranking Member Chu, for your
opening statement.
If Committee members have an opening statement prepared, I
ask that they be submitted for the record.
And for our witnesses, I would like to take a moment to
explain the timing lights for you. You will each have 5 minutes
to deliver your testimony. The light will start out as green.
When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn yellow.
Finally, at the end of your 5 minutes, it will turn red. Please
try to adhere to that limit.
And so with that, our first witness is Tameka Montgomery.
Thank you for being here. The associate administrator for
Entrepreneur Development within the Office of Entrepreneurial
Development at the SBA. In this capacity, Ms. Montgomery is
responsible for overseeing SBA's counseling and training
programs for entrepreneurs. I appreciate you being with us
today, and you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF TAMEKA MONTGOMERY, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR,
OFFICE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT, SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION; BARB CARSON, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF
VETERANS' BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

STATEMENT OF TAMEKA MONTGOMERY

Ms. MONTGOMERY. Thank you, Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking
Member Chu, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify before you today. I am excited to share
with you the important work of the Office of Entrepreneurial
Development, which is responsible for programmatic oversight of
the Small Business Development Centers, Women's Business
Centers, SCORE program, as well as other targeted initiatives,
such as Emerging Leaders, Regional Innovation Clusters, the
Learning Center, and Scale Up America.
As a former SBDC center director, I would counsel my
clients that they could not be all things to all people.
However, in OED, we must meet the varying needs of America's
entrepreneurial community. The diversity of our programs is
reflective of this aim. Each program has a unique value and
plays a key role in the entrepreneurial ecosystem.
America's business landscape is changing. Women-owned
businesses have grown at a rate of four times that of male-
owned; however, 90 percent of their companies do not have a
single paid employee and their average annual gross receipts
are $144,000, compared to businesses owned by men which
generate $638,000. More concerning is that businesses owned by
black and Hispanic women generate on average $28,000 and
$53,000, respectively.
Our Women's Business Centers serve a unique purpose by
providing services that address the challenges of women
entrepreneurs. Unlike any of our other programs, the WBC's core
mission includes empowering low to moderate income women to
become entrepreneurs. Currently, SBA manages 108,000 Women's
Business Centers that train and counsel over 140,000 clients
annually.
SCORE, our office's longest standing program, has been
providing mentorship to business owners for more than 50 years.
SCORE is powered by a core of 11,000 volunteer mentors who play
a critical role in helping to fill knowledge gaps that
entrepreneurs encounter as they start and grow their
businesses. SCORE volunteers offered more than 2 million hours
to 349,000 clients last year.
The SBDC program is our largest program with a footprint of
more than 900 centers across the nation. SBDCs are uniquely
suited to deliver long-term advising through ongoing one-on-one
business services tailored to the needs of the business owner.
SBDC's business advisors helped clients start more than 13,000
new businesses and provided training and advising to more than
450,000 entrepreneurs. SBDCs are also helping to advance the
nation's trade agenda by helping small businesses access the
global market.
Observing a need to help underserved and underrepresented
entrepreneurs scale up their businesses, we launched Scale Up
America, to fill a gap of business assistance to smaller
growth-oriented entrepreneurs. Although women and minorities
represent the fastest growing segment of new entrepreneurs,
their ventures are experiencing far less success. Data from the
Census Bureau shows that minority-owned businesses generate on
average $174,000 in gross receipts, compared to nonminority-
owned firms, which generate 552,000 in average gross receipts.
The goal of Scale Up America is to equip more high-potential,
growth-oriented entrepreneurs with the right tools to overcome
barriers to growth.
Small businesses drive innovation and play a critical role
in local economic development. Our Regional Innovation Clusters
connect businesses, suppliers, service providers and related
institutions within a defined cluster. Currently, we fund 14
clusters, such as an autonomous and unmanned systems cluster, a
bioscience and technology cluster, and a smart grid cluster.
While it is important that we are responsive to the
changing needs of entrepreneurs, we also want to make sure that
our programs are producing their intended outcomes. We have
worked closely with our partners, the SBDCs, WBCs, and SCORE,
to implement a collaborative evaluation methodology. Our office
also consulted with the Association of Women's Business Centers
to develop the first-ever survey to capture the outcomes of all
WBC services. The insights gained from this survey will guide
OED in our management and oversight of the WBC program.
Additionally, we have embarked on the agency's first-ever
economic impact evaluation piloted with the Scale Up
initiative. The findings will be used to improve the
effectiveness of this initiative, as well as provide us with a
model that we will evaluate other programs.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I look forward to answering any questions.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Ms. Montgomery. I appreciate
your testimony.
Our final witness is Barb Carson, the associate
administrator for the Office of Veterans' Business Development
within the SBA. In this capacity, Ms. Carson is responsible for
all programs and policies related to veteran entrepreneurs. She
is also currently a colonel in the U.S. Air Force Reserve.
Thank you for your service. And thank you for being here today,
and you may begin.

STATEMENT OF BARB CARSON

Ms. CARSON. Good morning, Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking
Member Chu, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today on the
U.S. Small Business Administration's continuing efforts to
empower veteran entrepreneurship and small business ownership
through programs and policies that maximize the availability of
SBA services for veterans, service members, and their spouses.
Our programs and policies target our nation's heroes and job
creators. We are grateful for the continued support of the
House Small Business Committee and this Subcommittee. We look
forward to sharing our successes with you and addressing your
questions.
As small business owners, veterans continue to serve our
country by creating critical employment opportunities and
driving economic growth. They possess the skills, discipline,
and leadership to start and operate successful businesses in
their communities. Nearly 1 in 10 small businesses is currently
veteran owned. Remarkably, although the overall number of
veterans declined significantly between 2007 and 2012, the
participation of veterans in business ownership was persistent.
This is according to the 2012 census survey of business owners.
During that period, the overall number of veteran-owned firms
increased at a faster rate than nonveteran-owned firms. We also
note that between 2007 and 2012, the number of women veteran-
owned firms increased by nearly 300 percent. All of this data
may indicate strong entrepreneurial activity among post-9/11
era veterans.
My office is strongly encouraged by these trends in veteran
entrepreneurship and is fully engaged in supporting them with
quality programs and thoughtful policy initiatives that all
cover SBA's primary missionaries of counseling and training,
access to capital, and access to contracting opportunities.
In Fiscal Year 2015, over 60,000 veterans received training
and counseling from SBA's 15 Veterans' Business Outreach
Centers. A prominent and enduring focus of the VBOC program is
providing transition assistance services via SBA's
administration of the entrepreneurship track of the Department
of Defense Transition Assistance Program (TAP), which we call
Boots to Business. Working through the interagency governance
of TAP, and with our partner support, we were able to deliver
Boots to Business to over 14,000 service members and their
spouses in Fiscal Year 2015, and over 35,000 have been trained
since the program's launch in January of 2013. Through an
efficient and effective cooperative agreement with the
Institute for Veterans and Military Families at Syracuse
University, we provide these services to those service members
who are disadvantaged by having to transition from an overseas
installation.
This year we reached several program milestones. First, we
increased the percentage of modules being taught by VBOCs.
Second, we implemented a Boots to Business specific outcomes
assessment survey to determine the number and rate of business
formation among the participants and get their feedback on the
quality and future service needs. And third, we implemented an
outreach campaign to increase the awareness and participation
of military spouses as well as service members who seek to
prepare for transition earlier in their careers as part of the
Military Lifecycle Model. Working with Congress and our
partners, we are proud now to offer Boots to Business to
veterans of any era and their families with a program extension
that we call Boots to Business Reboot.
SBA also supports comprehensive entrepreneurial development
programs specifically designed for women, veterans, and for
service-disabled veterans. Over 65 percent of the graduates of
these programs have started their own businesses.
In Fiscal Year 2015, SBA will sustain the SBA Veterans'
Advantage program and waive fees for veterans and their
families who qualify for SBA Express 7(a) guaranteed loans of
$350,000 and below, and reduce fees by half for SBA 7(a)
guaranteed loans between $150,000 and $5 million.
In 2015, lenders utilized SBA's 7(a) and 504 loan programs
to make over 3,300 loans, totaling more than $1.38 billion to
veteran-owned businesses. That is an 80 percent increase over
2014. In the area of Federal contracting, the Federal
Government in 2014 again exceeded a 3 percent goal for
contracting with service-disabled veteran-owned small
businesses. This was the third straight year. In 2016, my
office is expanding its engagement strategy to Federal agency
offices of small and disadvantaged business utilization to
ensure that service-disabled veteran small business
opportunities continue to grow.
My office empowers veteran entrepreneurs who seek Federal
procurement opportunities by building their capacity to compete
and win contracts. SBA, through a cooperative agreement with
the Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce Foundation, Veteran
Institute for Procurement (VIP) is how we do this. VIP is an
accelerator-like, in-residence, educational training program
for veteran-owned businesses, which is instructed by private
sector experts, government officials, and agency
representatives.
I thank you very much for the opportunity to testify before
your Committee today. By supporting our work, you are mandating
that the U.S. Government does all it should to provide American
dream of business ownership to those who have fought and
continue to fight every day to protect it. Thank you.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Ms. Carson, for your
testimony, and Ms. Montgomery. And we will begin questions. I
first yield myself 5 minutes, and I have a number of questions.
In your testimony, both of you have identified a number of
data points, certainly plenty of numbers, and performance
metrics are obviously important for Congress and agencies to
evaluate programs, oftentimes competing programs in the same
agency. It is my understanding that the Entrepreneurial
Development Management Information System (EDMIS) is the
performance database used by the SBA, but the recent upgrade
has been essentially a failure. This is very troubling to me.
First, who is responsible for overseeing this contract and
getting the system updated? And second, what is the current
status of EDMIS and what are the plans to update this system?
And third, what conversations have you had with your resource
partners about EDMIS?
And with that, we will start, I guess, with Ms. Montgomery.
If you can answer all of the above questions, or whatever you
can answer. Then, we will see what Ms. Carson thinks about
that. So with that, please answer the question.
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Thank you for your question.
Yes, EDMIS is our system in which we capture data. Really,
it is output data from our partners. And so what that means is
we capture the number of clients that our clients or our
resource partners serve. We recognize that EDMIS needs an
upgrade. Currently, there is not a contract. To answer your
second question, currently, there is not an existing contract.
Previously, there was an existing contract, and we recognize
that the system that was being developed was not meeting the
needs of our agency. And so now what we are doing moving
forward is that we have brought on someone on our team who is
solely committed to EDMIS, understanding what the challenges
are, and then also helping us to identify what the correct path
forward will be to improve the system and make sure that it is
a system that is not only effective for SBA in capturing the
data that we need, but then also for our resource partners
inputting their data.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. So the upgrade that I discussed that
had already happened, you abandoned that and are looking at
another upgrade, or are trying to actually finish the upgrade;
is that correct?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Correct. Last year is when that particular
upgrade had ceased.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. And who was in charge of making the
upgrade?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. I was. I was.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. And now you have filled a management
position that will be directly responsible for this upgrade.
And how much did you spend on the failed upgrade, and what are
you anticipating to ask for Congress, how many dollars to do
the upgrade right this time?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Yes. So one of the things that the
contract, the initial contract, was about a million dollars for
the initial upgrade. That contract had been moving forward
prior to my moving into the role. However, it was clear that,
as I said before, the system that was being developed was not
going to be effective, and so we stopped it so as not to
continue to waste government resources. As for how it will look
moving forward, our tea member is looking at the existing
system and will offer recommendations on whether or not does it
require an upgrade to the existing system? Do we look to an
off-the-shelf system? Do we create a new system? Or could it be
a combination of those? We do not know yet but we have a person
on the team who is working on identifying what the correct path
forward is on EDMIS.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. And if the upgrade failed, how do you
compare the performance between obviously the statutorily
authorized programs and these other initiatives that have not
been approved by Congress, how are you able to say which ones
are actually working?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Yes. So as I said earlier, EDMIS is a
system that captures outputs. It is not an effective system to
develop or to identify performance metrics or to, excuse me, to
evaluate the effectiveness of programs. And so what we have
done is we have been working with a third-party evaluator, and
as I mentioned, our third-party evaluator has worked with our
resource partners to come up with common performance metrics.
We use the third-party evaluator to evaluate our Regional
Innovation Clusters programs as well.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Ms. Montgomery, I am confused.
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Yes.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. So you have performance metrics outside
the performance metric database, and you use that to evaluate
the effectiveness of these programs? I am a little confused. So
what is the purpose of the database?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. As I said, the database is an effective
tool. It captures data. So it captures the numbers of clients
served, client demographics.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Well, I understand that. That is the
data. The upgrade failed.
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Yes.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. You are not apparently capturing the
data, so how do you evaluate the program if you do not have
performance data that you have captured because the upgrade has
failed?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. So I think what I have not explained
clearly is that we currently have EDMIS and the existing system
currently collects that particular data as I mentioned before.
What I was expressing is that as we look to move forward with
EDMIS, one of the things that we have to evaluate and determine
is that how do we look at gathering outcome measures and not
just output measures? And so that is where the two things that
we are working on. And so we recognize that EDMIS is effective
for capturing outputs, but it is not the best system as it
stands now to capture outcomes. And so in the meantime, what we
have done is that we have worked with our partners and a third-
party evaluator to capture more detailed, evaluative impact
information from the clients of our resource partners so that
we can really understand and evaluate the outcomes of those
clients after they have received services.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Ms. Montgomery. I am out of
time, but if you would provide the Subcommittee an explanation
of what the upgrade is for, the data you are missing now, and
how that will improve your evaluations, because it looks like
you wasted a million dollars. I think I am still confused what
exactly you were trying to do, and again, we do have a number
of statutory authorized programs that have a long history of
working and then you have these other initiatives which you
spent most of your time talking about that I do not see that we
had the data to compare those.
So with that, I will yield 5 minutes for the ranking member
for her questions. Thank you.
Ms. CHU. Thank you.
Ms. Montgomery, SBA resource partners, like the SCORE
program, the Veterans' Outreach Center, and the Women's
Business Center, provide a variety of services and counseling
to small businesses on not only starting a small business but
also the SBA programs that are available to them. And while
these programs are constantly changing, SBA must also provide
outreach about programmatic changes. In testimony, this
Committee has learned that SBA has a way to go to successfully
communicate with these partners. What steps is your office
taking to increase the communication with SBA's resource
partners?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Well, our resource partners are our direct
grantees, and so as such, our program offices are in constant
communications with our grantees, whether they are weekly
regular calls, for example, on the SBDC side with the state
directors, or with our WBCs. We also host with all of our
resource partners, collaboratively we host quarterly resource
partner calls in which we bring on the administrator to talk
about what things are happening within the agency from a more
broader level perspective, and we bring in some of the other
offices that also come in and speak to our resource partners.
Ms. CHU. Okay. Ms. Montgomery, SBA operates various pilot
initiative programs, such as the regional clusters and the
entrepreneurial education programs that provide training to
businesses. Of course, we have our statutory programs that were
established by Congress. But can you tell me what the merits
are of the programs that are the initiatives not found through
the statutory programs?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. So as you mention, our Regional Innovation
Clusters is one such program that we have been providing since
about 2010, and one of the things that we have found is that
the businesses that participate and receive assistance in the
cluster, that we have seen them secure more patents, that they
have received the targeted assistance to do commercialization
on key products and services. We have seen a higher level of
small businesses engage in their local economic clusters in
their communities. And so additionally, we have a number of our
clusters that collaborate with our resource partners to provide
potential clients or even to assist in sharing assistance,
providing technical assistance in other ways.
Ms. CHU. Okay. Ms. Carson, I am a fan of the Boots to
Business program because I think it provides resources to our
veterans at a very critical time in their lives. And I know
before that there was not that on-hands training before
soldiers left their assignments and went out into the world,
but the Boots to Business really corrects that, and they get
that training before they leave.
Now, I understand that this program is funded separately
from the Veterans' Business Outreach Centers and is
administered by various resource partners. With VBOCs having
the specific mission of aiding our veterans with business
training, has your office considered moving the program over to
the centers fully?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you for your question. Through Fiscal
Year 2015, you are correct. The appropriation was in two
separate categories--Veterans' Business Outreach Center and
Boots to Business. In Fiscal Year 2016 that will no longer be
the case, and so we can properly resource as needed. However,
there are only 15 Veterans' Business Outreach Centers at this
time, not nearly enough to serve the 160-plus military
installations that we are serving with Boots to Business around
the world, though we are focused, as I said in testimony, that
VBOCs need to increase their participation in Boots to Business
delivery, as that is by statute their primary responsibility to
serve the transitioning service member.
Ms. CHU. So what does that mean if you have only 15 VBOCs?
Ms. CARSON. It means that my goal is to expand the
Veterans' Business Outreach Center Program so that they can
take a larger role across the United States. With the number of
installations we have, which is over 150, I cannot possibly
serve them solely with Veterans' Business Outreach Centers,
which is why I am very proud that we have grant relationships
with SBDC, SCORE, and Women's Business Centers, because of the
diversity of that delivery model of Boots to Business at
installations introduces service members to all the resources
that they have in their community.
Ms. CHU. Do you think it would be more efficient for VBOCs
to administer the program or would it be more difficult to do
so considering the number of installations that there are
around the world?
Ms. CARSON. As you said, the number of them within the
United States makes it impossible at this time to serve solely
with Veterans' Business Outreach Centers. And I think there are
benefits to the diversity of the delivery among all resource
partners. That is SBA, and they get an introduction to our full
community.
Ms. CHU. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, ranking member.
Next, I will recognize Representative Kelly for 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. First of all, Ms. Carson, Colonel Carson, thank
you for your service. I think that citizen soldiers are the
backbone of this nation and have been since predating 1776, so
thank you for your service.
In August, I had the privilege of attending and operating
the VBOC at Mississippi State University. At Mississippi
University, Mississippi State University VBOC website, there
are two main training programs being advertised--Boots to
Business and Veteran Institute for Procurement (VIP). While
Boots to Business is administered locally, VIP is administered
at a centralized location. Mississippi State University
currently administers veteran entrepreneurial services to
Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana. Getting our
veteran entrepreneurs from Region 4 to the Potomac, Maryland,
where the VIP is held is cost prohibitive to many of my
veterans.
Ms. Carson, is your office working on a way to bring the
VIP program to other places besides Maryland?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you, sir, for your question. I have
explored that possibility with the Veteran Institute for
Procurement, and they have tested it once prior to their
cooperative agreement with the Small Business Administration.
And what they found is that most procurement decisions are made
here in the Washington area, and they found that they could get
the greatest participation from prime contractors, government
officials here in this location. However, I have not closed the
door to the idea that we do have some other central locations
around the United States where we could replicate this program,
perhaps in a different scale, but it could be done. So I have
not given up on that opportunity, sir.
Mr. KELLY. And Ms. Carson, you note in your testimony that
in Fiscal Year 2015, 60,000 veterans received training and
counseling from SBA's 15 VBOC centers. You go on to note that
working through interagency governments of TAP and with our
partner support, you are able to deliver Boots to Business to
over 14,000 transitioning service members and military spouses
in Fiscal Year 2015 and over 35,000 since the program's launch
on January 1, 2013. However, I notice that there is nothing
about the success of those veteran service members or military
spouses after they participate in your program. This Committee
and the GAO have noted the absence of performance metrics which
are very important. Measuring the right performance metrics is
the only way that you identify the right solutions and the
right problems to get the solution to. And so why is SBA not
tracking outcomes like business survivability or sales growth
instead of what they are tracking now?
Ms. CARSON. Sir, I will speak specifically to the Boots to
Business. I am very proud that over the last 18 months, we have
established finally a system of record at SBA so that we can
collect veteran data to begin to get that. And also, as I noted
in testimony, that I have also just been approved to launch an
assessment survey for Boots to Business participants to
understand what their business formation rate is. As you know,
this is a new program with its first appropriation in 2014,
although we did begin to test what would be the best practice
in 2013. So it is early days, but I am very certain that we are
on the right track, and I will start to get outcomes from that
survey next month.
Mr. KELLY. And just as a follow-up to that, what specific
data are you looking to track?
Ms. CARSON. First, I would like to know was it of use to
them? The quality of the service is the very first indicator.
Second, did it help them form a business? Third, I would like
to know if they were able to better connect with SBA resources
once they had had this course. It is hard to do without a
control group, but I would like to say that it makes a
difference to know about these resources before you are
actually back in your community. This is the biggest difference
between having nothing and having a transition when people are
making critical decisions about whether they want to go to
school, they want to get a job, or they would like to create
their own job.
Mr. KELLY. And this is more of a statement than a question,
but you understand that the military and the Veterans' Business
Outreach group, they are one of the best organizations, period,
about not seeing race, color, sex, or anything else. As you and
I both know from serving, we see green in the Army and you see
blue in the Air Force. That is the only colors we care about,
are green and blue. And so these are some of the brightest and
smartest and hardworking people, and they understand how to
achieve objectives when you give them to them. So I would just
say make sure your data reflects that because if we are not
getting success out of these folks, we are doing something
wrong, because we have the right people to achieve that
success, so we have to measure the right data to make sure that
we are providing them what they need.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Representative Kelly.
Next, I recognize Representative Payne for 5 minutes. The
floor is yours.
Mr. PAYNE. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to our ranking member.
Ms. Montgomery, in your testimony, you mentioned that the
number of women-owned businesses has grown significantly to
bypass the rate of male-owned businesses. However, you note
that even though women are starting businesses, 90 percent of
their companies do not have a single paid employees. When I
speak to my constituents, one of their primary concerns is
employment and financial prosperity. So can you give us
specifics about the unique barriers or circumstances that
women-owned businesses are facing that tend to inhibit them
from being able to add employees, and what can we do to assist
them in this area?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Thank you for your question.
Yes. When we look at women-owned businesses, there are a
number of challenges that women entrepreneurs have in scaling
up and growing their businesses. One of the things that we find
is that sometimes women do not believe that they can access the
capital that they need to really grow their business, and we
know that funding is very important for being able to grow a
business. And so making sure that they have the right
connections to the appropriate lenders, whether they are
microlenders or traditional banks, is something that we work
with business owners on.
One of the interesting things we talk about with pay and
women, is the ability to negotiate. That same ability to
negotiate also continues as it relates to businesses. And so
the great thing about Women's Business Centers and
understanding kind of some of those key challenges, their
training and their business assistance can really focus around
addressing those unique needs of women.
Mr. PAYNE. Thank you.
Ms. Carson, also I would like to thank you for your service
to this nation. We respect it and we appreciate it immensely.
In your testimony, you also noted that the uptick in women-
owned firms stating that between 2007 and 2012, the number of
women veteran-owned firms increased by nearly 300 percent. Can
you tell us about any unique barriers that are particular to
women veteran-owned firms?
Ms. CARSON. Thank you, sir. It has been a privilege to
serve, and I look forward to continuing that service.
I agree with Associate Administrator Montgomery that access
to capital continues to be a challenge for all women
entrepreneurs. I do, however, think that this population, they
recognize that they can negotiate. They have met many
challenges head-on, and I think they are going to be strong
entrepreneurs. They also happen over index, for example, in the
Boots to Business participation. Although the overall service
composition for women is in the high teens, we see it is over
20 percent of our courses are women service members who want to
take Boots to Business.
Mr. PAYNE. So do you think that their experience in the
Armed Services and the discipline and the criteria they have to
meet in terms to serve helps them when they go into starting a
business?
Ms. CARSON. I could not reference a survey, sir, but from
personal experience, I absolutely do think that it is the case.
Mr. PAYNE. Yes. Are there experiences that they have that
you could lend to women outside of that military experience
that allows them to be able to negotiate and prosper?
Ms. CARSON. I think that is a fantastic idea, and I already
work closely with Erin Andrew of the Office of Women's Business
Ownership to look for ways that our programs can learn from
each other and also collaborate, and that is a perfect way that
we could go forward in the future. Thank you.
Mr. PAYNE. I think that is excellent. And I will yield back
before the red light comes on.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, representative. I appreciate
that.
Next, I will yield 5 minutes to Representative Radewagen,
and I appreciate keeping on the clock. Thank you. You have 5
minutes.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Chu. I would like to welcome Ms. Montgomery and Colonel Carson
as well. And this question is actually for both of you.
In each of your respective areas, if the funding goes to
the unauthorized SBA-created initiatives went instead to the
authorized programs you oversee, how many more SBDCs, VBOCs, or
similar Entrepreneurial Assistance Centers could have been
opened or expanded instead?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Thank you for your question. The programs
that I believe you are referring to, for example, our Regional
Innovation Clusters, for example, those are programs that we
award through a contract because we do not have grant authority
for those programs. And so it is full and open competition, and
in fact, we have a Women's Business Center in Alabama that runs
a cluster. On our Scale Up initiative, we have a number of
Small Business Development Centers that are actually the
awardees of that particular program, and so they are delivering
that service, as well as we have some WBCs. But all of our
programs, all of our resource partners, have the ability or are
able to pursue those opportunities with us. There is nothing
that prohibits them from going after that funding.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. As a follow-up, could the U.S. territories
who are underserved by the SBA have been a possible location?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Yes. As I mentioned, it is full and open,
and so we receive applications or proposals from communities,
and it just depends on where they come from, but it is a full
and open competition.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Colonel Carson, any comments?
Ms. CARSON. Yes. I want to make sure that I understand the
question that you asked first. But if you are speaking of
programs, the unauthorized program perception of Boots to
Business, is that the one that you would refer to, ma'am?
Ms. RADEWAGEN. And others, yes.
Ms. CARSON. And others. Okay. In my case then, we do have a
statutory responsibility to participate in transition
assistance programs with the Department of Defense. We do
happen to call it Boots to Business. I believe that we are
really efficiently providing that program at minimum cost, that
it would still, even with great appropriation, have full and
open competition for more veteran outreach centers, but I
cannot do it fully in that manner to serve the transitioning
service member population. But like Associate Administrator
Montgomery, I do have fully open and competitive process for
grants for those resource partners.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. I would like to recognize
Representative Hahn for your 5 minutes.
Ms. HAHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Chu.
Thanks for holding this hearing.
One of the issues that we are grappling with in Los Angeles
County is veteran homelessness, and we have at the last count,
approximately 4,000 to 5,000 homeless veterans in Los Angeles
County. Last week, Secretary McDonald of the VA came out to put
his stamp of approval on a new master plan for the West LA VA
Center, which will provide housing to get our veterans off the
streets, but it is also going to be a place where more
resources for the veterans are able to be accessed--health,
legal services, addiction treatment. But also, there is a
portion of that that they are talking about the idea of helping
veterans become entrepreneurs because I think part of the new
thinking is it is one thing to get our veterans off the street;
it is another thing to prevent further homelessness by helping
them start a business. So I think this is the sort of model
that makes sense really around the country.
So Colonel Carson, I was going to ask you, SBA has versions
of this kind of resource hubs in the form of the 15 Veteran
Outreach Centers across the nation, but apparently, the only
center in California is up in Sacramento, and the majority of
veterans live in Southern California, and most of those live in
Los Angeles County. So since employment and entrepreneurship
are other venues to prevent homelessness, how can you assure me
that the veterans in Southern California are getting the
training and resources and counseling that you are speaking
about in these resource centers and what is the SBA and the
Office of Veterans' Business Development doing to reach out to
the veterans in Southern California? We are almost like two
states in California--Northern California, Southern California.
We have the most population in Southern California.
Ms. CARSON. Yes. I recognize that that is a challenge, and
in not being able to cover ever state as fully as we would hope
is a gap that I must address, and I continue to do so. So it is
a full and open competition for Veterans' Business Outreach
Centers, and the one in Sacramento was quite competitive. I do
share your concern that the veterans in Southern California
must get the attention and service that they deserve. So I do
count on Veterans' Business Outreach Centers, all of them, not
just in California, to be excellent resource integrators, to
make sure we know of all the resources that are available to
veterans both through the SBA district offices in Southern
California, the resource partners there, and I will also say
that I am finalizing a plan right now to expand the Veterans'
Business Outreach Center network because of an increase in
appropriation that is not yet final.
Ms. HAHN. Do you have a sense that the Southern California
veterans are accessing the resource center in Sacramento?
Ms. CARSON. Yes, I do, but I know I can do more, and
because the Veterans' Business Outreach Center mission is tied
really, the focus is on transitioning service members. You also
have a high number of military installations there, and now I
have better data, since we have been running the Boots to
Business program, to understand the demand, to understand the
existing veteran population and how we can better serve it. So
I look forward to making a lot of progress.
Ms. HAHN. Thank you. And I do think we have a great
opportunity here because certainly for all of us, just the
humane response is to get veterans and others off the streets,
into shelter, but long-term, I think we have a great
opportunity, whether it is women in minority-owned businesses,
veterans-owned. Women veterans is a huge issue, and I think we
have a great opportunity to transition them into the idea of
being an entrepreneur and starting their own business, and thus
really, you know, dictating the outcome of their own lives. So
I think you have a real opportunity, and I would like to see
you kind of look into this West Los Angeles VA Center and see
if that might not be something that you could partner with.
Ms. CARSON. And I would love to tell you if I have just 10
seconds.
Ms. HAHN. You do. You have 11. Oh, 10 now.
Ms. CARSON. Oh, good. We are testing a program that
integrates SBA resource with VA medical centers. I am testing
it on the East Coast right now in three different sites to work
with the VA Medical Center in their Compensated Benefits
Therapy Program for Entrepreneurs. Some peer-to-peer veteran
mentoring to start and launch small businesses, so I am
absolutely happy to look at the West LA and test it there as
well.
Ms. HAHN. Great. Thank you.
Ms. CARSON. Thank you.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thanks. I represent Representative Brat
for 5 minutes.
Mr. BRAT. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you both for being
with us today.
I taught economics for 20 years to college kids, and so I
am interested in all this entrepreneur stuff and I am all in
favor of it. But whenever I see entrepreneur development, I
almost get a little nervy because Adam Smith is my hero in the
invisible hand, and so entrepreneurs are supposed to be the
ones who have that precisability to be able to develop new
business, see opportunities, take risk, and all that kind of
thing. So now that government is going to come into play and
train entrepreneurs, my radar goes up. I am all interested. And
so make the best case you can for this. But what I really want
to know is the Subcommittee is entrepreneur development with an
arrow going toward economic growth. We are not doing so hot.
Last quarter was 0.7 percent economic growth. And so I think
the nation has more fundamental problems, and this is what I
want to get to with you. The folks you are seeing, do you see
other gaps that we could do a better job of? And my guess is it
is K to 12. Right? I have freshmen coming in to my college
classes. They do not know what a business is, for real. I have
seniors going out sometimes that do not know what a business
is. And then you guys get, and I get, and grad schools get
people that want to be entrepreneurs; they do not know what a
business is. And in higher ed, 90 percent of faculty think
business is evil. That is kind of tongue-in-cheek. Right? But
some of my colleagues are not in love with business. And so are
you seeing any gaps? If we want to do the best thing for the
people that are coming to you to be entrepreneurs, I want them
to be entrepreneurs. Right? Business is the only shot that kids
have. Right? That is the only shot for success. So we all want
to make that happen. Are there major gaps in skills and resumes
that we can do a better job of so that when they come to you
they are ready to go? And I will just kind of set off with that
question for both of you, whoever wants to go first.
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Thank you for your question. I think you
speak to something that is really interesting in that how do we
cultivate an entrepreneurial mindset much earlier? And I think
that that is important, because I think it does. K-12 12 is a
great opportunity and a great time to get young people thinking
in that way. And at SBA, we have been working on reaching out
to millennials because we know that while millennials are the
largest age cohort, they are actually starting businesses at a
far lower rate than previous generations. And so I do think we
have a great opportunity to inject and introduce
entrepreneurship earlier than even the millennials. So there is
an opportunity there that could help in the long term spur
innovation and entrepreneurship here in our nation.
Ms. CARSON. Sir, the population that I serve obviously is
not younger than 18 years old, but there are definitely some
benefits to veteran experience, and I would say those are
assessing risk, discipline, and responsibility for one's
actions, and those are essential to running a successful small
business. Where I still see room for growth is a focus on
business finance and personal finance as well and recognizing
the decisions that one makes as a young adult could have
serious complications as they try to start and grow a business.
Mr. BRAT. That is good. In turn, anything curriculum-wise,
any missing gaps? I mean, I tell my students, look, if you love
plays and the arts and music or whatever, good. Follow your
passion. Make sure you have got to do that. Right? But minor in
accounting. Right? You have got to do both. Right? And do some
Excel spreadsheets and learn about web design or whatever.
Right? And you just give them this package. And if they do not
have it, they are going to be hurting. Any just obvious
shortfalls where we have to, I mean, you gave some skills
analyzing risk and courage. Those are great virtues, but they
are not sufficient. And so what I am trying to get at, what is
the minimum in the schools? What can we really focus on to fill
in some of these gaps?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. I know that some of our Women's Business
Centers, as well as some of our Small Business Development
Centers recognize that gap, and they have been engaging from a
high school perspective, taking young people through a
curriculum that talks about a more entrepreneurial mindset
because the likelihood that that young person who is in high
school is going to actually start a business; rather, how do we
help that individual have the mindset so that whether or not in
the future they choose to start a business or they go work for
someone, they have an entrepreneurial approach that helps them
to be more effective. And in any situation, and in the future,
when they come to the point of wanting to start a business,
they can pull on what they have learned. And so I know, like I
said, we have WBCs and SBDCs that have already begun to provide
that type of service through training to young people across
the nation.
Mr. BRAT. That is great. I went over time but I was testing
you both, and I can tell you both actually like business. So
thank you very much. Very good.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Next, I will recognize Representative
Clarke for 5 minutes.
Ms. CLARKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank our
ranking member. I thank our witnesses here today.
Ms. Carson, in your testimony, you mentioned the Veteran
Institute for Procurement Program, which you note is instructed
by private sector experts and government officials. Could you
expand a bit more on this program, and how long it has been in
place, and what kinds of successes you have achieved?
Ms. CARSON. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for your questions.
I am very proud of this program, VIP. It is, as you said, a
Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce foundation, and it has
been funning for a number of years, but SBA has been involved
as a cooperative agreement for just--we are on our second year.
So the format of the program is it is at no cost to the veteran
business. It is at a facility for three days. It is intensive.
It is 27 hours of learning, and 80 percent of the attendees say
that they make significant changes to their business practices
after they have left the program. And the combination of
instruction is they are prime contractors who give of their
time to give and tell veteran business owners what would make
them more competitive, the things that they are not doing that
they could be doing, and what the landscape looks like for
procurement, which is why it is central to this area where most
of those big decisions are made. The agency officials that we
bring in, they can be SBA procurement center representatives.
They can be independent procurement decision-makers themselves,
and they are also leaders like myself, the 8(a) program. So
they get a full rounded perspective of everyone who is in the
procurement landscape.
Ms. CLARKE. So since your partnership, have you been able
to sort of chart successes in actually obtaining contracts from
individuals who have attended these intensive programs?
Ms. CARSON. That is at the 1-year point after going to the
program. Those members, those participants are surveyed, and we
did just receive one, so I am happy to provide that to you.
Ms. CLARKE. Okay. Very well.
Ms. CARSON. Thank you.
Ms. CLARKE. Ms. Montgomery, can you discuss a bit more
detail the initiatives that your office has put in place to
expand outreach to entrepreneurs, particularly to minority and
women-owned businesses in underserved areas?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Thank you. I would love to.
One program, and it is not really a program, but it is an
initiative that we recently launched, and we partnered with the
National Association of Government Guaranteed Lenders,
recognizing that there are in underserved communities
individuals obviously who want to start a business but do not
know where to go and they do not have the relationship
necessarily with SBA. They have not been introduced to SBA. And
so what we have developed in partnership with NAGGL was, or is,
called the Business Smart Toolkit. And basically, it is a
downloadable--it is on our website--workshop that provides
individuals with the basics around starting a business, how to
establish strong banking relationships, and then where to
connect with the local resources on the ground. And so this was
done through a co-sponsorship with NAGGL, and the way that we
have been able to deploy this and get it out into the broader
community is by partnering with organizations who have those
constituencies. So, for example, one of the organizations that
we have partnered with is--the 100 Black Men of America is one
of our partners. The National Association of Community Latino
Builders is another one of our organizations that we have
partnered with. So we have tried to partner with faith-based
and nonfaith-based community organizations to make them aware
of this resource that they can download to host a workshop, and
then on how they can connect with our SBA district offices and
how they can connect with a lender to come in and speak to
their constituents.
Ms. CLARKE. So that initiative seems to be a one-way
initiative. How do you judge whether you have met success in
connecting them with the lenders? Because that is the ultimate
goal; right?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Yes. So with that particular effort, I like
to say the goal is to educate and connect. And so in the
Business Smart Toolkit, we provide them with guidance on how to
host a workshop. And what we say is, it is three modules and we
say as the host organization, you deliver the first module. And
then the second module, which is about banking relationships,
we provide them with contact with NAGGL, and we say contact
NAGGL and they will identify a lender who will do the second
module. And then we connect them with our SBA district offices,
who will then deliver the third module. So that is how they are
getting directly connected with SBA as well as with a lender.
Ms. CLARKE. Have you been able to get a sense of how much
this is being utilized, what kind of feedback you are getting
on the ground in terms of the modules, and how that connects to
the small business community in those particular areas?
Ms. MONTGOMERY. We recently launched the Business Smart
Toolkit in October of this year, and so it is just getting--I
am sorry, October of last year. Excuse me. So it is just
getting out into the broader community. And so, but the
feedback that I have heard has been great. That people really
like the information. That those organizations who are
downloading it and using it, that they feel like the content is
written at the right level. That it really does help them to
connect their constituents with our resources, with SBA and
with bankers. So we are getting great feedback, but it is still
new.
Ms. CLARKE. Still young.
Ms. MONTGOMERY. Yes.
Ms. CLARKE. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman HUELSKAMP. Thank you, Subcommittee.
I want to follow up though on one last question. I am
trying to understand, Ms. Montgomery, your statement about your
authorization for the grants, the competitive grants, and if
you provide Committee documentation of your understanding where
you have that authority, and I also remind you of the request
for your performance metrics and the data that you are using
for comparative purposes. But it is evident to me that both
this Subcommittee and the SBA want to bolster the growth and
development of entrepreneurs. However, our main concern that
mismanagement at the SBA is resulting in the prioritization of
its own initiatives, rather than ensuring scarce taxpayer
dollars are carefully spent on the most effective programs with
proven metrics.
I hope that today's hearing will inspire the SBA to
reexamine their efforts to truly align with GAO's
recommendations and benefit our small businesses.
And last, I ask unanimous consent that members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered. This hearing is
now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:02 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking Member Chu, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify before you
about the SBA's Office of Entrepreneurial Development and my
oversight of its encompassing programs.

The Office of Entrepreneurial Development represents the
third leg of SBA's support to entrepreneurs by ensuring that
relevant and effective technical assistance, counseling,
mentoring and training is delivered to our nation's small
business owners. To accomplish this, my office is responsible
for programmatic oversight of the Small Business Development
Centers (SBDC), Women's Business Centers (WBC), and SCORE
programs as well as other targeted entrepreneurial support
initiatives such as Emerging Leaders, Regional Innovation
Clusters, The Learning Center, and ScaleUp America. Our aim
through the entirety of our programs and initiatives is to
ensure that our nation's entrepreneurs find our services
responsive and relevant to their needs of starting and growing
successful small businesses. Research shows that 70% of small
businesses that receive assistance survive more than five
years. I applaud the House and Senate Appropriations
Committees' recognition of the critical role business
assistance programs play in the success of small businesses
through their support of SBA's budget.

As a former SBDC center director, I would often counsel my
small business clients that they couldn't be all things to all
people. However, as stewards of public resources, we understand
that we must meet the changing and varying needs of America's
dynamic entrepreneurial community of 28 million small
businesses. The diversity of our programs is reflective of this
aim. Each program has a unique value and plays a key role in
ensuring a strong entrepreneurial ecosystem.

As America's economy innovates and evolves, so do the needs
of America's entrepreneurs. The most recent data from the
Census Bureau tells us that the number of women-owned
businesses has grown at a rate four times that of male-owned
businesses in recent years, and they now represent 36% of our
nation's businesses. However, while more women are starting
businesses, 90% of their companies don't have a single paid
employee and only 1.7% generate $1M or more in gross receipts.
This is where our Women's Business Centers step in to serve a
unique purpose by providing services that speak to the
particular needs and challenges of women entrepreneurs. WBCs
offer women entrepreneurs a community of support and services
that encourages their growth and business success. Currently,
SBA manages 108 women's business centers that train and counsel
over 140,000 clients annually. Unlike any of our other
programs, the WBCs' core mission is to empower low-to-moderate
income women to become entrepreneurs. Our WBCs play a critical
role in helping to level the playing field for women
entrepreneurs who face unique obstacles in the world of
business.

In 2015, our Office of Women's Business Ownership launched
InnovateHER, a national effort designed to identify and
showcase products and services with potential for
commercialization that have a measurable impact on the lives of
women and families. This year this effort involved more than
200 organizations that hosted InnovateHER pitch competitions
across the nation. Additionally, in 2015 our office partnered
with the Association of Women's Business Centers to develop the
first ever survey to capture the outcomes of all WBC services.
Results from this survey will be published later this year, and
the insights gained from the survey will be used to guide OED
in our management and oversight of the WBC program.

SCORE, our office's longest-standing program, has been
providing mentorship to business owners for more than 50 years.
SCORE is powered by a corps of 11,000 volunteer mentors, most
of whom have had successful careers in the private sector as
executives and business owners. A SCORE mentor plays a critical
role in helping to fill the knowledge gaps that entrepreneurs
encounter as they start and grow their businesses. SCORE
volunteer mentors volunteer more than 2,246,400 hours to
349,539 clients in fiscal year 2015. Starting off in business
or even tackling a new business challenge can feel like driving
along a road through a dense fog; you can barely see shapes and
you're straining to get clarity. Our SCORE mentors come
alongside the entrepreneur to help guide them and they clear
that fog so that the entrepreneur can see what's ahead.

In 2015, the Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs)
placed greater priority on helping long-term clients, who, we
have found, achieve the highest business outcomes. SBDCs are
uniquely suited to deliver long-term advising through ongoing
one-on-one business services tailored to the needs of the
individual business owner. The average time spent per client
increased by 2.5% in 2015 and business outcomes have also
increased. SBDCs' business advisors helped clients start more
than 13,000 new businesses and provided training and advising
to over 450,000 entrepreneurs of which 61,000 were ``long-
term'' clients who received 5 hours or more of face-to-face
time with their advisor. SBDCs across the country continued to
focus on programs and services designed to help underserved
markets, emphasizing inclusive entrepreneurship along with the
already vast array of services provided to their local small
business markets.

As I stated previously, the entirety of our programs are
designed to meet the changing and diverse needs of
entrepreneurs across the lifecycle of a small business.

Since 2007, the Emerging Leaders program has sought to
provide executive level training to entrepreneurs who come from
underserved and underrepresented communities. Over the eight
years that this program has existed, it has graduated more than
3,300 executives providing them with more than 100 hours of
training per cycle, In 2015, we focused on expanding the
program from 24 to 48 sites. We also focused on expanding
outreach to attract a diverse group of participants. This year
we will again expand the program to add five more communities.
Our recent data shows that 88% of participants maintained or
added an average of 3 net new jobs. Additionally, these
businesses provided a median annual salary for new employees of
$40,000 and an average salary of $74,000. In addition, 39% of
participants reported successfully securing financing for the
businesses.

Building on the success of Emerging Leaders as a cohort-
focused program, we launched ScaleUp America in 2014 to fill a
gap of business assistance needs of smaller growth oriented
entrepreneurs. These businesses are beyond start up and have a
desire to grow but need targeted programming and assistance
specifically focused on the unique needs and challenges of
scaling a business. Additionally, this initiative has a
particular focus on reaching underserved and underrepresented
entrepreneurs.

Although women and minorities represent the fastest growing
segments of new entrepreneurs nationally, their ventures are
generally smaller and experience far less success in terms of
revenue and employee size. The most recent data from the Census
Bureau shows that the average annual gross receipts of a woman
owned business is $144,000, with businesses owned by Black and
Hispanic women generating $28,000 and $53,000, respectively. By
comparison, businesses owned by men generate an average of
$638,000 in annual gross receipts. To further illustrate this
need, minority owned businesses generate on average $174,000 in
gross receipts as compared to non-minority owned firms which
generate $552,000 in average gross receipts. Often these
entrepreneurs lack access to growth capital, sufficient
business networks, and the necessary management advice and
training to increase their chances of success. The goal of
ScaleUp America is to equip more high potential, growth
oriented entrepreneurs with the right tools to overcome these
barriers to growth. To serve this segment of the
entrepreneurial marketplace, we have partnered with
organizations with a keen commitment and focus on strengthening
these entrepreneurs. In 2015 with the initial launch of the
initiative, we also embarked on our first ever economic impact
evaluation of this initiative. We have secured a third party
evaluator that is not only capturing data on ScaleUp
participants, but also a group of comparable small businesses
that have not received the services of ScaleUp. The findings
from this evaluation will be used to improve the effectiveness
of this initiative as well as provide us with a model in which
we will evaluate other programs that we manage.

Small businesses drive innovation and play a critical role
in local economic development. However, as local economic
development efforts seek to build on their region's assets by
encouraging industry clusters, small businesses face challenges
navigating and gaining access to opportunities within the
cluster. Our Regional Innovation Clusters (RICs) play a
critical role in connecting businesses, suppliers, service
providers and related institutions within a defined cluster.
They ensure that local clusters are inclusive of small
businesses so that they can effectively leverage the cluster's
assets to commercialize new technologies and expand into new
markets. The portfolio of SBA clusters ranges from smart grid
technology in Illinois to flexible electronics in Northeast
Ohio to advanced defense technologies in San Diego, California.
In 2015, we funded three new clusters, increasing our portfolio
from eleven to fourteen, adding an autonomous and unmanned
systems cluster in both Southern Kansas and Oklahoma, a
bioscience and technology cluster in St. Louis, Missouri and a
wood products cluster in a coal affected community in
Appalachian Ohio. While the makeup of our clusters is unique to
each industry, they all seek to provide small business
participants with services such as technology commercialization
assistance, business development support, avenues to access
capital, and networking opportunities with other cluster
stakeholders.

We take seriously our role as a steward of government
resources and we want to ensure that our programs are producing
the intended outcomes. Last year, we expanded our unit
dedicated specifically to implementing and overseeing our data
collection, program evaluation, and compliance efforts.
Moreover this past year we worked closely with our partners--
the SBDCs, WBCs, and SCORE--to implement a collaborative
evaluation methodology. Through this work, all partners agreed
upon common measures that are defined and tracked in a
consistent and uniform manner which are the basis of all future
evaluations. These common measures are jobs created/retained,
gross sales revenue, new business starts, capital obtained,
customer service, and client demographics. This will provide
all partners with a consistent way to communicate results with
stakeholders.

I hope I have given you a good picture of our thoughtful
approach to program management, development, and evaluation
which demonstrates our responsiveness to the diverse needs of
today's entrepreneur.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I look forward to answering any questions you may have. Thank
you.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Huelskamp, Ranking Member Chu, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on the U.S. Small Business Administration's (SBA)
continuing efforts to empower veteran entrepreneurship and
small business ownership through programs and policies that
maximize the availability of SBA services for veterans, Service
members, and their spouses.

Our program and policies target our nation's heroes and job
creators, and we are grateful for the continued support of the
House Small Business Committee and this Subcommittee. We look
forward to sharing our successes with you and addressing your
questions.

As small business owners, veterans continue to serve our
country by creating critical employment opportunities and
driving economic growth. They possess the skills, discipline,
and leadership to start and operate successful businesses in
their communities. Nearly one in ten small businesses is
veteran-owned.

Remarkably, though the overall number of veterans declined
significantly between 2007 and 2012, the participation of
veterans in business ownership was persistent according to the
2012 Census Survey of Small Business Ownership. During that
period the overall number of veteran owned firms increased at a
faster rate than non-veteran owned firms. We also note that
between 2007 and 2012 the number of women veteran-owned firms
increased by nearly three hundred percent. All of this data may
indicate strong entrepreneurial activity among the post 9/11
era of veterans.

My office is strongly encouraged by the trends in veteran
entrepreneurship and is fully engaged in supporting then with
quality programs and thoughtful policy initiatives covering
SBA's primary mission areas of counseling and training, access
to capital, and access to contracting opportunities.

Counseling, Training, and Transition Services

In fiscal year 2015 over 60,000 veterans received training
and counseling from SBA's fifteen Veterans Business Outreach
Centers (VBOC). A prominent and enduring focus of the VBOC
program is providing transition services via SBA's
administration of the Entrepreneurship Track of the Department
of Defense's Transition Assistance Program (TAP)--known as
Boots to Business.

Working through the Interagency governance of TAP, and with
our partners support, we were able to deliver Boots to Business
(B2B) to over 14,000 transitioning service members and military
spouses in fiscal year 2015, and over 35,000 since the
program's launch January 1, 2013. Through an efficient and
effective cooperative agreement with the Institute for Veterans
and Military Families at Syracuse University, we provide these
services to those service members disadvantaged by having to
transition from an overseas installation. This year we reached
several program milestones: 1) We increased the percentage of
modules being taught by our VBOCs 2) We implemented a B2B-
specific outcomes assessment survey to determine the number and
rate of business formation among participants and get their
feedback on quality and future service needs; and, 3) We
implemented an outreach campaign to increase the awareness and
participation of military spouses as well as service members
seeking to prepare for transition earlier in their careers as
part of the Military Life Cycle model. And, working with the
Congress and our partners, we are proud to now offer B2B to
veterans of any era and their families; with a program
extension we call Boots to Business: Reboot.

SBA also supports comprehensive entrepreneurial development
programs specifically designed for women veterans and service
disabled veterans. Over 65% of the graduates of these programs
have started their own business.

ACCESS TO CAPITAL

In FY 2016, SBA will sustain the SBA Veterans Advantage
program and waive fees for veterans and their families
qualifying for SBA Express 7(a) guaranteed loans of $350,000
and below and reduce fees by half for SBA 7(a) guaranteed loans
between $150,001 and $5 million. In 2015, lenders utilized the
SBA's 7(a) & 504 loan programs to make 3,354 loans, totaling
over $1.38 billion to veteran owned businesses--an 80% increase
over 2014.

CONTRACTING

And, in the area of Federal Contracting, the Federal
Government in 2014 exceeded the 3% goal for contracting with
Service Disabled Veteran Owned Small Businesses for the third
straight year. In 2016, OVBD is expanding its engagement
strategy with Offices of Small and Disadvantaged Business
Utilization in our sister agencies to ensure the service
disabled veteran small businesses opportunities continue to
grow.

OVBD empowers veteran entrepreneurs who seek federal
procurement opportunities by building their capacity to compete
and win contracts. SBA, through a cooperative agreement with
the Montgomery County Chamber of Commerce Foundation, supports
the Veterans Institute for Procurement program (VIP). VIP is an
accelerator-like in-residence educational training program for
veteran-owned businesses, instructed by private sector experts,
government officials, and agency representatives.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify before your
committee today. By supporting our work you are mandating that
the United States Government does all it should to provide the
American dream of business ownership to those that fought and
continue to fight every day to protect it.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
