- ACROSS TOWN, ACROSS OCEANS: EXPANDING THE ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS IN GLOBAL COMMERCE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ACROSS TOWN, ACROSS OCEANS: EXPANDING THE ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS IN
GLOBAL COMMERCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 20, 2015

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-012
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-652                         WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
TOM RICE, South Carolina
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BOST, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Stephen Dennis, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Deputy Staff Director for Operation
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Brian Bieron, Executive Director, eBay Global Public Policy
Lab, Washington, DC............................................     4
Mr. Dyke Messinger, President, Power Curbers, Inc., Salisbury, NC     6
Mr. Michael Stanek, Vice President & Chief Financial Officer,
Hunt Imaging, LLC, Berea, OH...................................     7
Mr. Timothy Brightbill, Partner, Wiley Rein, LLP, Washington, DC.     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Brian Bieron, Executive Director, eBay Global Public
Policy Lab, Washington, DC.................................    27
Mr. Dyke Messinger, President, Power Curbers, Inc.,
Salisbury, NC..............................................    50
Mr. Michael Stanek, Vice President & Chief Financial Officer,
Hunt Imaging, LLC, Berea, OH...............................    56
Mr. Timothy Brightbill, Partner, Wiley Rein, LLP, Washington,
DC.........................................................    67
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

ACROSS TOWN, ACROSS OCEANS: EXPANDING THE ROLE OF SMALL BUSINESS IN
GLOBAL COMMERCE

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 20, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Hanna, Rice,
Radewagen, Knight, Curbelo, Hardy, Velazquez, Clarke, Hahn,
Meng, Lawrence, Adams, Moulton, and Takai.
Chairman CHABOT. The Committee will come to order.
I want to thank everyone for joining us today for this
timely and important discussion on trade. Very often, this
Committee discusses ways to grow the economy, increase the
number of jobs being created, and sell more goods stamped
``Made in the USA.'' All of these goals would help the American
workforce, and all of these goals are attainable with trade.
Simply put, trade means opportunity for small business. After
all, 96 percent of the world's consumers live outside the
borders of the United States, yet of the 28 million small
businesses in America, only 1 percent sell their goods
internationally. If we tear down trade barriers, we can make it
easier for small businesses to participate in the global
marketplace and unleash our nation's most powerful economic
force.
One of the barriers facing small businesses looking to
export is confusion about how to even do it and a maze of
federal resources only sometimes add to the confusion. This
Committee recognizes that challenge and is working on
legislative solutions to better coordinate federal resources so
they are more efficient, streamlined, and better able to help
business navigate the export process.
Beyond that, we need better trade agreements. Currently, we
only have one free trade agreement with 20 countries, so that
is trade agreements with about 10 percent of the countries
around this globe; yet, nearly half of the goods exported from
the United States went to those countries that we had trade
agreements with last year. Better trade agreements mean small
businesses will be able to access new international customers
and offer their products more easily and at a lower cost than
ever before. It means that more products will be built and
sold. When that happens, jobs are created, wages are lifted,
and more opportunity is available to all.
That is really what is on the table with this debate--more
opportunity for all Americans. We cannot get stronger trade
agreements, like TPP and TTIP without trade promotion authority
or TPA. Without TPA, American workers will be competing under
the same unfair rules they do today. It will be the status quo.
With TPA, we can create trade agreements that will level the
playing field. We can remove barriers put up by foreign nations
that make it more difficult for American businesses to sell
their products. Put an American worker against anyone in the
world and I will take that bet every day of the week and twice
on Sunday, but we cannot get there without trade.
Trade is also an opportunity to spread American values of
economic freedom and individual liberty, freedoms we understand
as second nature. Without TPA, and subsequently TPP, other
nations will dictate the rules of the new economy; nations that
do not respect the rule of law or the rights of the
individuals. Trade is not a choice or a luxury in our modern
world; it is a necessity. It is a cornerstone of a strong 21st
century economy.
Today we will hear from small businesses who are directly
impacted by whether we move forward on TPA and important trade
agreements or whether we bury our heads in the sand while China
shapes the contours of the global marketplace.
I want to thank again our witnesses for being here, and I
now yield to the ranking member for her opening remarks.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Year after year, we are told that small businesses are the
catalyst for U.S. economic growth, and rightly so as they
create nearly two-thirds of net new jobs and are responsible
for countless innovations. A critical subset of this group is
small exporters. In fact, 300,000 small businesses are sending
their products across the world, and three in five nonexporting
firms are now interested in following suit.
Firms that export grow faster, generate more jobs, and pay
higher wages than other businesses. Clearly, in order for our
economy to continue gaining steam, it will increasingly depend
on global commerce to fuel expansion. Despite the advantages of
trade, it remains exceedingly difficult for small businesses to
enter foreign markets. By some estimates, just 5 percent of
small firms in this country export their goods overseas. Even
though small and medium-size businesses account for 97 percent
of American exporting companies, their exports account for only
one third of all U.S. goods shipped overseas.
And there are various challenges. It takes time to identify
foreign markets, to target new customers, and to learn the ins
and outs of the exporting process. In fact, nearly half of
small exporters spent a minimum of a few months a year, as well
as an average of 8.4 percent of their annual operating revenue
preparing to export.
Small companies often have fewer resources to expand on
developing a trade strategy or complying with complex
regulations. As a result, they consistently enter fewer foreign
markets than their larger counterparts, with nearly 60 percent
only entering one, while more than half of large firm exports
to five or four, or even more markets.
These difficulties are something we must be mindful of as
we consider legislation to fast-track approval of the
Transpacific Partnership. Given that details of this agreement
are difficult to come by, it is challenging to say if the
agreement will help or hinder small businesses. In theory,
balanced free trade agreements have the potential to be a
significant driver of growth. By eliminating tariffs and other
barriers to trade, they can help small firms expand sales
globally and create jobs at home.
In order for these benefits to be fully realized, however,
we must hold our trading partners accountable for unfair trade
practices and ensure that our small businesses receive the
level playing field they were promised.
Truth be told, small businesses often face challenges when
it comes to competing with foreign imports produced in
countries with lower label standards and nonexistent
environmental protections. Time and again we are told about
promising markets, but little discussion is given to the low
priced goods that will still enter our domestic marketplace.
Is this good for consumers? Maybe. Is it good for small
businesses? Definitely not. This is something we must be
mindful of as we consider legislation that will provide the
president with trade promotion authority. This decision will
occur against a complicated backdrop. International trade is
more a conflict than ever before, dependent on dynamic global
microeconomic trends, ever-changing trade policies, a variety
of expert promotions and a mix of enforcement mechanisms. It is
absolutely critical that small businesses are able to
participate in this global marketplace, but achieving this goal
should not require unfairly harming those entrepreneurs solely
doing business here at home.
I would like to thank our witnesses for their testimony and
for being here today. I look forward to hearing your
perspective on these very complex issues.
Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And I would ask that Committee members, if they have an
opening statement prepared, to submit them for the record, and
I will just take a moment to explain our timing rules here. You
get five minutes to testify. A yellow light will come on to let
you know you have one minute to wrap up and a red light will
come on and we would ask that you complete your testimony
within that time if at all possible. We will give you a little
of flexibility but not too much.
And we will go ahead and introduce our witness panel here.
Our first witness is Brian Bieron. He is the executive director
for the Global Public Policy Lab at eBay, Inc. In this role,
Mr. Bieron has covered public policy issues for eBay and PayPal
in the European Union and Australia. Mr. Bieron has a bachelor
of arts from St. Joseph University and a master's from George
Washington University, and we welcome you here this morning.
Our second witness will be Dyke Messinger, who is the
president and CEO of Power Curbers, Inc., in Salisbury, North
Carolina, where he has been president and CEO since 1981. Mr.
Messinger received his undergraduate degree from the University
of North Carolina Chapel Hill and his master of business
administration from Tulane, and we welcome you here as well.
Our third witness today is Michael E. Stanek, vice
president and chief financial officer of Hunt Imaging LLC. Mr.
Stanek serves on the Board of Trustees of the National Small
Business Association and is testifying today on NSBA's behalf.
He received his undergraduate degree from Cleveland State
University, and we thank you for your testimony as well.
And I will now yield to Ms. Velazquez to introduce our next
witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Tim Brightbill. Mr.
Brightbill is a partner in the international trade practice of
Wiley Rein, where he represents guidance on all aspects of
international trade law and policy, including trade remedies
and export controls. As a former vice chair and current member
of the Industry Trade Advisory Committee on Services and
Finance Industries, he advises the U.S. government on free
trade agreements and matters concerning the WTO. He is also an
adjunct professor for the International Trade Law and
Regulation at Georgetown University Law School. From 1994 to
1995, he served as counsel to the House Committee on Small
Business. Welcome back.
Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And we will now go to our panel. Mr. Bieron, you are
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF BRIAN BIERON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,EBAY GLOBAL
PUBLIC POLICY LAB; DYKE MESSINGER, PRESIDENT, POWER CURBERS,
INC.; MICHAEL STANEK, VICE PRESIDENT & CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER;
TIMOTHY BRIGHTBILL, PARTNER, WILEY REIN, LLP

STATEMENT OF BRIAN BIERON

Mr. BIERON. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
members of the Committee, thank you for inviting eBay to
testify on how U.S. small businesses are using technology to
reach international markets. Our company is a truly global
platform with nearly 60 percent of our revenue generated
outside the United States. We enable over 150 million users in
over 200 countries.
For the first time in history, nearly every entrepreneur
and small business can use technology to reap the benefits of
trade on a global scale, an opportunity traditionally open only
to the largest, multinational corporations. We are literally
entering an age of micro multinationals. Some small businesses
have always been engaged in trade, often as a supplier to a
very giant company, but today technology is creating a new
model of direct global commerce by small businesses. We call it
the global empowerment network, and it is based on the powerful
combination of the Internet global commerce platforms like
eBay, technology-enabled payment services like PayPal, modern
shipping services, and the knowledge of e-commerce exporting
opportunities.
Let me provide some numbers from the eBay Public Policy
Lab's 2015 U.S. Small Business Global Growth Report, a copy of
which I would ask to submit to the Committee record. As I
mentioned, U.S. small businesses have always been exporters,
but according to government data, it is just around 1 to 2
percent of them. By contrast, on eBay, 95 percent of them
export. The traditional small business exporters reach an
average of two export markets a year. On eBay, over 190,000
U.S. small business each exported to consumers on at least four
continents last year alone. That is truly global sales.
These staggeringly different results boil down to some
pretty simple data on exporters' survivability. The World Bank
has studied small business exporters in five upper-income
European countries and found that 85 percent of small
businesses that start exporting quit the effort by the end of
the third year. That is just a 15 percent success rate.
Exporting is hard. On eBay, the success rate for U.S. small
businesses was 74 percent from 2010 to 2014. That is 85 percent
failure versus 74 percent success. The Internet trade landscape
is also more open to newcomers. It is more inclusive. For
example, the largest 5 percent of U.S. exporters account for 82
percent of U.S. trade, but on eBay, the largest 5 percent of
exporters account for just 55 percent.
I find this global trade data very exciting, but you all
represent people, not numbers, and eBay is about empowering
people. Let me tell you about two.
Brian Robinson owns the Music Farm in Canton, Ohio. He and
his 11 employees export more than 40 percent of the Music
Farm's inventory. Great Sky Gifts is owned by a woman named
Colleen Rast. She employs four people in Kalispell, Montana.
From there they have exported to 99 countries. You know better
than anyone in Congress that small businesses face huge
challenges. They take risks, they work incredibly hard, and
they face intense competition. It is the same when they trade
globally.
At eBay, we are working to help address some of those
challenges and reduce barriers. Take language. Among other
innovations, our investment in machine translation technology
has lowered language as a barrier to U.S. exporters by 66
percent since 2004.
There are also things policymakers can do. EBay would
propose three to you. First, raise the U.S. low value customs
de minimis threshold, the level below which goods are exempted
from import duties and paperwork and make raising other
countries' de minimis thresholds a top trade negotiating
priority. Raising the de minimis threshold is basically a one-
step free trade policy for small businesses.
Second, modernize global postal systems across the world.
Micro multinationals regularly utilize postal services because
of their widespread networks. Those services are key to this
global trade model.
Finally, the U.S. Government has many excellent programs,
as you have mentioned, Mr. Chairman, designed to help
businesses export, but many of those programs were not
developed with small e-commerce businesses in mind. I would
urge the Committee to review existing government export
promotion programs to be more supportive of these e-commerce
micro multinationals.
Small and mid-size businesses can contribute to their local
economy and regularly service customers around the world.
Globalization itself can be a better system. It can be more
open and inclusive. I encourage you all to help achieve that
future, and I look forward to answering any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Messinger, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DYKE MESSINGER

Mr. MESSINGER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Congresswoman
Velazquez, and my congressman, Congresswoman Adams. Good to see
you.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today as the
president of Power Curbers, Inc., a 62-year-old company that
was founded in Salisbury, North Carolina. I am also appearing
today on behalf of the National Association of Manufacturers,
the largest industrial trade association in the United States,
with over 14,000 members.
Power Curbers was founded by two businessmen with a design
for the world's first automatic curb machine. This engineering
breakthrough helped streamline the process of laying out
highways, medians, and other road infrastructure projects.
While we still produce machines using the same curbing
technology, we have grown into one of the leading paving
machinery manufacturers for both agriculture and infrastructure
projects.
Power Curbers' success in the United States has been fueled
in substantial part by our ability to sell overseas. Since the
early 1960s, we have been exporting our equipment and have
exported now to over 90 countries throughout the world. By
exporting, we are simultaneously helping create safer, more
efficient infrastructure overseas and supporting good paying
manufacturing jobs in North Carolina and Iowa.
International sales and exports comprise 40 percent of our
total revenue and are critical to our continued innovation and
growth. More broadly, exports support 154,000 jobs in North
Carolina, and 81,000 jobs in Iowa, more than 20 percent of each
state's manufacturing employment. For example, on our order
board today, we have machines of approximate value of $350,000
to $400,000 destined for Chile, Panama, Saudi Arabia, Japan,
the Philippines, India, Uzbekistan, and Canada. More
importantly, during the financial crisis, it was our
international business that kept us going. Our international
business was 70-80 percent of machine sales those five years.
We do not just talk international business, we live it at
Power Curbers. At our regular meetings with employees, we have
a large world map of the world in our break room. Our employees
know where every machine ships and we bring back pictures and
job stories to share our success overseas. This ties them to
the work done with our machinery that is far beyond our borders
so they know their jobs are dependent on our international
business success.
Additionally, we have significant competition in our
industry, and that makes us all better companies. But our
company and our American competitors face real tariff
competition, which is highlighted in my official testimony. To
continue to thrive, manufacturers like Power Curbers need to
see open markets and a more level playing field.
I would like to focus on a few key trade issues on which
Power Curbers and the NAM are focused to grow competitiveness
and success of our manufacturers overseas. As was just stated,
the U.S. has the most open market of any major economy with the
lowest tariffs of any country in the G20. Indeed, more than
two-thirds of all manufactured imports entered the U.S. duty-
free in 2013, yet manufacturers in the U.S. face steeper trade
barriers abroad than virtually any major country, including
Mexico, China, and Europe, largely because those countries have
entered into more market access agreements than the United
States. Out of 138 countries measured by the World Economic
Forum, the United States faces higher tariffs than all but
eight countries. All but eight countries. That is ridiculous.
Why are European Union tariffs so much lower than ours?
Because they have entered into free trade agreements all over
the world. Congress can and must do more to expand U.S.
manufactured goods exports and open new markets if we are going
to grow manufacturing and the jobs it supports in the United
States.
Passage of TPA, which lapsed in 2007, is critical to
restore U.S. leadership on trade and help ensure the
negotiation of strong market-opening agreements that foster new
opportunities and a more level playing field for our nation's
manufacturers. The United States is now sitting on the
sidelines as other countries move forward and more aggressively
open markets, promote exports for their business at the expense
of ours.
By standing still, the U.S. is falling behind in the global
economy. It is time to reverse that trend and move to enact and
implement legislation and programs that will boost America's
global competitiveness.
Thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Mr. Stanek, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL STANEK

Mr. STANEK. Good morning, Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and Committee members. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify before you on this timely and important topic.
Hunt Imaging is a manufacturer of dry and liquid
electrostatic toners and developers used primarily in high
speed computer printers. I am proud to be representing not only
Hunt Imaging but also the National Small Business Association
and its international arm, the Small Business Exporters'
Association.
Hunt was a spinoff from a Fortune 200 company 19 years ago
and has operated as an independent company since. In addition
to our headquarters in Berea, Ohio, we currently operate a
branch in Belgium but are in the process of closing that
facility due to a sustained downturn in European sales. As a
company whose history emanates from a multinational
organization, we were fortunate to have had a strong background
in exporting, a background the vast majority of our small
business brethren do not share.
Even with our prior experience, however, we have learned
that the opportunities to expand our international presence
have declined since we became a standalone entity. Finding
effective distribution partners is an essential component of
small business entry into the export arena. In general, small
businesses are challenged in having limited resources upon
which to draw when entering international markets, and frankly,
quite often have a fear factor in attempting to take that step.
Possibly the biggest challenge for a small business, and
certainly ours, is finding international opportunities to
pursue. When we were part of a large corporation, we had a
worldwide network of colleagues who could not only pinpoint
opportunities for us, but also pursue them on our behalf. As a
small, private organization, we are challenged to uncover
potential sales opportunities and have struggled with
identifying domestic resources to assist in that process.
One suggestion to help small businesses in participating in
the 95 percent of the worldwide purchasing market that exists
outside the U.S. is to offer a one stop shop. Ideally, within
the Department of Commerce, and more specifically within the
International Trade Administration, they would have a
centralized staff dedicated to assisting small businesses in
all aspects of exporting. A beginning to end focus for each
company could tremendously ease the complications that seem to
be inherent in this process.
Free trade agreements are likewise extremely important as
they lower foreign barriers and produce a more level playing
field. Lowering the hassle factor of exporting greatly
increases the attractiveness to small companies. Given the
importance of small business to both the European and Asia-
Pacific economies, it is vital that the TTIP and TPP
negotiations address the specific needs of small business and
all aspects of their agreements, and we support the passage of
TPA to allow this to happen.
If we desire American small business to export more, it is
also important to reduce variable costs like tariffs. Many
companies impose tariffs on U.S. exports that are substantially
more than our own, and a web of nontariff barriers overseas
often shuts out U.S. goods and services. These nontariff
barriers can include items such as foreign patent and trademark
costs, paperwork requirements, and performance bonds and
licenses.
Interpreting and comprehending regulations has also proven
to be a challenge that exhausts a small firm's resources and
drains our wallets when we have to turn to outside
professionals. NSBA supports the creation of a centralized
website that is monitored and collects up-to-date information
on regulations and policies for the most commonly traded goods
and services.
Having a strong commitment to intellectual property rights
is vital to protect our innovative products and service. The
creation of simplified methods for filing and renewing
trademarks and copyrights will provide more timely enforcement
of these rights, which are the result of the innovations of our
small businesses.
On a broader scale, we also need to get more community
banks into export finance and educate them on available
government lending programs so they can better advise their
small business customers who are considering exporting. The
U.S. financial sector seems to be less engaged in World Trade
than are the financial sectors in Europe.
While there is no doubt that some of America's biggest
companies can continue to increase their exports, the largest
untapped resource for American exports is small and medium-
sized companies. Just over 1 percent of these businesses
currently export, and many believe it is too burdensome or
risky or just do not know where to start. Federal agencies can
play an important role in helping to reduce exporting barriers
for small businesses and help these entrepreneurs tap into new
markets and grow.
Thank you for hearing my testimony, and I look forward to
responding to any questions you may have.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Brightbill, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY BRIGHTBILL

Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez,
and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today on the important issue of expanding
the role of small business and global commerce, and it is good
to be back at the House Small Business Committee today.
I have practiced international trade law for 20 years, and
I have always focused on helping American companies,
industries, and workers. I work with members of a wide variety
of industries, from solar panels, to steel, to hand tools, to
school notebooks. I also work with many U.S. companies who
provide services here and abroad. My job is to help these
companies grow, prevent unfair trade practices from harming
them, and to help eliminate trade barriers overseas.
As this Committee knows, small businesses face enormous
challenges in the area of international trade. According to the
president's 2015 trade agenda, and as Chairman Chabot said
earlier, there are 28 million businesses in the United States,
but only 1 percent of them export their merchandise to other
countries. And of those small businesses that do export, most
export to only one country--Canada or Mexico. This demonstrates
how small businesses often struggle to overcome steep tariffs,
trade barriers, paperwork, fees, and other significant
obstacles.
Now, the U.S. Government has taken steps towards removing
these barriers but there is much more to be done. I would like
to list just a few areas of priority for Congress and the
administration that are particularly relevant to small
businesses.
First, on the Transpacific Partnership. The U.S. Government
does have a potentially important opportunity to create jobs,
expand trade, and manufacturing, and improve the global rules
of international trade with the TPP free trade negotiations. If
approved, TPP would be the largest U.S. free trade agreement
involving 12 countries and more than 40 percent of global
trade. And that agreement should help U.S. small businesses
export, not just by eliminating jobs but by streamlining
customs procedures, eliminating trade barriers, and developing
more transparent regulatory procedures.
There are other benefits, such as the eliminating of
barriers to ecommerce and express delivery services, and also
new disciplines on state-owned enterprises. When U.S. small
businesses export, they should not have to compete with foreign
governments. And while China is a notable example of the
problem, SOEs play substantial roles in the economies of TPP
countries like Malaysia and Vietnam, as well as Russia, Brazil,
India, and many others.
At the same time, TPP poses potential threats to small
businesses. First, the opening of the U.S. market to additional
foreign competition could harm some smaller businesses and
could head to some jobs being lost to lower wage positions in
other TPP countries.
Second, small business goals and objectives are less likely
to be fully represented in these negotiations, and in fact,
while the TPP contains a chapter on small and medium
enterprises, the details of the agreement are not well known.
Before it considers TPP, Congress must first take up trade
promotion authority. The Senate is considering TPA legislation
and amendments this week, and the House will do so shortly. And
as this debate has progressed, the number one theme that we
have heard over and over again is one of enforcement. Congress
should not approve new trade agreements until it has better
ways of enforcing our existing agreements, and there is an
opportunity here.
I think the best way to build support for TPA, among
Republicans and Democrats, is to improve trade enforcement for
all types of businesses, including small businesses. First,
Congress should approve much-needed trade enforcement measures
as part of TPA. U.S. industry has proposed a set of five trade
law changes that it views as essential for domestic companies
and their workers. These provisions were included in the
Customs and Trade Bill that passed the Senate Finance Committee
on a bipartisan basis. They should be included in TPA as well.
Second, Congress should improve the ENFORCE Act legislation
to guard against foreign companies who engage in trade fraud
and evasion. Senator Wyden has championed this legislation for
years, and again, it was included in the Customs and Trade Bill
that passed the Senate Finance Committee on a bipartisan basis.
Third, Congress should address the important issue of
currency manipulation, and in particular, it should approve
legislation directing the Commerce Department to investigate
currency manipulation as an illegal subsidy.
I am happy to address specific aspects of TPP, or the Trade
and Services Agreement, or the Trans-Atlantic Trade and
Investment Partnership, and there has been a very good ITC
study done on that recently. But regardless of the agreement,
the same challenges remain. Encouraging exports by U.S. small
businesses is imperative to allowing American industry to
expand and American workers to prosper.
Thank you for addressing these issues today. I am happy to
answer any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
And I want to especially thank all four of the panel
members for keeping within our time limits almost to the word,
so well done. And the testimony was good, too.
And I will begin with recognizing myself for five minutes,
and Mr. Bieron, I will begin with you, if I could.
We are certainly aware that the statistics are there is
only about 1 to 2 percent of small businesses that actually
trade internationally, yet eBay has been able to have, because
of your platform, a 95 percent of those, and you mentioned four
continents. Those are incredibly, I think, positive numbers. I
would just like to hear if you wanted to expand upon that a
bit, what successes they have had, why you think there is such
a discrepancy between the overall small business community and
those who operate through eBay.
Mr. BIERON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sure. One of our studies did, did, in fact, try to look at
what are the kinds of barriers that are so much lower when a
business is operating online than not. And to give some
perspective, I think what we are talking about at eBay is the
fact that you now have a completely different business model
for very small businesses to try to go and engage in global
markets. And it is literally a paradigm shift. And my
colleagues at the table here, I mean, outstanding and inspiring
export stories, but from businesses that I think are exporting
in the way businesses have exported for years, at eBay, the
idea that these microbusinesses are targeting specific
countries, are investing, for example, in the kinds of
expertise it takes to engage in Germany, or sell to France, or
sell to Brazil, it is not like that on the Internet with really
small businesses; instead, the platform itself that allows a
small business to have their product be seen. So it is
essentially global advertising. Or it replaces the need to have
trust in an individual business with trust in the platform. Or,
for example, on eBay, the feedback system that allows a
consumer anywhere in the world to have trust in individual
small business, maybe a five-person business, as I said, in
Montana or in Ohio. These are transformative changes, and what
it means is that it is almost harder, I would say, not to
export than it is to export. We do have some small businesses
that are operating in the U.S. and all around the world who
literally choose not to export because they believe, for
example, that maybe the complexities are too much. They do not
want to deal with currency. They do not want to deal with some
things. But instead, most choose to sell to whom they can sell,
and that ends up being global trade.
And so that does not mean that it is simple. Like I said,
language is a huge challenge, and literally moving stuff across
borders still is hard. So whether it is the shipping itself--I
mentioned postal systems--or the complexity of customs duties,
you know, when you are a five-person business and you are
having to deal with customs and duties for 50 countries, that
is harder than it ought to be.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
And Mr. Messinger, I will turn to you next if I can.
You had mentioned, among other things, that you are in
favor of TPA, and Mr. Brightbill mentioned some of the concerns
about jobs and things like that and also mentioned that the
Senate, we think, is going to be taking it up this week, I
believe, and the House, probably sometime in the near future.
And I happen to be a supporter and hope it passes. But I know
some of my colleagues who are opposed to it are concerned about
jobs being lost and companies taking their business overseas
and setting shop up over there instead of in the U.S. And my
belief is basically we create far more jobs than we lose. That
is one of the reasons I am in favor of it. But could you
comment on TPA and what it would mean to your business in
particular and what you think it would do relative to the
hiring of more employees, or do you think you would end up
letting employees go? What do you anticipate in your business?
Mr. MESSINGER. Well, as it was said, TPP, which is kind of
the hottest topic under TPA, is the most far-reaching agreement
that we have ever encountered, and because Asia is such a
rapidly-growing part of the world, it is going to mean huge
advantages to us because we have Chinese competitors. They are
exporting today to those countries, and it is going to mean
through that reduction in tariff, it is going to mean--we are
very aggressive in the international market--job growth for us.
But more importantly, if you look at the statistics for
manufacturing jobs in this country, they have grown every year
outside of the financial crisis, of course, but every year
consistently since NAFTA. So manufacturing jobs are going to
continue to grow, and I would predict rapidly with the approval
of TPP.
Chairman CHABOT. Okay. Thank you.
My time is expired. The ranking member is recognized for
five minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Brightbill, do you believe that the TPP will
realistically expand the number of foreign markets that
American small businesses enter? Or will the nontariff and
logistical barriers remain too much for them to overcome? We
know that, for the most part, our small businesses trade with
Mexico and Canada. But will we achieve more than that? And if
not, why?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Ms. Velazquez, it is very difficult to
know. We know what some of the positives potentially are out
there. Certainly having common tariffs or reduced tariffs could
be a positive thing. You would have less of a spaghetti bowl of
trade agreements that companies have to deal with. If you have
harmonized standards, harmonized reduction of technical
barriers to trade, harmonized assessment of products, that
could be a positive. If you have harmonized customs procedures,
again, as has been pointed out, getting goods through customs,
the delays in the paperwork and the fees are often
extraordinary. My concern is you have to have a way to enforce
all of those things that are written on paper, and it is not
clear to me that all the enforcement tools are there or readily
accessible to small business.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So let us talk about the Korea-U.S. Free
Trade Agreement. It was sold to us as being able to support
70,000 jobs and increase U.S. exports by $11 billion. However,
since that agreement took effect in 2012, exports to Korea have
increased by less than $1 billion. Meanwhile, Korean imports to
the U.S. have surged more than $12 billion, resulting in a net
loss of 75,000 jobs--U.S. jobs. So why is that?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Again, I think----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Is it lack of enforcement?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. I think lack of enforcement, and there are
powerful incentives in these other countries, even after a free
trade agreement is reached, to keep their trade barriers up and
to keep their markets closed. We hear this around the country
so that is the challenge that we face in negotiating a good
agreement and one that gives us ways to enforce it after the
ink is dry.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. So my question is, do you expect that we are
similarly being sold a false bill of goods regarding the TPP?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. That is a good question. I do not know the
answer to that. I think it is a large agreement. It involves
many countries. In some, I think there is potential for
improvement. In others, I think it will be very difficult to
get rid of those barriers even over time.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. I agree with you. The lack of enforcement
obviously is going to produce the results that we have seen
with the U.S.-Korean agreement.
I have another question, and this has been central to the
whole debate, and that is, how does currency manipulation
affect small businesses?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Yes. Well, currency manipulation is a form
of a subsidy. The Peterson Institute of International
Economics, very well respected by Congress, and the
administration called currency manipulation ``the biggest
subsidy of them all.'' And the estimates over time as to, for
example, how much China's currency is undervalued, have ranged
anywhere from 10 percent to 40 percent or more. So what we are
seeking and what industry has sought in the legislation that is
moving forward on the Senate side, is to say that the Commerce
Department should look at currency manipulation as a subsidy,
and if it finds it to be a subsidy, you impose a duty, like any
other subsidy--a grant or a loan or a loan guarantee--to offset
that unfair trade practice.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Brightbill, for the record, should
Congress require that free trade agreements, including the TPP,
incorporate enforceable rules regarding currency manipulation?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Yes, I think they should.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Bieron, as an intermediary operating in the U.S., eBay
is not held liable for the unlawful actions of its users. Is
this the case in foreign countries?
Mr. BIERON. Internet liability law is different in
different countries. We believe that it is clear, and I would
like to be clear, that when eBay has knowledge of improper
actions by our users anywhere, then there is liability. It is a
case of the importance of when our users, unknowingly to us,
are engaging in some kind of malfeasance--but it is different
in different countries. We believe that actually U.S. law and
Internet intermediary liability is the most pro-growth and is
something that we think can be promoted through trade
agreements.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady's time is expired but if
she would like to follow up----
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. How has that affected eBay's decision to
enter countries that do not have such protections?
Mr. BIERON. There is no question that we are able to
operate more effectively in countries that have adequate
Internet intermediary liability laws. It is just that they can
be slightly different in different markets. We believe that
promoting the standards and the balance that is in the DMCA and
section 230 of the Communication Decency Act, the two
cornerstone U.S. policies, these are important for our
negotiators to achieve.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Yes or no answer--do you feel that this
issue should be dealt with in this pending free trade
agreement?
Mr. BIERON. Yes. We think it is an important priority.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Missouri, the vice chairman of this
Committee, Mr. Luetkemeyer is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank the
members or the witnesses for being here today.
I would like to follow up a little bit more on the currency
manipulation question. The other three members or the witnesses
of the panel, they did not get to answer the question, so Mr.
Stanek, would you support something, a provision in the TPP on
currency manipulation, or do you believe it is not something
that needs to be addressed in the agreement?
Mr. STANEK. Thank you, sir. It is not an issue that we have
come up against directly, so I do not necessarily have a direct
opinion on that.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Messinger?
Mr. MESSINGER. I would agree with that. I am not current on
currency manipulation issues. It would be difficult for me.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Bieron?
Mr. BIERON. Small business trade over our platform is
impacted by currency. Whether or not there should be a specific
provision in the TPA on manipulation, I am really not
comfortable making advice on that.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. It is interesting because I was talking to
the president of one of the larger banks in the country, in
fact, one that clears a lot of international transactions, and
I asked him this question because I was leaning towards making
sure there was something in the TPA and TPP to protect against
currency manipulation. He said, ``You know what? It goes on all
the time. We do it ourselves.'' So how are you going to keep
currency manipulation from the Chinese and whoever against our
own currency manipulation? I think it is a valid point and it
points out the fact that this goes back and forth. I am not
sure how you enforce that. Again, it gets back to Mr.
Brightbill's point. So I appreciate the comments.
With regards to intellectual property, to me, this is a
really important thing, especially for all the small businesses
because that is where a lot of innovation is driven from, the
small business people. They come up with the ideas and they are
the entrepreneurs that come up and have an idea and they
develop a business around it and off they go. Do you see
protections being developed in the TPA that would be something
you support or is it not an extensive enough bill or authority
at this point? What is your thoughts so far?
Mr. Bieron? And just go down the line.
Mr. BIERON. We believe that intellectual property
enforcement is very important. We think that the balance that
exists in U.S. intellectual property law is very important to
promote innovation. And lastly, we believe that we are more
likely to get sound intellectual property law with our trade
partners through trade agreements than not through trade
agreements.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Messinger?
Mr. MESSINGER. I would completely agree with that. We are
not going to have an opportunity to get to those subjects until
we have a trade agreement with these folks.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. But you believe it needs to be a part of
the agreement?
Mr. MESSINGER. Absolutely.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Stanek?
Mr. STANEK. Yes, sir. We believe very strongly that the
intellectual property rights need to be protected in the trade
agreements. Our small business members have enough challenges
sometimes protecting their intellectual property domestically.
They do not need to have the same types of issues on an
international basis.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Brightbill?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Congressman, thanks for the question. We
agree, and my clients agree, that intellectual property
protection is a serious problem around the world and needs to
be addressed. I do think my understanding is it is an area of
emphasis in the TPP agreement, which is important.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. How do you enforce that?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Sorry?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. How do you enforce patent infringement,
intellectual rights?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Well, patent infringement, there are
various options. You can bring cases in district court. You can
also bring a case at the International Trade Commission here in
the United States, a section 337 action where if a foreign
country is violating a patent or intellectual property, they
can impose a barrier at the border to stop those counterfeit
goods from coming in.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Kind of interesting whenever the Chinese
are over here swapping, trying to steal all of our intellectual
secrets from a lot of our big manufacturers and we are worried
about this. It is kind of ironic.
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Well, and Congressman, you are right. On
trade secrets, there is more that could be done in our trade
agreements there as well.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Huge, huge problem. And I think the
chairman needs to be congratulated on this because we have had
a hearing on this before, so I thank him for this emphasis.
Mr. Bieron, you talked about raising a threshold for
minimum taxes on exports. Can you elaborate just a little bit?
I have got about 30 seconds left and I have got one more
question to ask before we get done.
Mr. BIERON. I believe right now the de minimis, for
example, in the U.S., is $200. The customs reauthorization
proposes taking that to 800. Sellers on eBay, when they export
and their product gets returned to them, they oftentimes find
themselves paying import duties on their own return. Moving
that up to 800 would reduce that burden for them.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. Very good.
Very quickly, Ex-Im is a really big talking point around
here. I think it is an important part of any export discussion.
Do you support reauthorization or not, Mr. Bieron?
Mr. BIERON. Ex-Im Bank is not something that our sellers, I
think, are involved with.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Okay. Mr. Messinger?
Mr. MESSINGER. Absolutely. It is critical to small
manufacturers.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Stanek?
Mr. STANEK. We support not only reauthorization but an
increase to a 25 percent threshold.
These are my personal views only. I do support Ex-Im
reauthorization, but there are some troubling things that have
happened at Ex-Im and those need to be looked at as well. China
has recently formed an Asia Development Bank, so I think we do
need a counterweight. China should not be the world's
financier.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you. And I thank the chairman. I
think this is the second hearing we have had a group of small
business people who have indicated unanimously either support
for or a neutral position on Ex-Im. I think it is important to
note that, Mr. Chairman, that Ex-Im is a really, really big
part of supporting small business in this country, and with
that, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman's time is
expired.
The gentlelady from New York, Ms. Adams, who is the ranking
member of the Investigations, Oversight, and Regulations
Subcommittee is recognized for five minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chair, North Carolina. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Chairman CHABOT. I apologize. North Carolina.
Ms. ADAMS. That is all right. That is all right.
Chairman CHABOT. I was wondering why you were smiling.
Ms. ADAMS. I grew up in that area a little bit.
Chairman CHABOT. Sorry about that.
Ms. ADAMS. But yes, I claim North Carolina as home.
Let me thank the ranking member as well, Member Velazquez,
and gentlemen, for your testimony.
Mr. Messinger, thank you for being here. And thank you for
representing some of the finest companies that we have in North
Carolina, particularly in the 12th District, which I represent.
And I am proud to highlight North Carolina's best.
But as we look to improve federal international trade
programs to meet the needs of small business exports, can you
offer any advice as to what sort of financial and counseling
resources would better enable small business to begin exporting
and help existing small business exporters grow
internationally?
Mr. MESSINGER. Thank you.
As you know, the Department of Commerce has an outstanding
export promotion office. In our early years we used them
extensively. In addition, states have really good export
offices, North Carolina in particular. I think there are
adequate tools available if manufacturers will seek them out to
help them promote exports. And I would further say that Ex-Im
Bank is a tool that from time to time we have found critical in
competing with our German competitor. And so I think
reauthorization of Ex-Im would go a long way towards helping us
compete.
Ms. ADAMS. All right. Thank you.
An ongoing discussion we have here on the Hill is whether
or not to reauthorize the Export-Import Bank. And while many
other countries have similar government export financing
institutions, many of my colleagues cannot agree on whether to
reauthorize Export-Import, or under what condition to
reauthorize it. So can you speak to the significance of having
small businesses effectively compete within the international
markets and the importance of federal guarantees in supporting
our small businesses internationally?
Mr. MESSINGER. Yeah. Further to Ex-Im, and I do not know
the agency and its balance sheet financial statement, but as I
understand it, they return a substantial amount of money to the
U.S. Government through their loan guarantees. Ex-Im supports
far, far more small businesses than they do larger
manufacturers. I know that the total volume of Ex-Im guarantees
cover larger manufacturers, but without Ex-Im reauthorization,
a lot of smaller people like ourselves get cut off from
opportunities overseas.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. My last question is for Mr. Messinger, for
you as well as Mr. Stanek.
As Congress analyzes the arguments for and against TPP, and
in the very near future the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership, better known as TTIP, it might be useful to go
beyond the broad point of the potential to increase market
access for the U.S. exports and ask the question, ``market
access for who?'' What are the potential share of trade
benefits or challenges that could accrue to small and medium-
sized business, and also, what about minority-owned businesses
as well?
Mr. MESSINGER. Well, I think the opportunities for all
businesses exist with these agreements. I happen to believe
that with free trade, open trade, relations improve between
countries. I think we have seen that time and again. So I am
fully supportive of that.
Ms. ADAMS. Mr. Stanek?
Mr. STANEK. Ms. Congresswoman, I believe that the greatest
benefit that we receive from the trade agreements is the
simplification of the process. Right now it is very complicated
for a small business to attempt--particularly one who has not
been in the export business previously--to engage in that with
the various rules and regulations that exist around the world.
And being able to simplify that whole process will open up the
doors for exportation for so many more companies.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
Since the chairman screwed up and identified the lady from
North Carolina as being from New York, I probably should say
that the next questioner is from New York and not New York, but
I will not do that.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Hanna, who is the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce is recognized
for five minutes, and I apologize to the gentlelady.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to make a comment about the Import-Export Bank--I do
support it. I know, for example, Boeing is talking about
exporting some of their jobs for manufacturing, I believe, and
what is true, and you said this yourself, Mr. Messinger, is
that there are hundreds and hundreds of small companies that
depend on these larger companies to pull all this together and
export their products.
Mr. Brightbill, the assumption of enforcement is flying
around the room here today, that it is actually doable. For
example, currency manipulation in China, the numbers, as you
said, go from 10 percent to 20 percent to 30. Nobody really
knows, and it is a fungible number anyway because it is
something that can change in a heartbeat.
Two things. What do you think the actual number, say, is
from China in your opinion? And are the things that we assume
are enforceable--we listen to Elizabeth Warren and it is fair
that in my office we get a lot of very negative calls over this
because people are afraid. They look at what Ms. Velazquez says
and they agree with her. So, but it is also clear we cannot
wall ourselves off to a world of opportunity. So if the key to
all this is telling people you are going to enforce things and
make something change that you do not like, is it doable? And
what have we seen that would lead us to believe that? We have
not seen much. So how do you enforce--I mean, it is just a word
if there are no teeth. So go ahead.
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Congressman, I think those are very good
points.
On currency manipulation, I do still believe that China is
undervaluing its currency to favor its exports, and the history
of that over the last five to 10 years is overwhelming. I mean,
there are estimates that millions of American jobs have been
lost and that has increased the U.S. trade deficit by $200
billion to $500 billion per year. So you ask how to enforce it,
what lawmakers have proposed is that you treat currency
manipulation as account available subsidy. You let the Commerce
Department look at it like any other subsidy. So if there is a
financial contribution, if there is a benefit to Chinese
companies as a result, and if it is specific, or an export
subsidy, then you impose a duty at the end. And I think that
the IMF and the Commerce Department and other agencies are
capable of figuring out the extent of currency manipulation.
Mr. HANNA. Somehow is the core of this argument though that
you cannot deal with any of this unless you have agreements, I
mean, in the absence of agreements, we have what we have. So in
the presence of agreements we have more opportunity. And let us
face it. Our tariffs are low. The goal is to lower everyone
else's so that we can have more free movement. But if currency
manipulation continues at some level then without enforcement.
And the other thing that bothers me about this is the path
to enforcement is impossible almost. I mean, you take a small
company, and Mr. Messinger, I have actually used your
equipment, thousands of pieces. You make good stuff. How do you
respond to that? I mean, what do you----
Mr. MESSINGER. Well, first of all, some of the enforcement
change would be changes to U.S. law. They would not necessarily
be in the trade agreements. We are just taking advantage of
this opportunity while we are passing TPA or TPP, make these
small changes to U.S. law and regulations at the same time. So
I think that is possible.
Another issue that we talked about is state-owned
enterprises and how you address that. My understanding is that
the TPP does, for the first time, address the problem of state-
owned enterprises competing with U.S. companies around the
world, and it would allow U.S. companies and the U.S.
Government to get information. So if they see unfair
competition in China or a third country, or even here in the
United States, they can get information on that and they can
raise it in dispute settlement in the trade agreement itself.
So you have to make the dispute settlement process work in that
trade agreement to be able to enforce it.
Mr. HANNA. So you see that as a positive thing obviously
because we do not have a good system now.
Mr. MESSINGER. We do not have any system for addressing
state-owned enterprises.
Mr. HANNA. Right. I mean, and Boeing has Airbus subsidized
company; right?
Mr. MESSINGER. Exactly. Now, that we have tried to address
at the World Trade Organization with mixed results.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back.
And the chair would like to note the presence of some
guests here this morning from American Samoa, some high school
students, and I would like to defer to the gentlelady from
Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, if she would like to say something.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, I would like to welcome some of our future leaders of
American Samoa. These students are here participating in the
Close Up program.
I have a couple questions for you, Mr. Messinger.
Chairman CHABOT. If you do not mind, I have to go over to
this side.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Okay.
Chairman CHABOT. I will be back.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. And we welcome our
guests here this morning for being here. Thank you very much.
And the gentlelady from California, Ms. Hahn, is recognized
for five minutes.
Ms. HAHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A point of personal
privilege, I would also like to welcome a guest. Trevana is
here. A lot of us are wearing these blue ribbons. It is
National Foster Care Week, and there are a lot of youth who
have been in the foster care system who are shadowing a member
of Congress today. So she is my shadow all day today.
So thanks for holding this hearing. I think it is really
appropriate as we are talking about TPA and TPP to listen to
how it affects our small businesses. And Mr. Messinger, I was
noting that in one of the papers up here, I think it was The
Hill, talked about the American Association of Manufacturers is
against TPP because they feel like it has lost manufacturing or
it will lose manufacturing jobs. So I was just going to ask you
what you think should specifically be in this deal that would
protect small businesses, particularly those who are in the
manufacturing area. What would you like to see specifically in
these deals for manufacturers that would make it a good deal?
Mr. MESSINGER. Well, first of all, I am not familiar with
that association and their work. As I testified earlier, the
history of trade agreements and job growth in the manufacturing
sector is very clear. We have continued to grow manufacturing
jobs. Even in Korea, manufacturing jobs were increased. Part of
the issue in Korea is that the economy collapsed.
Ms. HAHN. So what would you specifically like for us to pay
attention to in these deals that would protect small
businesses?
Mr. MESSINGER. It is hard to say. I am not a legislator. I
have not seen the details of a bill. The main interest that we
have is tariff reduction. And as I testified, we are facing--we
open our markets to everybody seemingly and yet we are closed
in so many opportunities overseas. So that is the most
important issue to us.
Ms. HAHN. Okay, thank you.
You know, I represent the Port of Los Angeles, the
largest--along with Long Beach is the largest port complex in
this country, and they are very good about having programs for
small businesses. It is called Trade Connect, and they attempt
to reach out to small businesses and educate, even handhold,
talk about access to capital to allow small businesses to
understand what it would mean to connect to the international
trade industry. But Mr. Bieron, I was wondering, listening to
you and talking about eBay and ecommerce, is that a model that
we could or should update to educate small businesses in the
intricacies of ecommerce? It is a good model but maybe it needs
updating.
Mr. BIERON. I think, yes. I think that it is a way to get
far more small businesses exporting. I think that it is not as
complicated as traditional exporting, which is why the numbers
are so vastly different, but one of the five points that we
talk about with the Global Empowerment Network is, in fact,
knowledge of how e-commerce can lead to exporting. And so we do
think that there is a role to get that word out.
Ms. HAHN. And what exactly have you done to maybe get that
word out to some of these Trade Connect programs that currently
exist here?
Mr. BIERON. For example, eBay has a relationship with the
Department of Commerce, and in fact, about a month ago we had a
group of sellers, small business sellers, here in town meeting
with some pretty senior officials over at the Department of
Commerce to talk about how the existing trade promotion export
support programs can be updated to reflect ecommerce small
businesses, so we are just beginning that process.
Ms. HAHN. Great. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlelady from American Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, who is
the chairman of the Subcommittee on Health and Technology is
now recognized for five minutes.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, I want to welcome our students who traveled 10,000
miles to be here with us today. We are all very proud of them.
Mr. Messinger, I have a couple of questions for you. We
hear one of the largest barriers for exporting is understanding
and complying with foreign regulations. Can you explain how you
keep up with all the changing foreign regulations, including
technical barriers and changes in tariffs?
Mr. MESSINGER. We cannot keep up with all of that. You
know, we are a small company. We do what is right. We build
machinery that is compliant with European standards, all
international standards, and support it with outstanding
service, and that is really all we can do.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you.
To better assist with export coordination, what tools
should policymakers strengthen or reexamine for inefficiencies
to help small businesses' efforts to start or increase trading
opportunities? Mr. Messinger?
Mr. MESSINGER. Well, as I said earlier, I think the
Department of Commerce has outstanding resources. Many of the
states have tremendous programs, and quite frankly, a lot of
our international market intelligence just comes from the
Internet. You just get on and start asking questions and
looking around and it is amazing what you can find.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. And lastly, this is your day today, Mr.
Messinger, when you are looking to export to a new market, what
is your biggest obstacle, either domestic or international?
Mr. MESSINGER. Wow, that is a good question.
For the most part if is the energy and the money that we
might have available at any point in time to attack that
market. We assess a market by its financial conditions. Do they
have enough foreign exchange? Are they earning enough foreign
exchange that the labor machine ratio favors machinery versus
hand labor? If it does, then we are going to go out and see if
we can scratch something in the dirt and make something happen.
So it is probably not a limitation other than just the local
economy.
Ms. RADEWAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady yields back. Thank you.
And the gentleman from Nevada who is chairman of the
Subcommittee on Investigations, Oversight, and Regulations is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Most of you already spoke on currency manipulation and that
you really do not have much familiarity, but Mr. Brightbill,
the question I have for you is would currency manipulation be
better off under the Treasury, handled under the Treasury
rather than under the TPA? Just a question.
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Congressman, we are concerned that what the
Treasury Department does currently is not enough. Every six
months the Treasury Department is supposed to certify which
countries are currency manipulators, and throughout the entire
Obama administration it has refused to name China as a currency
manipulator. So I do not think Treasury alone is the solution
to this, which is why my clients support a procedure that would
allow the Commerce Department to determine whether currency
manipulation is a subsidy. In addition, there is also the TPA
Amendment advanced by Senator Portman from Ohio that would have
enforceable requirements for currency manipulation to be
addressed in free trade agreements like TPP.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you.
This is kind of across the panel here. You have all had
success in what you are doing trading overseas. What advice
would you give small business to get them to maybe get more
involved? What advice would you give them to help them have a
little courage to step out there and start using the foreign
markets? Does anybody care to start with that one?
Mr. BIERON. I think the eBay marketplace is a little
different. As we have heard from most small businesses, nearly
all of our small businesses do export. Honestly, one of the
things we have encouraged them to do is contact Capitol Hill
about TPA because we believe new trade agreements are the only
way we are going to get a focus on microbusinesses who export
because this is a very new model for exporting by small
businesses.
Mr. MESSINGER. What I have found in talking with
manufacturers that do not do a lot of exporting is that there
is some times a fear of the unknown, yet there are
opportunities for just about everyone overseas. Unless you have
a desire to start really looking overseas, you certainly are
not going to find it. But as I mentioned earlier, get on the
Internet, pose some questions, look in your industry at what
might be going on, and it is unbelievable what you can find.
Mr. STANEK. Congressman, we have found our freight
forwarded to be of immense help to us. The employees at the
freight forwarder are able to help walk us through a lot of the
regulations that we are personally challenged with, and I would
recommend someone looking to get into the arena to speak with a
good freight forwarder and help initiate that process.
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Congressman, I think I would focus on the
trade barriers and some of the bigger problems. One of the
biggest ones that we have not talked too much about is the lack
of common standards and harmonization of standards. We are
trying to negotiate a free trade agreement with the European
Union right now but there has not been a lot of movement on the
very different regulatory systems. I mean, if a product is safe
and effective here, that should be suitable in the European
Union as well and we just have not seen a lot of movement from
the EU on that. So I think that is something that needs to be
looked at as these trade agreements are negotiated.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you. You just led into my next question,
because I think some of those discussions--do you feel like you
being involved in this trade TPA as businesses in the
discussion of fair trade, balanced trade, do you feel like your
voice is being heard? Because sometimes I feel like being new
here, that we do not utilize the real experts, the real people
who get harmed or benefit enough. Does everybody--go ahead.
Mr. STANEK. I feel that we are being heard through our
trade association. If not for the trade association, the
National Small Business Association, I think individually we
would have a difficult time being heard, but I believe our
voice is heard via that route.
Mr. HARDY. That is good to hear.
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Well, the NAM for sure. They are vocal on
these issues.
Mr. BIERON. I think we are trying to be heard but the small
businesses using the Internet to sell globally is such a new
phenomenon that I feel like the trade infrastructure of
Washington and really other major capitals, they are not really
aware of how much of the small business trade is actually going
on, so that is a real challenge.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you.
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. I would just agree. I think small
businesses face a real challenge. I mean, the pharmaceutical
industry, big manufacturers can get their voices hard. It is
much tougher for small businesses to get their priorities out
there and incorporate it into these agreements.
Mr. HARDY. Thank you.
Can I ask one more question, Mr. Chairman?
Are there any ideas of how we can do a better job of
bringing small business into that discussion better?
Mr. Brightbill?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. It is difficult. As you know, the text of
the TPP, for example, has not been released yet. There are
chapter summaries that are available to cleared advisors. I am
a cleared advisor, so I can go to a room and read those
summaries. But it is hard to know if you do not know what the
provisions are or where they stand. So that is a real
challenge. I can give that some more thought, and if I have
some other answers I would be happy to respond in writing after
the hearing.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair would just note for the record that one of the
mechanisms for the small business community around the country
to get to Congress what it is they think about TPP and other
things is this committee and us holding hearings, and that is
what we are doing today. And this panel has done a commendable
job, and I think the attendance of the members here today has
been good on both sides, too, so we are listening, and
hopefully we will enter that into our ultimate decisions on how
we vote on these things. So I would just note that for the
record.
And the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Rice, who is the
chairman of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and
Capital Access is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. RICE. I want to ask each of you this. Where we do not
have a trade agreement at all, would each of you agree that we
face more barriers on exports than we place on imports?
Mr. Brightbill?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Where we do not have a trade agreement, you
are saying are there more barriers on export than there are on
imports? Certainly. We are the most open and transparent market
in the world, and I agree with the statistics earlier as far as
the immense challenges, ones that are in the laws as well as
laws that we do not even know about in foreign countries. So I
definitely agree.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Stanek?
Mr. STANEK. I would agree also. And all we are looking for
is a balanced playing field.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Messinger?
Mr. MESSINGER. Absolutely. As my testimony indicated, we
are given our market and we are not getting that much in return
at times.
Mr. RICE. Mr. Bieron?
Mr. BIERON. I would agree and just note that the amount of
exporting being done by small businesses is pretty remarkable
given the current playing field.
Mr. RICE. Probably a lot because, as you said earlier, it
is flying under the radar screen and the government has not
stuck their hands into it yet; right?
So what you are saying is that we are less competitive in
the world when we do not have trade agreements. Would you agree
with that?
I know that Volkswagen, in the past five years or so, was
looking to locate a facility in South Carolina where I am from,
was on the list, and they ended up going to Mexico because we
did not have a trade agreement. Arcelor Mittal in my district,
a steel company in Georgetown, South Carolina, just announced
they are closing in four months. They will lose about 300 jobs.
And they cited as the primary reason unfair trade from China on
steel. So I do think trade agreements are really important. I
do not think they are a panacea. I do not think they solve all
the problems. I do not think you can. There are too many ways
in my opinion.
Mr. Brightbill, could you define for me, what is currency
manipulation?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Sure. Currency manipulation, and it is
defined more clearly in other studies and things, but I think
it is generally defined as prolonged intervention by a
government that leads to maintaining currency levels or pushing
them in a specific direction for an extended period of time.
Mr. RICE. I would ask the rest of you guys, Mr. Stanek,
what do you think is currency manipulation?
Mr. STANEK. I would suggest that it is a country unfairly
moving its currency to impact itself favorably at the expense
of other countries.
Mr. RICE. I would ask the rest of you all this question but
it is really probably not in your area of expertise.
Mr. Brightbill, how do you manipulate currency?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. There are many ways that currency can be
manipulated. All I would say is that the evidence of what has
happened with China over the years and other countries makes it
clear that there is a problem here, that it has harmed U.S.
businesses, and that we do need to take action to address it,
and I think we should take action in trade agreements and also
under U.S. law.
Mr. RICE. And I am going to ask you just very obvious
questions, but so if a country, let us say, manipulates its
interest rates to artificially low levels, does that have an
effect on the value of its currency?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. You could look at that under using Commerce
Department subsidy rules and decide is that an unfair subsidy
that distorts the playing field, or is that something else? So
I think there are ways of creating----
Mr. RICE. I mean, there could be cogent arguments that the
United States is manipulating its currency; right?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. I think that----
Mr. RICE. I am just asking if there is an argument.
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Sure. Arguments can be made against us
around the world on any topic, but I think the evidence does
not demonstrate that the United States is manipulating currency
in the same way as China.
Mr. RICE. And I understand that. I am not trying to be
overly argumentative, but I think China might disagree with you
on that.
Now, with respect to prolonged deficit spending, does that
have an effect on currency valuation?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Well, I think you could evaluate all of
these. I would say that companies like ArcelorMittal and others
in the steel industry would argue that currency manipulation
hurts their ability to export and to compete around the world.
And I think they would like something----
Mr. RICE. And I agree with you. The point I am trying to
make is that there are myriad ways to, I mean, from tax policy
to income tax policy to government regulation to things that
you would not consider as currency manipulation, to manipulate
currency. And I do not know. The trade agreement is just going
to be a framework, and we have to do the best we can to set up
enforceable mechanisms. But we, honestly, I do not believe, can
sit here and foresee all the potential ways that a country
could manipulate trade, and we have to do the best we can with
our framework to make us more competitive, because everybody
sitting here in this panel, and I think everybody sitting here
on this panel agree that where we are without a trade agreement
is a bad place. I mean, we all know we are making ourselves
less competitive by not doing what we can to strike down these
barriers to our exports.
And my time is over. Thank you very much.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired.
And the gentlelady, the ranking member is recognized. She
wanted to ask a follow-up question.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Brightbill and Mr. Stanek, you mentioned before that we
need to help, and Mr. Messenger, you also mentioned that at the
beginning you got a lot of assistance from the Department of
Commerce. And so some of those programs will help small
businesses get the type of technical assistance that will help
them take advantage of the overseas market. But when I meet
with small business exporters, one area where it is challenging
for them is to find affordable export financing. The Ex-Im Bank
can fill the void that exists, but there is a debate going on
here in terms of whether the Ex-Im Bank is providing the
assistance that small businesses need. Here we are debating
this massive free trade agreement that is supposed to open and
provide more opportunities for small businesses, and yet when
you look at the reauthorization language of the Ex-Im Bank, it
does not increase the small business lending cap that was put
in place years ago by 20 percent.
So Mr. Brightbill, you said that there are some areas that
need to be addressed within the Ex-Im Bank. Can you mention one
or two?
Mr. BRIGHTBILL. Sure, Congresswoman. Great question.
Like I said, I do support reauthorization, but there have
been abuses of the system. There have been some concerns about
how loan recipients are selected. I can tell you some of my
clients also have concerns when loans are made abroad to
companies that then manufacture or mine raw materials, for
example, that then end up in foreign steel that comes back at
dumped and subsidized prices. So there are concerns about who
Ex-Im lends to, the procedures for lending, and also, as you
say, small business concerns as well, and those should be
looked at carefully as part of this debate.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
I would like to thank the witnesses for being here. Our
panel, I think, has given us excellent testimony. Trade is
clearly one of the more important issues that Congress is going
to be facing in the upcoming weeks and months when one
considers TPA, TPP, TTIP, and the Ex-Im Bank, and a range of
other issues, and I think you made a great contribution, all of
you, towards this Committee, and our colleagues understanding
and grasping this issue, and hopefully doing the right thing.
I ask unanimous consent that members have five legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. Without objection, so ordered. And if there is no
further business to come before the Committee, we are
adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:24 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

TESTIMONY OF

Brian Bieron

Executive Director, Global Public Policy Lab

eBay Inc.

BEFORE THE

United States House of Representatives

Committee on Small Business

Across Town, Across Oceans: Expanding the Role of Small Business in
Global Commerce

PRESENTED

Rayburn House Office Building, Room 2360

May 20, 2015

11:00 a.m.

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of
the Committee, thank you for inviting eBay to testify on how
small businesses are using technology to expand their economic
opportunity by reaching international markets. Our company is a
truly global business--with approximately 60% of our gross
merchandise volume coming from activity outside the United
States. We enable over 150 million users in over 200 countries
to engage in technology-enabled commerce.

eBay is a U.S.-based global technology company that enables
hundreds of thousands of U.S. entrepreneurs, small businesses,
as well as mid-size and large businesses, to reach customers
around the world. Through our experience, we have found that
technology is transforming trade by allowing Main Street
businesses to directly take part in globalization, reaping the
benefits of markets previously only open to the largest global
companies.

The prototypical model for trade by small businesses has
involved plugging into the supply chain of a large multi-
national company. This model continues to be the dominant model
for trade, but there is an emerging model for trade by small
businesses that is incredibly exciting because of its socio-
economic impact.

Our unique experience at eBay demonstrates how the Internet
and mobile technology are now powering global trade by small
and micro-businesses. These micro-multinationals include
businesses like: The Music Farm in Canton, Ohio, which exports
more than 40% of its inventory to customers overseas and has 11
employees; and Great Sky Gifts in Kalispell, Montana, which
exports to 99 countries with only four employees.

My team has spent the last four years conducting research
on the growth of global trade by micro-multinationals. Most
recently, we completed the, ``2015 U.S. Small Business Global
Growth Report''. I would like to offer to submit a copy of the
report for the Committee record.

Our report shows that the Internet and platforms like eBay
are revolutionizing global trade by opening it up to even the
smallest enterprises. In the US, the Small Business
Administration has found that between 1% and 2% of small
businesses export. By contrast, on eBay, 95% export. The
traditional small business exporters reach on average two
markets a year. On eBay, 190,000 US small businesses reached 4
continents in 2014. Our data also shows that these micro-
multinationals survive at a higher rate, meaning they continue
to export while traditional businesses stop exporting because
of the tremendous barriers to trade that they face. And
newcomers capture a larger overall market share than
traditional small businesses, meaning the online marketplace is
more inclusive for small businesses. The global trade regime is
changing before our eyes.

This new ``Inclusive Globalization'' depends on four
components that make up what we call the Global Empowerment
Network: 1) access to the Internet; 2) access to global
services that exist on top of the Internet; 3) an efficient
small package shipments logistics network; and 4) an
educational system for businesses to learn about online
opportunities.

Unfortunately, these four tenants of the Global Empowerment
Network are undermined by trade barriers. At eBay we have been
working to tackle the barrier of language. As a result of our
investment in machine translation technology, we have lowered
language as a barrier to trade by 66% since 2004. But
technology alone cannot solve all of the trade barriers that
micro-multinationals face.

I will offer three policy recommendations to improve the
global ecosystem for micro-multinationals. First, raise the US
low value customs ``de minimis'' threshold and de minimis
thresholds around the world. The de minimis threshold is the
level below which imports are exempt from duties and paperwork.
Micro-multinationals trade in low-value shipments and raising
the de minimis would allow products to reach global customers
with less friction. The Customs Reauthorization Act here in the
House would raise the US de minimis and I urge you to support
that bill.

Second, modernize the global postal service system. Micro-
multinationals regularly utilize postal services because of
their wide-spread networks. Modernizing postal services to meet
the needs of micro-multinationals engaging in package trade
directly with consumers could greatly help to grease the wheels
of modern small business trade.

Finally, the US government has many excellent programs
designed to help US businesses, but many of these programs were
not developed with small, global eCommerce businesses in mind.
I urge the Committee to review existing government programs to
be more inclusive of micro-multinationals.

Today we are witnessing the dawn of a new era of
globalization. Small and mid-sized businesses contribute to
their local economy and regularly serve customers around the
world. This is good economics because it means more growth and
wealth, and it is good for society because it means a more
inclusive form of globalization. I urge the Committee to keep
micro-multinationals on top of mind as it seeks to protect and
promote cross-border trade opportunities for small businesses.

Thank you again for the opportunity to address the
Committee on this important and timely topic. I look forward to
answering your questions.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Good morning. I would like to thank Chairman Chabot,
Ranking Member Velazquez and the members of the Committee on
Small Business for inviting me to testify today on issues
related to challenges facing small-business exporters and the
impact U.S. trade policy has on small businesses.

My name is Michael Stanek and I am the Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer of Hunt Imaging LLC, a manufacturer of
dry and liquid electrostatic toners and developers used
primarily in high speed computer printers. Hunt Imaging is
headquartered in Berea, Ohio just outside of Cleveland in a
100,000 square foot manufacturing facility we have occupied
since 1974. We also have a 12,000 square foot facility outside
of Antwerp, Belgium but are currently in the process of
shutting down that operation as sales throughout Europe have
declined to a level that make it financially unfeasible to
maintain it as an ongoing entity.

Although more than 99 percent of all businesses in the U.S.
and European Union (EU) are classified as small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs), accounting for the vast majority of
employment, and adding more than 14.3 million new jobs to the
U.S. economy--we are still struggling to keep our European
operations open due to both economies being mired in sluggish
and uninspiring recoveries.

I am proud to be here representing not only my company but
also the National Small Business Association (NSBA)--the
nation's first small-business advocacy organization for whom I
serve on the Board of Trustees, and its international arm, the
Small Business Exporters Association (SBEA). I also serve as
the First Vice Chair of the Board of Directors at an NSBA
affiliate, the Council of Smaller Enterprises (COSE) in
Cleveland, Ohio, the nation's largest regional small business
association.

Hunt Imaging was founded in 1996 as a spinoff from a
Fortune 200 company with more than 90 years of imaging
chemicals experience. With both dry and liquid capabilities,
Hunt is able to service a broad array of needs in the imaging
industry. Our current focus is on the high speed computer
printer market with a particular niche in magnetic image
character recognition (MICR) toners. We supply some of the
largest printer manufacturers on an Original Equipment
Manufacturer (OEM) basis and compete in the aftermarket as well
with a Hunt labeled product. We currently employ thirty-five
hard-working individuals between our two facilities and will
maintain a workforce of thirty-one after our downsizing is
complete.

Challenges to Exporting

The fact that Hunt Imaging is a Fortune 200 spinoff is very
germane to the foreign trade topic as the background and
experience many of our employees gained from being part of a
large company gave us an advantage over most other companies
our size when it came to exporting. Not only did we inherit an
ongoing operation in Europe that made us very unique for a
company our size, but our original employees brought with them
the knowledge of how to deal with freight forwarders, customs
brokers, export/import documentation, and other items that are
specific to the export arena.

Without this innate knowledge, we would have been facing
the same legal, administrative and regulatory barriers that so
many of my colleagues face when they decide to enter into the
global marketplace. The fact that nearly half of the exporters
who responded to a 2013 NSBA and SBEA Exporting Survey citing
they spend a few months or more preparing to export is a clear
indicator of the complexity faced by new exporters and the need
for improved, streamlined assistance. The average small-
business exporter reported spending approximately 8.4 percent
of their annual operating revenue on preparing to export. To
put that in context, the average S-Corporation reports spending
11.1 percent of their annual operating revenue on salaries and
wages, according to the most recent information available from
the Internal Revenue Service.

Clearly, for Hunt, having the foreign operation and an
existing book of foreign customers when we spun off had us in
the export business--with a clear advantage--from the very
beginning of life as a stand-alone entity. We did not fully
comprehend at the time how unique we were in comparison to the
vast majority of companies our size which are at a loss when it
comes to having that background, yet join us in the challenge
of having limited resources upon which to draw when it comes to
learning new practices and in keeping up with ever-changing
rules and regulations. Developing foreign markets is a
significant challenge, especially for a small firm with limited
human and financial resources. There are cultural factors to
learn, language barriers, legal snares and obstacles, and the
complex array of logistical and governmental issues surrounding
cross-border trade.

Our history in exporting has been varied, with more recent
sales being focused in the European footprint and Canada. We
have also in the past year sold into Brazil but have done so
via a customer in Miami, Florida who has handled the actual
exportation. We have handled our recent Brazilian shipments in
this fashion as the Miami company has a pre-existing
relationship with the Brazilian customer and it also shields us
from economic unrest in the Brazilian economy.

Finding effective distribution partners has been essential
for us in identifying new customers, in new countries and
understanding the different regulatory requirements. Without
them, we would have had to spend a considerable amount of time
finding labeling, shipping, certification requirements and all
of the other relevant rules that apply to doing business in
Brazil. The time that we devote to an export transactions is
time that we won't be devoting to some other, equally important
business operation. One often has to wonder if it is even worth
trying to expand into new markets. Other destinations to which
we have exported directly, although not recently, have included
the Philippines, Egypt, and Pakistan.

Service to our customers in Europe has been handled through
our Belgian facility, a luxury which we will lose shortly due
to the aforementioned economic decline. We have historically
produced all of our toner in our U.S. facility in Berea and
would then export in bulk to our branch in Belgium where the
toner would be packaged for sale to European customers. We are
now in the process of changing the relationship with our
largest European customer out of Germany and will both produce
and package their product there in the U.S. and then export it
directly to them.

This change in shipping point has resulted in a number of
challenges for us to face. We now have to look at numerous
facets of our operation, from things as basic as now having to
order, inventory and utilize Euro pallets for shipping to much
larger challenges such as addressing the REACH (Registration,
Evaluation, Authorization, and Restriction of Chemicals) issue
and its attendant certifications. The REACH issue in particular
has been challenging for a small business such as ours to,
first, fully understand, and second, to meet the criteria.

REACH is a regulation of the European Union (EU) which came
into force in 2007 and addresses the production and use of
chemical substances. The 849 pages of legislation have been
described as the most complex legislation in the European
Union's history and affects industries throughout the world.

REACH requires all companies manufacturing or importing
chemical substances into the EU to register those substances
with the newly established European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) in
Helsinki, Finland. In our case this registration is necessary
for every raw material contained in our toner formula.

We were previously REACH compliant through our Belgian
branch but with our new direct sales approach from the U.S. we
are looked at as a new company and required to make new
registrations. While our customer in Germany is technically
responsible for the registration as the importer of the product
they have insisted that we handle the registrations. Many
European companies will not consider purchasing from outside
the EU unless the exporter assumes all REACH registration
responsibilities.

The required registration can be handled by establishing a
relationship was an organization within the EU termed an ``Only
Representative'' (OR), OR consultancy companies exist outside
the EU but it is not possible to register a substance if the OR
is not based in the EU unless it is subcontracted to an EU-
based registrant. The OR assumes responsibility and liability
for fulfilling obligations of REACH for substances being
brought into the EU by a non-EU manufacturer. However, the cost
of engaging an OR can be in the tens of thousands of dollars,
putting it well out of reach of a typical small-business
exporter.

As an alternative to engaging an OR ourselves, we have been
forced to take another, though no less time-consuming,
approach. Each of the suppliers of our raw materials are large
companies and all are also non-EU manufacturers. In response to
the REACH regulation they have each found it necessary to
individually contract with an OR in the EU. As the products
which they are supplying to us are fully registered through
their ORs we have been able to negotiate agreements with each
of them that are allowing us to `piggyback' on their
registration by extending their OR appointments to include the
distribution of substances via Hunt Imaging to our customer.
These negotiations and the subsequent paperwork to effect the
relationships have consumed a significant amount of time and a
fair amount of legal and consultancy expense.

The REACH issue in Europe is only one of myriad challenges
that need to be faced and addressed when a small business is
looking to export. For a business without the internal
resources to address these challenges it becomes a matter of
finding outside assistance which in and of itself can become
both time-consuming and cost-prohibitive.

Possibly the biggest exporting challenge for a small
business, and certainly ours, is finding international
opportunities to pursue. When we were part of a large
multinational corporation we had a worldwide network of
colleagues who could not only pinpoint opportunities for us but
also pursue them on our behalf. As a small stand-alone
organization we are challenged to uncover potential sales
opportunities and have struggled with identifying domestic
resources to assist in that process.

Participating in the trade show circuit, both as an
exhibitor and as attendees, has proven to be of limited value
to us. In addition to numerous domestic trade shows we also
have been an exhibitor at Drupa, the largest printing
exhibition in the world, held every four years in Dusseldorf,
Germany. This show attracts nearly 2,000 exhibitors and
300,000-400,000 visitors. Again, the results as far as new
business have been disappointing. We've picked up a few small
sales but never anything that has justified the cost of
exhibiting nor any business that we can maintain once our doors
are closed in Belgium.

Once new customers are identified and a sales agreement is
reached the next step is, of course, exporting the product to
the customer. After 19 years as an independent organization our
knowledge base from previously being part of a multinational
corporation was waned. We now rely very heavily on our freight
forwarder to advise us of rules and regulations and have, in
fact, passed along power of attorney on export related issues
to our freight forwarder.

Large companies in the U.S. are, for all practical
purposes, fully globalized. They have a good sense of where
their export markets are and what is needed to sell in those
markets. They know where to go to finance their foreign sales
and have the resources to handle common types of foreign trade
barriers to U.S. exports. The situation among small and mid-
sized companies in our country is dramatically different.

Large companies in the U.S. are, for all practical
purposes, fully globalized. They have a good sense of where
their export markets are and what is needed to sell in those
markets. They know where to go to finance their foreign sales
and have the resources to handle common types of foreign trade
barriers to U.S. exports. The situation among small and mid-
sized companies in our country is dramatically different.

The economic difficulties over the past few years, coupled
with ongoing outsourcing, have put small businesses at a
distinct disadvantage in the global economy. NSBA and SBEA have
been urging for years--decades, even--that more must be done to
emphasize the needs of small business within the scope of U.S.
trade in order to enhance exporting opportunities for small
U.S. companies. I have been pleased to see in the past few
years, there has been a concerted effort by the administration,
Congress and regulators to improve and enhance exporting
opportunities for small businesses.

What Can Be Done

It should come as no surprise that the results from the
NSBA/SBEA Exporting Survey shows that fifty-five percent of
SME's export to less than five countries. Foreign laws and
regulations can change daily, making it increasingly difficult
for a small business to stay up-to-date on when and how to
comply with these regulations, and it acts as a deterrent to
explore new markets. Additionally, the survey highlights that
forty-seven percent of small-business owners are the ones
handling the bulk of their exporting activities; this is on top
of running the day-to-day operations of the business, and
oftentimes serving as the accountant, benefits coordinator,
attorney and personnel administrator.

One-Stop-Shop

It is critical for policymakers to understand that, for a
small business, more information isn't always a better
information. With more than twenty federal departments and
agencies playing some role in international trade, it is
important that SMEs have a place to turn. Many of these
agencies overlap and offer duplicative services. I would
recommend the creation of a One-Stop Shop--ideally within the
Department of Commerce and more specifically the International
Trade Administration (ITA)--that would have a centralized staff
dedicated to field small business ``how to'' calls on exporting
and to assist small businesses in transferring their exporting
thoughts and ideas into reality. It would be beneficial to
develop a ``beginning-to-end'' focus on each company--staying
with a company from initial inquiry through the completion of
the transaction and any necessary follow-up.

Increased coordination between agencies will help more
small businesses access the tools they need to export; enhanced
export training and technical assistance are key. Especially
for small companies that are new to exporting and those with
specialty products for exotic markets, there are undeniable
fear factors, knowing exactly where to go and who to call could
alleviate some of this anxiety which serves as a major barrier
to entry into global trade. Cross-agency outreach guides and
learning materials on the intended foreign markets with virtual
marketplace and virtual trade missions would make it easier and
less expensive for small businesses to reach foreign partners.

Trade Agreements

Trade agreements are a vital part of the effort to increase
country and customer range, as well as the value of small-
business exports. Free trade agreements are extremely important
as they lower foreign barriers to our exports and produce a
more level playing field. Lowering the ``hassle factor'' of
exporting to specific countries helps to increase the
attractiveness of those countries to smaller companies. And
when trade agreements succeed in lowering exporting costs, they
broaden the range of export profitability for American
companies and American products.

For successful negotiations, it is critical the president
have the authority to negotiate trade agreements through Trade
Promotion Authority (TPA). TPA, which expired in 2007, is
crucial to the passage of trade deals through Congress because
it allows the agreements to advance under ``fast track'' rules
with no amendments. Without TPA, the U.S. is relegated to the
sidelines as other nations negotiate trade agreements without
us--putting American workers and companies--especially small
ones--at a competitive disadvantage. New and expanded market
access through trade agreements has been an important catalyst
for increased small business exports. I am pleased to see that
Congress has begun consideration on TPA, and am hopeful both
chambers will have constructive debate and pass this important
legislation as soon as possible.

At Hunt, we consider selling into Canada to be a routine
matter; the paperwork is simple and the logistics network is
just an extension of our normal domestic carriers. It has been
shown that following the implementation of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), American SME exports to Canada
and Mexico skyrocketed. Small businesses represent over 95
percent of all U.S. exporters to the NAFTA market. This same
type of success is achievable with other trade deals.

Currently, the administration is negotiating two broad
trade agreements: the Transatlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership (T-TIP), with members of the EU and the Trans-
Pacific Partnership (TPP) with countries in the Asia-Pacific
region. These two agreements would cover 60 percent of American
exports and 84 percent of foreign direct investment, both
expanding some existing trade agreements and creating
opportunities for free trade with more countries.

Given the importance of small businesses to both the
European and Asia-Pacific economies, it is vital that these
negotiators not only get the details right when crafting the
SME-specific chapter, but also ensure that they address the
specific needs of small business throughout the entire
agreement.

NSBA and SBEA are pleased that trade negotiators have
finally realized the need for including a chapter dedicated to
small exporter issues in these agreements. It is critical for
their long-term usefulness, however, to establish a small-
business committee or advisory panel that would engage with the
SME community and provide resources and information on
understanding the full scope of these agreements and how they
can benefit small businesses.

TPP and T-TIP are excellent opportunities for these
countries and the U.S. to coordinate approaches and facilitate
cross-border trade and investment opportunities for American
SMEs. By removing tariffs, making the regulatory process easier
to understand, and ensuring companies have access to the
information they need to start exporting, these agreements can
make a real difference to the increased number of small firms
who have expressed interest in exporting, per the NSBA/SBEA
survey: from just 43 percent in 2010 to 63 percent in 2013.

Ease Tariffs

If we want American SMEs to export more, it is important to
reduce variable costs like tariffs. Many countries impose
tariffs on U.S. exports that are ten or twenty times as high as
our own, and a web of non-tariff barriers overseas often shuts
out U.S. goods and services. At Hunt we have found that our
products can often times be classified numerous ways by a
single country. Without combing through a maze of product
descriptions and classifications we risk having our material
placed in a much higher tariff class than necessary.

Also, we need to pay close attention to fixed or
``inflexible'' costs because those costs can impose
disproportionate burdens on SMEs. When it costs $10,000 in
legal fees to comply with at trading rule it is a nuisance for
a large company, but it is a potential show-stopper for a small
company.

A lot of non-tariff barriers can generate such
disproportionate costs. Non-tariff barriers include such items
as foreign patent and trademark costs, ``physical presence''
requirements, paperwork requirements and performance bonds and
licenses. Sometimes these disproportionate costs are subtle,
such as when a country requires foreign companies to be
structured in a certain way to do business there. But even
small increases in a company or product's cost due to tariffs
can mean the difference between making and losing a sale for
SMEs. NSBA/SBEA supports the elimination of all tariffs across
all industries and product lines. Though the tariffs between
the U.S. and EU economies are already relatively low,
eliminating them would boost bilateral trade by more than $120
billion in five years, according to a report from the Centre
for Economic Policy Research.

Transparency of Rules and Regulations

Interpreting and comprehending regulations has proven to be
a challenge that exhausts a small firm's human resources and
even drains our wallets when we have to turn to outside
professionals. The easier it is to understand and comply with a
country's rules without having to hire attorneys, the cheaper
it is to get into that market. While we have relied very
heavily on our freight forwarder to keep us informed of and in
compliance with all necessary rules, it would be much more
comforting for us to have a clear way to confirm our own
compliance.

New rules and regulations should only occur after notices
have been posted online in an easily-accessible format for the
public and American companies to provide comments on the impact
the new rules would have on their business. Also, all issues
raised by U.S. companies should receive written responses with
justifications for all new rules. The creation of an SME
committee that would analyze and examine the impact of new
rules on smaller companies would also be beneficial.

NSBA/SBEA also supports the creation of a centralized
website that is monitored and collects up-to-date information
on regulation policies and practices pertaining to requirements
for shipping, labeling, testing, certifications, and customs
clearance for the most commonly traded goods and services. It
should be presented in a clear and easy-to-read format, to
serve as a resource for businesses looking to navigate the
process and enter a new market.

Customs Simplification

Reducing administrative burdens associated with customs
procedures, raising the de Minimis threshold, eliminating
unnecessary double customs controls and simplifying rules of
origin could benefit small exporters--especially as a way of
reducing red tape and delays at borders. Improving
predictability, simplicity and uniformity in border procedures
will make it easier for SMEs to participate in trade.

The current de Minimis value for goods entering the U.S. is
$200, while the current personal exemption for goods carried
into the country is $800. Duties and taxes are assessed only if
the value exceeds $800. If consumers ship their purchases back
to the U.S. that same duty-free limit falls to $200. This
difference arbitrarily penalizes companies--such as mine--that
ship products necessary for the production and manufacturing of
our goods in the U.S. Streamlining this customs process and
matching the $800 exemption will help American businesses grow
their export volume and enter new markets. NSBA/SBEA support
the bipartisan efforts in Congress to increase this threshold,
which will lower costs for American exporters.

Strong Intellectual Property Protection

Small businesses are the leaders in innovation and
creativity that drive job creation and economic growth. Having
a strong commitment to intellectual property rights (IPR) is
vital in order to protect our innovative products and services,
especially because small exporters are highly vulnerable to
infringements of our IPR. U.S. small businesses are at a
particular disadvantage, because they may lack the knowledge,
expertise or resources necessary to prevent the theft of their
ideas and products. In fact, research conducted by the United
States Patent and Trademark Office found that only 15 percent
of small businesses that conduct business overseas know that
they need to file for IP protection abroad.

Many small businesses also may not have personnel and
operations overseas, so they lack the ``eyes and ears'' needed
to be vigilant globally and the theft of their IP can often go
undetected. In addition, small businesses generally do not have
the level of access or the resources, such as specialized legal
counsel, that may be available to larger companies. NSBA/SBEA
endorses the creation of simplified methods for filing and
renewing trademark and copyrights to decrease the amount of
time and paperwork normally required which in turn will provide
more timely enforcement of IPR.

Expand and Improve Export Finance

On a more broad scale, we need to get more community banks
into export finance and educate them on available government
lending programs so they can better advise their small-business
customers who are considering exporting. This can be achieved
by streamlining paperwork, externalizing some of the banks'
administrative costs for smaller export finance deals,
providing export finance training, enhancing outreach to banks
on the benefits of trade finance and improving bank recruitment
practices.

Hunt just negotiated a new line of credit with a regional
bank that allows us to borrow up to 80 percent of outstanding
accounts receivable. However, we were unsuccessful in
attempting to address the issue of foreign accounts receivable
and are unable to borrow any money against receivables that are
to be collected from companies outside U.S. borders. This
naturally makes it much more difficult for us to financially
support new export opportunities that may arise.

The U.S. financial sector is far less engaged in world
trade than the financial sectors in Europe, Asia and other
parts of the world, where banks themselves encourage business
customers with promising products to export. To truly set up
American exports, our banks must do more.

While Hunt does not use the Export-Import Bank of the
United States (Ex-Im), it is also an important part of the U.S.
export strategy for so many small exporters. The Ex-Im Bank is
self-supporting and actually has generated excess revenues of
nearly $7 billion dollars since 1992. I cannot understand why
the reauthorization of its lending authority has been so
controversial. It is crucial the Bank maintain its
congressionally approved lending authority allowing the Bank to
operate without restrictions, so companies have the certainty
and predictability we need to level the playing field and
compete in the international marketplace. Interestingly enough,
NSBA's members find this program valuable enough that
reauthorization of Ex-Im Bank was voted among our top 10
priorities for the 114th Congress.

These are just some of the recommendations that, if
accomplished, could alleviate many of the barriers affecting
SMEs and yield significant gains for us and the overall U.S.
economy.

Conclusion

While there is no doubt that some of America's biggest
companies can continue to increase their exports, the largest
untapped resource for American exports is small and medium-size
companies. SMEs struggle with real and perceived challenges to
exporting. Just over one percent, or 287,000, of the
approximately 27.9 million small businesses in the U.S.
currently export. With 95 percent of the purchasing market
outside of the U.S., small businesses understand the importance
of opening new markets and competing in the global marketplace.
Although the number of small exporters has been steadily
growing their share of overall U.S. exports--34 percent in
2010, up from 27 percent in 2002--exporting is still not as
much a part of the business culture in the U.S. as it is
worldwide.

Many SME's think exporting is too burdensome or too risky,
or they just do not know where to start. As highlighted
throughout my testimony, some of the top barriers for small
exporters are: (1) problems identifying foreign business
opportunities and federal export assistance resources, (2)
limited information on how to analyze foreign regulations and
contact potential foreign customers, and (3) the need for
external financing in order to undertake an export transaction.
Federal and state agencies play an important role in helping to
reduce these types of exporting barriers for small businesses.
Lowering more of these barriers will help small exporters tap
into new markets and grow.

Given the specter of a jobless economic recovery and
lagging consumer spending, exporting holds many opportunities
for small businesses during the domestic economic malaise, and
supports long-term domestic growth and job development. Though
small business exports represent less than five percent of the
GDP, with aggressive support from the U.S. Government this
contribution could be significantly increased.

Again, I would like to thank Chairman Chabot and the
members of the committee for the opportunity to speak today. I
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
House Committee on Small Business

``Across Town, Across Oceans: Expanding the Role of Small Business in
Global Commerce''

Testimony of Timothy C. Brightbill

Partner, Wiley Rein LLP, Washington DC

Adjunct Professor, Georgetown University Law Center

May 20, 2015

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and Members of
the Committee. I am Tim Brightbill, a partner at Wiley Rein LLP
and adjunct professor at Georgetown University Law Center.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify here today on the
important issue of expanding the role of small business in
global commerce. (These views are my own, not those of my firm
or my clients.)

I have practiced international trade law for 20 years, and
my practice has always focused on helping American companies,
American industries, and American workers. I work with members
of a wide variety of industries--including manufacturers of
everything from solar panels to steel to school notebooks to
heavy forged hand tools. I also work with many companies that
provide products and services both here and abroad. My job is
to help these companies grow, to prevent unfair trade practices
from harming these companies, and to help eliminate trade
barriers overseas.

As this committee is aware, small businesses face enormous
challenges in the area of international trade. According to the
President's 2015 Trade Agenda, of the 28 million small
businesses in the United States, only about 1 percent, or
approximately 300,000 of these small businesses export their
merchandise to other countries.\1\ Equally striking is the fact
that of those small businesses that do export, more than half
export to only one country--either Canada or Mexico. This
demonstrates how small businesses often struggle to overcome
steep tariffs, complicated paperwork, fees, and the often
significant delays that they face in exporting to other
countries. These trade barriers disproportionately affect small
businesses that often cannot meet the high costs of compliance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Office of the U.S. Trade Representatives, The President's Trade
Agenda: Made in America, at 19 (Mar. 2015).

In the last several years, the U.S. government has taken
several steps towards easing such barriers, but there is more
to be done. Encouraging and facilitating exports by U.S. small
businesses is imperative to allowing American industry to
expand and American workers to prosper. I'd like to list just a
few areas of priority for this Congress and Administration that
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
are particularly relevant to small businesses:

1) Trans-Pacific Partnership - The U.S. government has a
potentially important opportunity to create jobs, expand trade
and manufacturing, and improve the global rules of
international trade in the Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade
negotiations. If approved, the TPP would be the largest U.S.
free trade agreement, involving 12 countries and more than 40
percent of global trade.\2\ The TPP specifically seeks to
promote measures that improve U.S. small businesses' ability to
export, such as streamlining customs procedures, eliminating
tariff and non-tariff barriers, promoting digital and e-
commerce, and developing more transparent regulatory
procedures. The TPP provisions are similar to the types of
improvements included in the World Trade Organization's recent
Agreement on Trade Facilitation. As discussed below, the TFA is
intended to make the movement of goods between countries
faster, less expensive, and more reliable, as in the TPP.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Office of the United States Trade Representative, Overview of
the Trans Pacific Partnership, https://ustr.gov/tpp/overview-of-the-
TPP.

Two other features of the TPP that could benefit small
businesses are the implementation of common tariffs (prior to
tariff elimination) across countries and the chapter on express
delivery services. A serious challenge to the effectiveness of
international trade rules is what some have called the
``spaghetti bowl'' of free trade agreements, each of which has
its own rules. This creates uncertainty in the system when
different tariffs are imposed on the same products by different
countries. Some small businesses don't even bother to claim
duty free treatment for their goods due to the complexity of
the process. Standard tariffs across TPP countries should
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
reduce this burden.

The TPP will also, for the first time, impose disciplines
and requirements on state-owned enterprises, which will greatly
assist U.S. companies, both large and small, by reducing the
need to compete with foreign-government backed entities. While
China is a notable example of this problem, SOEs play
substantial roles in the economies of TPP countries like
Malaysia and Vietnam--as well as Russia, Brazil, India, and
many others. When U.S. small businesses export, they should not
have to compete with foreign governments, which is why these
SOE provisions are potentially so important.

Similarly, many small businesses use express delivery
services for their exports, and the TPP includes provisions
that should allow greater use of these services. The TPP
specifically seeks to enhance such services through expedited
procedures that help small businesses gain quick and efficient
access to global markets and supply chains.

But, before it can pass the TPP, Congress and the
Administration must first pass Trade Promotion Authority, which
defines U.S. negotiating objectives and priorities for trade
agreement negotiations. As you know, the Senate is currently
considering TPA legislation as well as potential amendments,
and the House will also do so shortly. And as this debate has
taken place in recent weeks, the theme we have heard over and
over again is one of enforcement. Specifically, Congress should
not approve new trade agreements until we have better ways of
enforcing our existing agreements. Several TPA amendments would
go a long way toward improving enforcement for all types of
businesses, including small and medium sized enterprises.

First, Congress should approve much-needed trade
enforcement measures as part of TPA. U.S. industry has proposed
a set of five trade law changes that it views as essential to
strengthening the U.S. government's enforcement and
administration of the U.S. trade laws, and to ensuring that
U.S. trade laws remain an effective tool for domestic companies
and their workers to respond to unfair trade practices. These
provisions would:

Enhance the Commerce Department's ability to
address non-cooperative foreign parties in trade remedy
cases;

Clarify the injury standard in trade remedy
cases;

Enhance the ability of the Commerce
Department to calculate a trade remedy when foreign
prices or costs are distorted; and

Clarify the Commerce Department's authority
regarding the selection of which foreign companies to
investigate in a trade case.

These changes would benefit all companies who bring trade
cases against dumped and subsidized imports, including large
and small business alike. They were included in the Customs and
Trade bill passed by the Senate Finance Committee. They should
be included in TPA as well.

Second, Congress should approve the ENFORCE Act legislation
to guard against foreign companies who use fraud and evasion to
avoid paying trade case duties. Senator Wyden has championed
this legislation for years, and again it was included in the
Customs and Trade bill passed by the Senate Finance Committee.
The ENFORCE Act is preferable to the PROTECT Act, which has
also been proposed in the House.

Although the TPA would prove beneficial to small businesses
in many respects, there are potential drawbacks as well. First,
the opening of the U.S. market to additional foreign
competition could harm smaller businesses that are less able to
compete than larger or multinational companies. This could also
lead to jobs being lost to lower-wage positions in other TPP
countries. However, the extent of such harm, if any, is not
known, and some experts have stated that because many TPP
countries are already free trade partners of the United States,
the actual increase in competition may be limited.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, e.g., David Autor, David Dorn & Gordon H. Hanson, Why
Obama's key trade deal with Asia would actually be good for American
workers, Wash Post (Mar. 12, 2015).

Second, opponents of the TPP argue that the agreement,
largely negotiated behind closed doors, reflects powerful
corporate interests, rather than the interests of small
businesses who are less able to influence U.S. trade policy. In
fact, while the TPP will contain a separate chapter on small-
and medium-enterprises, little is known about the contents of
that chapter. The United States Trade Representative has
indicated that the TPP will address informational challenges
that small businesses have previously raised with regard to the
difficulty of actually utilizing free trade agreements, but the
specifics remain unknown.\4\ And while the Administration is
seeking to include a provision for regular reviews of how the
TPP is working for small businesses, it is not clear if and/or
how the outcome of such reviews will be used to the benefit of
these companies.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Office of the United States Trade Representative, Trans-Pacific
Partnership: Summary of U.S. Objectives, https://ustr.gov/tpp/Summary-
of-US-objectives.

\5\ See, id.

Third, and perhaps most controversial,\6\ are the TPP's
Investor-State Dispute Settlement provisions. Under these
provisions, U.S. businesses could challenge foreign government
policies or actions before independent arbitrators with the
authority to order compensation to the companies, if so
warranted. Critics of ISDSD argue that it could allow the
rollback of U.S. health, safety, and environmental regulations.
My personal view is that these concerns are overstated, and
there are many ways that ISDS could be beneficial to small- and
medium-sized enterprises who invest abroad. These arbitration
proceedings are often a cost-effective way for companies to
protect their investments abroad from hostile government
actions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See, e.g., Elizabeth Warren, The Trans-Pacific Partnership
clause everyone should oppose, N.Y. Times (Feb. 25, 2015).

2) Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP):
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership is another
trade agreement that has the potential to bring substantial
benefits to U.S. small businesses. The United States and the
European Union have one of the most complex trade and
investment relationships, with U.S. goods and private services
trade with Europe totaling more than $1 trillion in 2013.\7\
Nearly 95,000 U.S. small businesses export to the European
Union, but the growth in such exports is hampered by the need
to comply with European standards, technical regulations, and
conformity assessments.\8\ Such requirements, coupled with high
tariffs and shipping costs, are often prohibitive for small
businesses. The TTIP negotiations seek to address these
barriers by reducing or eliminating tariffs, promoting duty-
free treatment of digital products, promoting compatible
regulatory requirements and assessments, and reducing border
costs and delays. The TTIP negotiations are in their early
stages, so it is still too soon to assess their potential.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Office of the United States Trade Representative, European
Union, https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/europe-middle-east/europe/
european-union.

\8\ U.S. International Trade Commission, U.S. International Trade
Commission Releases Report on How T-TIP Will Benefit Small Businesses
(Mar. 28, 2014); U.S. International Trade Commission, Trade Barriers
that U.S. Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Perceive as Affecting
Exports to the European Union, Inv. No. 332-541, USITC Pub. 4455, at 2-
2-2-7 (Mar. 2014).

3) Trade in Services Agreement: The Trade in Services
Agreement, being negotiated among 24 countries, seeks to expand
global trade opportunities for service industries like
telecommunications, financial services, healthcare, and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
distribution and delivery services.

Today, barriers to trade in services are often greater than
those facing manufactured goods, so TISA could provide small
businesses with greater and more affordable access to global
markets. Because the United States already runs a large trade
surplus on trade in services, TISA should further strengthen
U.S. services firms that are looking to expand abroad.

4) Currency Manipulation - Currency manipulation continues
to be a serious problem that harms all U.S. exporting
businesses, large and small. Currently manipulation has
resulted in the loss of thousands, if not millions, of U.S.
jobs by making imports of certain goods into the United States
artificially cheap and by giving foreign-manufactured products
an unfair advantage over U.S. products in export markets. The
Petersen Institute for International Economics, one of the most
respected think tanks in Washington, has previously called
currency manipulation ``the biggest subsidy of them all,'' \9\
and despite recent International Monetary Fund statements,\10\
many estimates suggest that China's currency is still
undervalued by 25% or more. In addition to the millions of lost
American jobs, such currency actions by China and more than 20
other countries are estimated to have increased the U.S. trade
deficit by $200 billion to $500 billion per year.\11\ Yet, the
Commerce Department has repeatedly refused to investigate
whether currency manipulation is a countervailable subsidy
under U.S. trade laws.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See C. Fred Bergsten, Addressing Currency Manipulation Through
Trade Agreements, Peterson Institute for International Economics (Jan.
2014).
\10\ See Bonnie Cao & Ye Xie, IMF Official Says Yuan Nearing Point
Where No Longer Undervalued, Bloomberg Business (Apr. 17, 2015).
\11\ C. Fred Bergsten & Joseph E. Gagnon, Currency Manipulation,
the U.S. Economy, and the Global Economic Order, Peterson Institute of
International Economics (Dec. 2012).

U.S. free trade agreements currently do not address this
serious issue, to the detriment of American companies and
workers. Congress now has the opportunity to take two important
steps towards stemming this ongoing problem. First, Congress
should direct the Commerce Department to investigate currency
manipulation as an illegal subsidy. Second, Congress could
establish, as a negotiating objective, that the Administration
seek enforceable rules against currency manipulation in all
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
future trade agreements, including the TPP.

5) World Trade Organization's Agreement on Trade
Facilitation - This agreement has not yet entered into force,
but could benefit many U.S. small businesses by making the
movement of goods between countries faster, less expensive, and
more reliable. Exporting goods to some countries can be
particularly difficult, with delays at the border, substantial
paperwork, and steep fees. Under the TFA, WTO members must
adopt procedures that (1) allow exporters to submit import
documentation even before the arrival of their goods at the
port; (2) allow for the release of merchandise even before the
final customs duties and fees are determined; (3) allow for
expedited procedures for operators with demonstrated records of
customs compliance; (4) provide a mechanism for expedited
release of merchandise; (5) implement procedures to reduce
documentation requirements, and allow for the rapid release and
clearance of goods, particularly perishable items; and (6)
allow for the temporary admission of certain merchandise
intended to be re-exported. Another benefit to small businesses
under the TFA is access to expedited shipping channels,
increasing access to global supply chains and allowing for more
cost-efficient shipping and logistics. Such measures would
allow U.S. small businesses increased opportunities and
destinations for their products, and the U.S. should urge WTO
members to ratify the agreement as quickly as possible.

Thank you for addressing these important issues today, and
I would be happy to answer any questions.

[all]
