- SMALL BUSINESS AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT: HOW CYBER ATTACKS THREATEN BOTH

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SMALL BUSINESS AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT: HOW CYBER ATTACKS THREATEN
BOTH

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 20, 2016
__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 114-057
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-072                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio, Chairman
STEVE KING, Iowa
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
RICHARD HANNA, New York
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
CHRIS GIBSON, New York
DAVE BRAT, Virginia
AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
STEVE KNIGHT, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
YVETTE CLARK, New York
JUDY CHU, California
JANICE HAHN, California
DONALD PAYNE, JR., New Jersey
GRACE MENG, New York
BRENDA LAWRENCE, Michigan
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MARK TAKAI, Hawaii

Kevin Fitzpatrick, Staff Director
Emily Murphy, Deputy Staff Director for Policy
Jan Oliver, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Steve Chabot................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Richard Snow, Owner, Maine Indoor Karting, Scarborough, ME...     4
Mr. Kevin Dunn, Technical Vice President, NCC Group, Austin, TX..     6
Mr. Nicholas A. Oldham, Counsel, King & Spalding, LLP,
Washington, DC.................................................     7
Mr. Stephen F. Mankowski, CPA, National Tax Chair, National
Conference of CPA Practitioners (NCCPAP), National Secretary,
NCCPAP, Partner at EP Caine & Associates CPA, LLC, Bryn Mawr,
PA.............................................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Richard Snow, Owner, Maine Indoor Karting, Scarborough,
ME.........................................................    25
Mr. Kevin Dunn, Technical Vice President, NCC Group, Austin,
TX.........................................................    36
Mr. Nicholas A. Oldham, Counsel, King & Spalding LLP,
Washington, DC.............................................    42
Mr. Stephen F. Mankowski, CPA, National Tax Chair, National
Conference of CPA Practitioners (NCCPAP), National
Secretary, NCCPAP, Partner at EP Caine & Associates CPA,
LLC, Bryn Mawr, PA.........................................    47
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
NAFCU - National Association of Federal Credit Unions........    54

SMALL BUSINESS AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT: HOW CYBER ATTACKS THREATEN
BOTH

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Steve Chabot
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chabot, Luetkemeyer, Hanna,
Gibson, Brat, Hardy, Kelly, Velazquez, Clarke, Payne, Meng, and
Adams.
Chairman CHABOT. Good morning. The Committee will come to
order. I want to thank you, everyone, for being here today, and
we want to especially thank all of our witnesses for coming
here to share your insights and expertise with this Committee
on a very timely and important subject. In April of last year,
this Committee heard from a panel of industry experts about how
small businesses across the country are being threatened by a
growing number and variety of cyber attacks. Since then, the
threat to small businesses has only grown. Unfortunately, in
many ways, the Federal Government's efforts to guard against
this threat have not kept pace.
This morning, the Committee will look at the effects of
cyberterrorism and cyber attacks on both small businesses and
on the Federal Government. Small businesses face an increased
risk because they lack the resources to protect themselves
against sophisticated cyber attacks. We must make sure that the
Federal Government is part of the solution and not adding to
the problem. It is vital to both the economic and national
security of this nation that the sensitive data held by Federal
Government be safeguarded. The owners, employees, and customers
of America's 28 million small businesses need to have
confidence that their data is secure.
I think it is fair to say that confidence has been shaken
in recent years with the cyber attacks on the IRS, the State
Department, OPM, and even the White House. Between foreign
hackers from countries like China and Russia and domestic
identity thieves, the Federal Government has a target on its
back that seems to get larger by the day.
This is why recent findings by the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) on cybersecurity problems at
agencies like the IRS and the SBA, are so troubling to me and
many other members of this Committee. Just this month, the GAO
reported that the IRS paid $3.1 billion in fraudulent identity
theft, or IDT, tax returns. Three billion dollars for people
filing tax forms, for example, that were not the person who
actually should be getting the credit back.
When the GAO testified before this Committee earlier this
year, they told us that ``the SBA has not conducted regular
reviews of its IT investments.'' In these scenarios, American
small businesses and consumers were put at risk due to a lack
of diligence by Federal agencies. Just last week, I asked IRS
Commissioner Koskinen about the data breach at his agency last
May, which compromised the data of approximately 700,000
accounts. The commissioner informed our Committee that there
are 1 million cyber attacks at the IRS every day. Think about
that. One million cyber attacks every day at the IRS, people
trying to get into files for illicit, illegal purposes.
With over 3 billion different mobile applications and $340
billion in online commercial sales last year, business
transactions are moving away from the cash register and toward
the smartphone. It is great to be able to order your coffee or
pay your electric bill or reserve a car ride using your phone,
but with this convenience comes increased exposure for both the
customer and for businesses. In 2015, the average amount stolen
from small business bank accounts after a cyber attack was over
$32,000.
The fast pace of changes in technology means that hackers
are coming up with more sophisticated methods to go after
intellectual property, accounts, Social Security numbers, and
anything else that can be used for financial gain or a
competitive edge. With all of the uncertainty facing small
businesses in today's world of e-commerce, it will take
vigilance by all Federal agencies, and the watchful eye of this
Committee, to ensure the data of small businesses and
individual Americans remain secure. We must also look for new
and innovative ways to help small businesses protect their data
for this great and growing threat.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses here this
morning, and I will now yield to the Ranking Member for her
opening statement.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Technological innovations are vital to our modern economy,
and even more essential to the nation's small firms. In fact,
small businesses are some of the savviest users of technology
by using the internet to access new markets to grow and
diversify. Yet, for all the benefits technology brings to the
equation, it also creates additional challenges for business
owners, consumers, developers, and vendors. As more consumers
and businesses participate in E-commerce, protecting our
financial information from cyber attacks is critical.
Unfortunately, recent data breaches at federal agencies,
like the IRS and OPM, compromised financial data and personal
information of millions of people. Attacks like this have made
clear the weaknesses of the current cybersecurity landscape.
Last year's attack on the IRS exposed over 700,000 taxpayers'
accounts, and just last week we found out a former FDIC
employee breached the information of 44,000 FDIC customers.
These attacks strike close to home for many of us,
including small business owners. Keeping software and networks
up-to-date with the latest security is no longer enough. Cyber
threats come in many forms, but they are devastating to both
business owners and their customers. A single attack can wipe
out a small business, which is why cybercrime poses severe
problems for small businesses that are unprepared.
Sadly, some small companies fail to recognize the value of
cybersecurity as an investment until it is too late. On the
other hand, small firms that do recognize the importance of
such an investment often lack the resources to implement an
effective security system. Just as we must strengthen private
sector cybersecurity, we need to ensure Federal agencies take
precautions.
The testimony we will hear today will help us better
protect the nation's small businesses from growing cyber
threats. We will discuss the strengths and weaknesses of our
federal initiatives and what more must be done for private and
government data protection. In advance of the testimony, I want
to thank all the witnesses for both your participation and
insights to this very important topic.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
If Committee members have opening statements prepared, we
ask that they be submitted for the record.
I would like to take just a moment to explain our timing
and lighting system here. It is pretty simple. You get 5
minutes. The green light will come on there and you can talk
for 4 minutes. The yellow light will come on. That will let you
know you have a minute to wrap up. Then the red light will come
on after a total of 5 minutes, and if you could try and stay
within that, we would greatly appreciate it. The members hold
ourselves to the 5-minute rule, also, and we will ask you
questions then.
I would now like to introduce the panel. Our first witness
is Richard Snow, owner of Maine Indoor Karting in Scarborough,
Maine. Mr. Snow is here to provide his experience as a small
business owner whose company was the victim of a cyber attack.
Our second witness is Kevin Dunn, technical vice president
of NCC Group in Austin, Texas. He has over 14 years of
experience as a professional security consultant.
And our third witness today is Nicholas Oldham, counsel at
King and Spalding in Washington, D.C. In his current role, Mr.
Oldham assists clients with cybersecurity and risk management,
data privacy, incident response, and internal government
investigations. We welcome you all here today.
I would now like to yield to the Ranking Member to
introduce the final witness.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure
to introduce Mr. Stephen Mankowski, the national tax chair and
national secretary for the National Conference of CPA
Practitioners. He is also a partner at EP Caine and Associates
CPA, LLC, where he advises individuals and small businesses on
issues related to accounting, taxation, business consulting,
and litigation support services. Welcome.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Snow. You are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF RICHARD SNOW, OWNER, MAINE INDOOR KARTING; KEVIN
DUNN, TECHNICAL VICE PRESIDENT, NCC GROUP; NICHOLAS OLDHAM,
COUNSEL, KING AND SPALDING LLP; STEPHEN F. MANKOWSKI, CPA,
NATIONAL TAX CHAIR, NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF CPA PRACTITIONERS,
NATIONAL SECRETARY, NCCPAP, PARTNER AT EP CAINE AND ASSOCIATES
CPA, LLC

STATEMENT OF RICHARD SNOW

Mr. SNOW. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Chabot, Ranking
Member Velazquez, and members of the House Small Business
Committee for inviting me to testify today on the current state
of cybersecurity for small companies and how phishing scams
have impacted my own small business.
My name is Rick Snow, and I am the owner of Maine Indoor
Karting, located in Scarborough, Maine. We are an indoor
entertainment venue with a go-kart track, mini golf course,
arcade, and cafe. We have about 20 employees.
I am pleased to be here representing the National Small
Business Association, where I currently serve as a Board of
Trustee member and Chair of the Environmental and Regulatory
Affairs Committee.
NSBA is the Nation's oldest small business advocacy
organization with over 65,000 members representing every sector
and industry of the U.S. economy. NSBA is a staunchly
nonpartisan organization devoted solely to representing the
interests of small businesses which provide almost half of all
private sector jobs to the economy.
Several data breaches within the Federal Government,
including OPM, IRS, and DOD make it clear the government
struggles to combat cyber attacks. If the government cannot
protect its networks and data from cyber attacks with almost
unlimited resources at its disposal, how can we expect
America's small businesses to do so? Forty-two percent of NSBA
members surveyed indicated that they have been the victim of
cyber attack. In almost half of those attacks there was an
interruption in service.
I was the victim of a phishing attack, and I have also had
my credit card stolen three times. When I was phished, I
received an email from my bank that there had been a suspicious
attempt to gain access to my account. The email urged me to
immediately log in to my account and confirm that it was, in
fact, an unauthorized attempt. The link provided in the email
looked identical to the log-in page of my bank. Frantic that
there had been a breach, I logged in, and as soon as I typed my
password, I realized what had happened. I raced to the local
branch of my bank to set up a new account which took several
hours. It took about a week to get the new checks and debit
cards for the new account to us. Since we used the cards and
checks for all our bills and local purchases for our business,
I had to either use our company line of credit or my own credit
cards. This is not unusual as many small business owners often
need to use their personal credit cards to support their
business, especially during difficult times.
The financial cost to my business paled in comparison to
the delays and disruptions. My wife, who runs the day-to-day
operations of our business, and her work were limited because
she spent the week trying to update all of the vendors with the
new account information.
According to the NSBA 2015 Year-End Economic Report, in 10
percent of cyber attacks, a bank account was improperly
assessed. I was one of those. Two weeks after the initial
phishing attack, I logged into our new account late Friday
evening, and to my horror, found that my balance was zero. It
was payday and I was terrified that the paychecks that were
issued that day would not clear. We are supporting a number of
families, many of which live paycheck to paycheck and could not
have made it without that particular payday. I quickly
discovered that three wire transfers were made that night to
three different bank accounts around the country totaling
$15,000.
This is an ongoing threat of internet age, and it will
evolve as long as the internet continues to facilitate commerce
in the global economy. It is unlikely that there will be one
solution.
I am sorry. I missed a page. So, excuse me. Sorry.
After a night of no sleep, I had to be at the bank first
thing Saturday morning. I was lucky and was able to stop the
wire transfers. I had to then spend another day away from work
opening another account and going through the process of
getting all my new cards and ordering new checks. My poor wife
had to spend another week updating vendors. She spent the
better part of 2 weeks away from her normal duties because of
this phishing incident.
My bank told me that this was a standard phishing loss and
that I was lucky that I discovered it before the 48 hours had
lapsed so no money was actually stolen. My business accounts
were not protected against theft the way that my personal
accounts would be, so the losses would have been on my
business. This attack could have ended my business if I had not
been able to recover the money. Most small businesses do not
have a significant cushion to absorb these type of losses, and
we are no different. Losing thousands of dollars during a tough
time in the economy can make a significant different for me, my
business, and my employees.
As small businesses become increasingly dependent on the
internet, they become a larger target for cybercriminals. These
threats are very real and immediate. In fact, 94 percent of
small business owners indicate they are concerned about being
targeted by cyber attacks. For many small businesses, a
cybersecurity incident could lead to an entire network being
down for many days until the full extent of the problem is
known and then fixed.
This is an ongoing threat of the internet age and it will
evolve as long as the internet continues to facilitate commerce
at the global economy. It is unlikely that there will be one
solution to stop the attacks. In fact, slowing and preventing
these attacks will most likely require an ongoing process to
identify new threats, vulnerabilities, and ultimately,
solutions. I urge Congress and this Committee to always bear in
mind the unique challenges that small businesses face and
continue to include the small business community in that
process.
Thank you for allowing me to testify before the Committee
today, and I would be happy to answer any questions that you
might have for me.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you, Mr. Snow, for your testimony
today. What a scary situation. Thank you.
Mr. Dunn, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN DUNN

Mr. DUNN. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and other esteemed members of the Committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Kevin Dunn, Technical Vice President for NCC
Group. For the last 15 years, I have dedicated my career to
carrying out cybersecurity attacks against private companies
and government organizations. I am not a criminal; I am a
penetration tester. For our actions in this highly specialized
field, my colleagues and I determine ways to break into
organizations via cyber and physical means. Specifically, we
are hired to identify vulnerabilities that allow a company's
security to be compromised. This exercise subsequently allows
us to provide customized advice to our clients, detailing the
short- and long-term actions they should take to reduce their
susceptibility to attack.
My testimony today will focus on four areas: the strengths
and weaknesses of cybersecurity training, increasing security
when using cloud service providers, the potential impact of
small business security on the government, and the benefits of
a data-driven risk model.
To evaluate the state of high level cybersecurity training
designed for small businesses, I would like to explore two
examples: training provided by the U.S. Small Business
Administration and training provided by the Federal
Communications Commission. Through these trainings, small
businesses are able to gain awareness of important
cybersecurity threats such as the dangers associated with
phishing emails, malicious websites, malware, ransomware, and
the typical motivations of attackers. This information provides
an ample start for educating small businesses in a general
awareness capacity and extends to providing cybersecurity tips
for the major areas of concern. However, the training and
guidelines are high level in nature and lack the depth of
information needed to convert directly into hands-on actions.
In the world of small business IT support where efforts are
typically coordinated by owner-operators, this information may
not be comprehensive enough to make a worthwhile difference
beyond providing general education.
Many small businesses use cloud service providers to
implement important services like email, file storage, and data
backup. This often unburdens the IT administration overhead
from small business owner-operators or small businesses with a
one- or two-person IT team. The use of third-party cloud
service providers is typically a positive security move for
small businesses. The attention to security from the major
providers in this space affords a number of features that
greatly increase the security of data for a small business.
However, it should be noted that there are additional
features that should be enabled to make attacks harder for
adversaries. These features are often not enabled by default.
Chief among these is the use of multifactor authentication. The
majority of major online services now support the use of
multifactor authentication using at least SMS messages to a
cell phone as a means of out-of-band authentication. But
despite this inexpensive option, it is often overlooked by
organizations that use cloud services or internet services,
relying instead on single factor authentication in the form of
user names and passwords.
The impact of a small business on the government should be
considered in at least two key ways. The first concerns the
direct and indirect connectivity between a small business and a
government network. The second concerns small businesses in the
government supply chain. A small business with a direct
connection to a government network is likely a rare occurrence,
but in such a scenario, if the small business is compromised
sufficiently, an attacker's ability to traverse to a government
network could be a simple task. However, examples of indirect
connectivity are more common and are typically databased in
nature. When government users consume the services of a small
business, their user names, passwords, personal information,
and other data could be used in a subsequent attack against
government systems if extracted from a compromised small
business system. Of course, the reverse is true as well.
The second area to consider is when a small business is in
some way part of the supply chain to a government department or
agency. The most typical examples of this are where a small
business develops software or hardware that is subsequently
installed on government networks.
Finally, a good way to think about security and a means to
ensure that the approaches chosen to secure your organization
are fit for purpose is to think first about the data you care
about. Considering the data first is an excellent approach and
one that is advised in the FCC's small business cyber plan at
all. However, too few organizations actually consider their
data or subsequently plan security around the value of
different data types. Even fewer organizations consider what
will happen when, not if, an attacker gains access to their
data. Using a data-centric risk management model would allow
small businesses to focus their security attention where they
need it most.
Thank you again for this opportunity to address this
Committee. I will be happy to answer any questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Oldham, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NICHOLAS OLDHAM

Mr. OLDHAM. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and members of
this Committee, thank you for allowing me the opportunity to
appear before you today.
I have been involved in cyber issues for many years as a
former Federal prosecutor at the U.S. Department of Justice,
and now as an attorney at King and Spalding. In my practice, I
counsel clients, both large and small, on cybersecurity risk
management. Our interconnectivity is growing at an astonishing
rate. This interconnectivity, especially the internet of
things, holds tremendous promise for consumers and companies.
It also creates new challenges in terms of cybersecurity
because anything connected to the internet can be hacked.
Cyber attacks cost businesses billions of dollars every
year as a result. Where do small businesses fit into this
landscape? The interconnected world lets small businesses
develop new products and services and compete across the globe,
but with cybersecurity, small businesses often get burned at
both ends. They are less likely to have the resources to
prevent breaches, and also may have fewer resources to respond
to those breaches. It can be difficult for small businesses to
find the right information and training, and the cost of
mitigation measures in response can significantly impact a
small business' bottom line.
As a lawyer, I do not manage corporate networks. I do not
conduct vulnerability testing. Rather, I believe that
cybersecurity is as much a people and a process issue as it is
a technical issue. I focus on the people and process side of
the equation, addressing the legal and business cybersecurity
risks faced by companies. I also help manage companies comply
with their legal obligations, interact with various regulators,
and respond to regulatory enforcement actions and litigation.
These legal and business costs, including compliance costs,
drain on employee morale, and time and reputational damage can
be significant.
There are at least three ways the government can play a
role in lowering these costs. First, by addressing the
cybersecurity education gap. When weighing the costs and
benefits of enhancing their cybersecurity, companies may find
that it is far more expensive to not implement basic security
measures. The problem here is that there is a cybersecurity
education gap. Small businesses may not find the information
they need to properly assess and mitigate these costs.
Bridging this education gap can be difficult for small
businesses, especially those that lack the resources to hire
specialized employees or cybersecurity experts. Even when
information is available online, it is often difficult to find,
rarely updated, and often inadequate.
In many ways, cyber threats have analogs to traditional
crime. In the traditional crime scenarios, small businesses
would likely call the local police department for best
practices in preventing or responding to crime. In the digital
crime scenarios, there is no one logical place to call. The
government may have a role in bridging the cybersecurity
education gap by encouraging the development of cybersecurity
education resources and connecting them to those who need them
in the private sector.
Second, many of the cybersecurity initiatives receiving the
most attention are not necessarily tailored to small
businesses. For example, the NIST cybersecurity framework is
emerging as a leader, which is a promising development. This
could simplify the landscape for small and large businesses
alike. The current iteration of the NIST framework, however, is
not particularly geared towards small businesses. It can be
difficult and expensive to understand and implement regardless
of business size, and until it is better tailored to small
businesses, for some of them it may just be one more program
that they cannot afford to keep up with.
Perhaps more importantly, a small business might become
subject to a cybersecurity framework by virtue of its
contractual relationships. In this case, the small business
might inadvertently expose itself to significant liabilities
and cyber risks. While good cyber hygiene is important, to
improve the NIST framework and similar programs and policies,
the government should make a serious effort to increase the
involvement of small business owners in all phases of the
legislative and rulemaking process.
Third, the current regulatory regime for cybersecurity
presents additional difficulties for small businesses who will
inevitably struggle to determine both what cybersecurity
measures they are required to meet, and when a breach or attack
does occur, what procedures the law requires them to follow.
There are currently 51 different State or territory data breach
notification laws and many of them are inconsistent with each
other. I have seen a growing number of Federal agencies also
stepping into this space.
In short, there is a need to clarify and simplify what
companies must do. Because of the complicated and evolving
landscape, the on-the-ground expertise of the private sector
must necessarily play an important role in these efforts.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Mankowski, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN F. MANKOWSKI

Mr. MANKOWSKI. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today.
My name is Stephen Mankowski, a partner with EP Caine and
Associates, the Executive Vice President of NCCPAP, the
National Conference of CPA Practitioners, and a member of the
AICPA.
NCCPAP has been at the forefront of identity theft issues
through our advocacy and testimony at prior hearings dealing
with ID theft. NCCPAP members have helped guide numerous
clients who have been victims of identity theft.
ID theft has been growing exponentially for years. It seems
that no matter what controls are put in place, criminals have
better and more focused resources to circumvent these
safeguards.
The IRS reminds practitioners that they must be vigilant
with their system integrity. Criminals are aware that the prize
for breaching tax practitioner systems could yield not only
names and Social Security numbers, but also several years of
earnings, as well as bank information and dates of birth. Two
Midwestern firms were compromised this tax season and had
fraudulent returns submitted by utilizing their Electronic
Filing Identification Number or EFIN.
While firms are required to obtain an EFIN from the IRS to
electronically file tax returns, paid preparers are required to
use a Practitioner Tax Identification Number or PTIN. Firm
information, including their Employer Identification Number,
however, still appears on their tax return. Given the risk of
firm ID theft, why has the IRS not adopted a firm PTIN,
something that NCCPAP strongly recommends.
Over the past year, as noted by the other panelists, the
IRS has had multiple system breaches. First, the IRS online
transcript program, Get Transcript, was compromised in May
2015. The number of accounts affected now exceeds 700,000. The
second breach was related to the IP PIN retrieval tool that was
contained on the IRS website and is more troubling. The
taxpayers who have IP PINs have already been victims of tax
refund fraud and obtained the six-digit IP PIN to prevent
further unauthorized account access or tax filings. This tool
had been used using the same interface as Get Transcript but
had remained available to the public, and unfortunately, those
less scrupulous.
Social Security uses a banking prenote to verify the
accuracy of the recipient's banking information prior to the
initial payment. Unfortunately, the IRS refund system does not
include prenote account verification. The implementation of a
prenote system could result in a significant reduction of the
annual $3.1 billion misappropriation of government funds.
While it is easy to understand that taxpayers want to
receive their refunds as quickly as possible, one must ask a
simple question: Is paying a tax refund in 7 to 10 days
prudent? A recent survey by Princeton Research Group noted that
22 percent of taxpayers surveyed would be willing to wait up to
6 to 8 weeks to receive their refund if they knew it would
combat identity theft.
Taxpayers are urged to protect their personal data, but
with widespread internet usage, online shopping, and criminals
just waiting to pounce on unsuspecting victims, ID theft
continues to grow. Individuals and businesses remain the target
of cyber attacks and must remain cautious when opening emails
with attachments, visiting web pages, or simply paying for the
family groceries. Taxpayers often do not realize they have been
a victim of tax-related ID theft until their electronically
filed tax return gets rejected. Once a taxpayer has been
victimized, they expect to obtain an IP PIN from the IRS, and
starting in January 2017, they automatically will.
In conclusion, NCCPAP feels that using the prenote
technology that already exists and is used throughout the
financial industry would allow taxpayers to continue receiving
their refunds promptly while reducing refund fraud.
Further, NCCPAP urges Congress to pass legislation to
provide the IRS the necessary authority to regulate all tax
preparers and require paid preparers to meet minimum standards.
Currently, only CPAs, EAs, and attorneys are subject to the
requirements of IRC Circular 230.
Finally, NCCPAP calls on Congress to provide the necessary
funding for the IRS to continually modernize and upgrade their
systems to minimize and eliminate data security breaches. The
first step would be Congress reauthorizing streamline critical
pay authority to allow the IRS to secure top IT talent without
a 3- to 6-month waiting period.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony,
and I welcome your questions.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much, and we appreciate the
testimony of all the witnesses here this morning. It was
excellent.
Mr. Snow, first, let me apologize to you for having to
return a call there before your testimony. I apologize for
that, but I had your written statement ahead of time, so I am
prepared.
You experienced a worst-case scenario for a small business
cyber theft. What advice would you give to others who are put
in the same or a similar situation?
Mr. SNOW. The first thing I would do is to ensure that when
you look at the website at the top, web ID, that there is a
https ID, and that would have prevented that from happening. I
just learned that in that process. But it would be very
difficult to stop someone from just accessing the way it was
with me because it was an identical website to the bank
website. The login looked identical. In fact, there was no
difference.
What was more disconcerting to me was the fact that they
stole the new account number, and to this day, no one
understands how that happened; how they were able to access a
brand new account opened with all that information and move
money out of the new account, not the old account.
Chairman CHABOT. How long did it take you to straighten all
this out?
Mr. SNOW. The whole process was about a month because, the
first time we had to rush everything because they have to print
new checks and new credit cards and everything, so it was about
a week and a half. Then when we discovered the loss, it was 2
weeks later. Then we had another week and a half or so of
additional time to go through that whole process again.
Chairman CHABOT. Mr. Dunn, in your testimony, you provided
the example of using text message authentication as an
inexpensive use of multifactor authentication. Are there other
inexpensive steps the Federal Government or small businesses
could make in order to verify accounts?
Mr. DUNN. Yes. I think that you can use email. There are a
number of channels that you can use. The situation really is
that when you rely on just one thing, in perhaps this case as
well, just a username and password, that that is a single point
of failure. The point is to have more than one authenticating
factor. A number of things could do that so long as it is out
of band from the process.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Oldham, protecting the privacy and civil liberties of
Americans is obviously an important component of cybersecurity
discussions. What effort is the private sector making to
protect consumers in this area?
Mr. OLDHAM. One of the key goals is transparency,
communicating to consumers what information is being collected
and how is it being used. That has become even more important
as the ecosystem is growing so that everything is connected,
multiple third parties and the like, and the third party would
include, for instance, sharing information with the government.
I think the most critical step the private sector is taking is
ensuring that there is this transparency.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Mankowski, in your testimony, you gave a firsthand
account of how a tax preparer dealt with confusion and delays
with the IRS in response to a data breach. What would you
recommend to the IRS for future responses to a tax preparer
once a breach has been confirmed?
Mr. MANKOWSKI. That is a very good question, Mr. Chairman.
What I would recommend, first of all, is that I have reached
out to my contacts that I deal with through some of my
committees at the IRS, and it is being addressed tomorrow at a
monthly meeting. But in addition, I would advise practitioners
to know who their local stakeholder liaisons are so they have
an area that they could reach out to so that they can start the
process of communicating with the IRS when they suspect there
may be a breach, not once they actually confirm. Because during
that period of time, if their EFIN was being used improperly,
the IRS could have stepped in very quickly, disabled their
EFIN, and could have potentially stopped fraudulent returns
from being processed.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. Let me give you another
question. You mentioned a recent audit where 6 of 13 e-filing
sites failed to take steps to protect consumers from fraudulent
and malicious emails. What recommendations would you offer
these sites in order to improve their cybersecurity?
Mr. MANKOWSKI. That is also a very interesting question. I
believe that is one that Mr. Dunn could probably help with as
far as the cybersecurity aspect. But they would certainly need
to ensure that as they are going through their systems that
they are making sure that any incoming emails are being
checked. There has been widespread spoofing of calls as well as
emails coming in to companies that are purporting themselves to
be high-level individuals within a company asking for data that
they would normally be asking for, such as W-2s and such, that
everything looks to be coming from that individual, everything
looks the same, just the email address may be slightly or just
something a little bit off. Companies really need to be
vigilant as to looking at who emails are coming in from, and if
they are not sure if it is legitimate or not, they should pick
up the phone and call the person who they are actually getting
this request from. Simply responding to that email, you are
responding back to the criminal. Of course, they are going to
say, oh, yeah, I am so-and-so, and I need to get this
information to finalize a report for the board. They are
further spoofing. They just need to be careful when they are
responding, and as Mr. Snow had mentioned, making sure that any
websites they go into do have the https that would mean that it
is a secured website.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much.
Mr. Dunn, I would follow Mr. Mankowski's advice, except
that I am out of time, and I like to hold myself to the same
rules I do everybody else. So I will yield back my time, and
the gentlelady, the Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mankowski, last week we had the Commissioner of the IRS
here testify before our committee, and he talked about the
Cybersecurity Summit between the IRS and tax practitioners.
From the industry perspective, do you believe this partnership
is effective at preventing tax fraud?
Mr. MANKOWSKI. I think it is a very good first step, and
they have already shown that it has been successful. They have
met with, and they have included initially people from State
associations, State government, as well as the banking and
software community, to work on trying to prevent tax returns at
the onset when they are being processed into the IRS system.
They have gone further and expanded their focus now to starting
including practitioners into their groups, and they are
estimating that last year, with the first year of their summit,
they prevented in excess of 3 million fraudulent returns from
getting into the system. Now they just need to understand that
returns are, unfortunately, getting through the filters, so now
they need to keep working on filters during the processing and
primarily protecting the refunds because that is taxpayer
dollars, as well as government funds, that are being
misappropriated.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Snow, I am concerned that typically, small business
owners view an investment as a way to increase revenues, yet,
with cybersecurity they are expected to make an investment in
order to prevent revenue losses. So is it often hard to
persuade small firms to spend money without seeing an immediate
return? What needs to be done to bridge this gap?
Mr. SNOW. I think the number one issue that we have as a
small business is that every single thing leads to the bottom
line. Every decision you make adds a cost. In our case we have
added insurance, cybersecurity insurance, to our overall cost.
The unfortunate part of that is that the deductible is very
high. It is a $5,000 deductible. For me, I am out that
immediately. That is the same as my burglary insurance as well.
When we have someone break into our building, which happened a
few months ago and they destroyed our security system, it cost
us $5,000, which is also our deductible. We are out that money.
That happened to be all the revenues that we had for that
particular month. So it really eats into our bottom line. It is
very expensive.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Dunn, in your estimation, how much would
it cost a company, a small company, one with fewer than 250
employees, to become cyber safe?
Mr. DUNN. I think it is very hard to provide that
estimation because it really depends on the data that they
hold, the types of inputs and communication channels they have.
We could be talking about a very simple setup or we could be
talking about a very complicated setup. It is true that the
cybersecurity industry has a certain price point that currently
is very difficult for small business owners to take part in.
Certainly, we are probably talking thousands of dollars in
order to get consultative help.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Mr. Oldham, who do you think is best situated to handle
cybersecurity threats, the federal government or private
industry? Or do you think some sort of balanced public-private
partnership is needed to properly address cybersecurity needs?
Mr. OLDHAM. I think the balanced public-private partnership
is the key. This industry is evolving so rapidly, and when the
government gets involved, it becomes very static. I think it is
important to make sure the private sector has a huge input, and
that is why I think something like in this framework is a great
start because it is voluntary. It attempts to coalesce the best
standards that are out there, but it is also something that has
a recognition that it needs to evolve over time. My worry is
tipping the scale to one side or the other will cause the
current industry to stagnate more.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. What type of recommendations would you offer
for encouraging that type of partnership?
Mr. OLDHAM. Number one, supporting NIST's efforts and what
they are doing. Right now, NIST has put out a framework. It has
had some widespread success but also quite a bit of criticism
from industry. They held a workshop last month where they heard
from several sectors of the industry, including small business,
that it is not really approachable and useful. Just as a big
picture, the NIST framework was designed for critical
infrastructure, so it is not approachable for small businesses,
ensuring that the NIST is putting the appropriate emphasis on
adapting itself to particular market sizes and industries.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you.
Ms. VELAZQUEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Gibson,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. GIBSON. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity here today to hear from the panelists' illuminating
testimony provided.
Mr. Snow, I want to begin with you, just a point of
clarification. You, in telling us about what had happened to
you, you had made the comment that, fortunately, within 48
hours you were able to take action. What was implied in your
statement is we have a differentiation between business and
personal liability or accounts. I am looking for clarification.
Is there some dimension of FDIC that protects people? Why is it
different? If you could just help me understand that, number
one.
Mr. SNOW. Number one, I do not know the exact
ramifications. My understanding was because it was a wire
transfer there is a 48-hour time that it runs. If you can stop
it within that timeframe, the money does not actually transfer
or they can call it back, the bank, with the interbank
processes.
Mr. GIBSON. Do any other panelists know the answer for
that? Why is it that business does not seem to have the same
protection as an individual? One of my constituents out there,
if somebody was to do a phishing expedition on them and they
would be under similar circumstances, I am curious if anybody
knows the answer to that.
Okay, for the Committee, I think that is something probably
worth checking into. A concerning situation. I am glad it
worked out okay for you there.
Then Mr. Oldham--even though I know that it was Mr. Snow--
it was very burdensome and onerous on your bottom line based on
you had to divert resources. Mr. Oldham, in one of your
comments you talked about that the Federal Government might
want to look at clarification or clarity in terms of what
companies must do when these circumstances happen, reporting
requirements and the like. What is your understanding of what
the SBA requires now with regard to--or the United States
Government--in terms of a protocol when a company faces an
attack?
Mr. OLDHAM. I am not aware of anything from the SBA, but
the notification requirement at large are a hodge-podge. If it
involves financial information, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
would require notification. If it is healthcare information,
regulations under HIPAA would require notification. Each of the
State data breach laws have different definitions, and I think
one of the key concerns, especially if you are a small business
and you may have information involving people from multiple
jurisdictions or multiple types of information, there is an
enormous cost of just figuring out what you have to do at the
beginning.
Mr. GIBSON. I appreciate that comment. In fact, it mirrors
some of my experiences in the U.S. military. I think that is
also worthwhile for the Committee to capture that. Maybe we
should consider a clearinghouse requirement that really
socializes, if you will, what companies must do under these
circumstances.
Finally, for the panel, I would love to hear your insights
on this question, that with regard to science and technology,
research and development, sort of blue sky, if you will, what
do you think, based on your experiences, would be a worthwhile
endeavor to address the issue of cyber attack at large--on
businesses, on people, on government--on where you think we
should put emphasis on for science and technology, research and
development, to protect?
Mr. DUNN. I think in most cases, every incident I have ever
been involved with, the visibility of what is actually
happening from a data and packet level is never where it needs
to be. I would definitely like to see strides in that
direction, some way of increasing the ability for us to
understand from a network and data perspective what has
happened in a given scenario.
Mr. GIBSON. Thank you.
Mr. SNOW. I think the most frustrating thing for me was to
realize that someone at the receiving end of that money was
going to show up and get that money, and that there was no
action taken. On my private credit card thefts, purchases were
actually made. The merchant was out of that merchandise.
Obviously, they got the money for that merchandise, but we
absorb it as all of the consumers in the overall doing
business. There is no authority trying to stop these people,
that I know of, trying not catch these people who are making
these purchases with fraudulent credit cards or other things.
That is the frustration that I have. I know that I can call my
local police when they break into my building. If I walk into a
bank and demand money, the FBI will be chasing me forever. But
in this case, there is really no action that is done beyond
what we had to do as individual business owners.
Mr. GIBSON. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I see my time has
expired. I wonder if maybe science and technology, research and
development into biometrics, is a possibility as a surety for
any kind of transaction is worth our endeavors. But I thank the
Chairman for the opportunity.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
is expired.
The gentlewoman from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is the
Ranking Member of the Investigations, Oversight, and
Regulations Subcommittee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Ranking Member
Velazquez, for hosting this hearing.
Some of you have mentioned the importance of education and
training in cybersecurity. I am long-time educator and very
interested in what we can do there.
The Federal Government is involved in this in a number of
ways. For example, last year, the Obama Administration
announced the New Cybersecurity Consortium consisting of 13
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, HBCUs, two
national labs, and a K-12 school district. The goal is to
create a sustainable pipeline of students focused on
cybersecurity. My question to any of you, is the Federal
Government doing enough to provide the kinds of expertise that
small businesses need to ensure their cybersecurity? If you
could speak to maybe some relationships between educating
students beyond this point.
Mr. MANKOWSKI. Ms. Adams, I will start the discussion. I
believe that from a tax standpoint, the amount of education
really starts from the government, from the IRS. As
practitioners, we are continually discussing this with our
clients that the IRS, with the different phishing phone calls
and the email scams, that the IRS currently is not phone
calling or emailing people. If they get any of these calls,
they should hang up. If they get a email that says it is from
the IRS, that they have an extra refund, just delete it,
because they are not going to be authentic. But every day
during tax season, it seemed my office was getting a phone call
from someone who received a phone call that they were getting
ready to get arrested. My partner in my firm had gotten a
similar phone call. We actually had a little bit of fun with
the people. We kind of strung them along for a little bit. But
as times are changing, with the rules that were passed recently
with collections within the IRS, some of that, as the
collections get outsourced, the companies that are going to be
taking over will be calling and could potentially be emailing
our clients. It is going to create an even greater disparity of
the education because what we have been telling our clients for
years, come whatever point that the IRS is able to implement
that process, everything we have worked on and gained with our
clients over the last few years will pretty much be thrown out
if they start getting phone calls from a collection for old tax
balances. Thank you.
Ms. ADAMS. Mr. Oldham?
Mr. OLDHAM. I think there are two separate issues; both are
very important. One is educating students as they come up about
cybersecurity. That is critical. Just like educating people how
to balance their checkbook to keep good financial sense,
teaching people good cyber hygiene is going to be imperative
for minimizing the cyber threats in the future.
Today, educating small businesses can be more challenging
because they have not had the years of education, such as a
secondary student. However, the biggest issue that I see is
that there is not a lot of helpful information out there that
is practical and granular for small businesses. In fact, in
preparation for my testimony today, I searched around the
internet looking for small business guides and was surprised
that in many locations, including on government websites, the
links were broken, the guides were out of date, or the guides
were so high level that I do not know how an owner-operator
without IT security background would be able to implement
security measures based on those guides.
Ms. ADAMS. Okay. Well, let me move on to another question.
Online marketplaces, such as eBay, have given small businesses
greater access to suppliers and customers abroad. A McKinsey
Global Institute study found that 97 percent of U.S. small- to
medium-size businesses on eBay engage on export to other
countries. My question is, do these marketplaces and
international transactions expose small businesses to greater
cybersecurity risk?
Mr. Dunn, if you want to answer that?
Mr. DUNN. I think the websites themselves and the online
marketplaces do have to be vetted, do have to be verified to
understand if they have any security flaws because, having a
security flaw in a marketplace like that will expose the vendor
and the small business to potential attacks. Understanding if
there are any flaws in that marketplace is really critical.
Ms. ADAMS. Quickly, Mr. Dunn, you talked about the use of
cloud computing. What is the best way that small businesses
could benefit from using cloud providers to improve their
security?
Mr. DUNN. I think not doing conventional IT in-house is a
good move. Using email and file storage from a cloud service
provider will be beneficial because it is not on premises, and
typically, the major providers of those services are doing a
lot in security and more than a small business could do.
Ms. ADAMS. Thank you. I am out of time, Mr. Chair. I yield
back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentlelady yields
back.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Kelly, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. KELLY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank each of you
witnesses for your insight here today.
First of all, I would like to echo what the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Gibson said. I think it is important for us as a
Committee to find out if there are different rules for persons
and small businesses and then large corporations to make sure
that we are protecting each of those in an appropriate manner.
Second, Mr. Snow, it is a travesty what happened to you,
but that story is repeated over and over again across this
nation. As a former district attorney, I can tell you that
there is a lot of room that we can improve in this. Do you have
any specific areas that you think the Small Business Committee
or the Small Business Administration can help to either educate
or inform the general public and small business users that we
can take forward?
Mr. SNOW. Thank you. I believe that education is probably
the key. Obviously, cost is another big concern for every small
business. When you start a business, capital is usually at a
premium, and when you sit down, in my case, I have close to
70,000 members who come in and race at my track throughout the
time that we have been open. I have their data, and it is in a
server that I have to protect. That is a concern. My software
is provided by a Belgium-based software company, so I have to
have access to them. They come in at night to update and
upgrade the system on a regular basis. In an international
marketplace that we are in, I think education is very important
so that the small businesses understand. The other issue is the
liability is significant, and a lot of small businesses do not
understand that. When I sat down with my insurance agent to
renew our insurance, that was one of the questions I asked, and
I was amazed, number one, at the cost to get the coverage, but
number two, how few businesses actually apply and get that
coverage. It can be very expensive for a small business.
Mr. KELLY. Mr. Oldham, going back, as I said, first of all,
thank you for your service as a prosecutor. I think they are
some of the most important people enforcing this law, and being
a former one, I am obviously biased in that. But I thank you
for your service. As a former district attorney, I was on the
local level or I was on the State level, and you as a Federal
prosecutor. Quite commonly what I saw is that, number one, when
small businesses or individuals are victimized, they do not
know who, how, what they need to report.
The second thing that I saw is quite often the
jurisdictions are not clear. It is not clear where it is coming
from, and they do not inform other jurisdictions, so they do
not know if it is Federal, they do not know if it is State,
they do not know if it is county, they do not know if it is the
next State over. It is outside the jurisdiction of this
hearing, but I think it is important that we inform law
enforcement on how to deal with this and small businesses on
how to inform law enforcement so there is a database that we
can use to stop this. Do you have any ideas in that area?
Mr. OLDHAM. I would say generally the jurisdiction issue is
a major issue in prosecuting cyber crime cases. The resources
are not there at the local level and it is hard to chase
criminal information that is as wide as the web and tracks lead
everywhere in the world.
I think, going back to the education point from earlier,
training local enforcement who are going to get the calls from
businesses that have been breached on who to report to, who is
the right person in the Federal Government who can help, or
where is this database, as you mentioned, would be incredibly
helpful to make sure the information is not just coming in for
prosecution, but also going out to help the small businesses
around the country.
Mr. KELLY. On that same line, quite often, these people who
take advantage of small businesses or individuals move from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and there is not any database
that gets us ahead of the curve. Quite commonly, they use the
same scheme. From Mississippi, they will move to Alabama, they
will move to Tennessee, they will move to New York City, but
they continue to do that. Are you aware of any Federal database
which keeps up with ongoing scams, especially those that are
quite frequently the same group or persons or organizations
that are doing the scams?
Mr. OLDHAM. I am not. In my role now in advising private
companies, I know we call the local law enforcement, usually at
the Federal level, to report information, and we rely on them
to come back to us with whatever information. But not with a
lot of visibility of what is going on behind the scenes.
Mr. KELLY. Are you aware of any program, and this is for
any of you, from the SBA or from anyone else that keeps people
informed of what the current scams are and the current phishing
expeditions and those things? Because quite frequently, people
fall victim to something that has been used over and over. Is
there anything that keeps people informed where they can go to
one source and see that?
Mr. MANKOWSKI. I know that the IRS does release what they
consider to be their ``Dirty Dozen,'' which are the top tax
frauds that they are suspecting or they are seeing in any given
year. What I have seen, especially with a lot of the phishing
and the phone calls, is that initially, some of the local news
stations were not all that keen on picking up on it, I believe
until they started to realize that even some of the people, the
top people within the IRS were getting the same phone calls as
you and I may be getting, saying that they are about ready to
get arrested or your wife is getting arrested or the sheriff is
coming to take your car. Now the news stations are broadcasting
that the IRS does not make the phone calls. They are getting
the word out, which is good, because by getting it out on the
news on that end, they are not using any of the budget that is
constrained within the IRS at this time.
Chairman CHABOT. The gentleman's time is expired. Thank
you.
The gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. PAYNE. Thank you to the Chairman and to the Ranking
Member. I appreciate the opportunity to be here, and to all the
witnesses, thank you.
I want to ask, would it make sense to coordinate
cybersecurity efforts that are focused on small businesses
through the SBA? My thought is that if business owners are more
informed of computer security techniques and products to secure
their networks, we may be able to help curtail some of these
cyber attacks. Does that make sense?
Mr. DUNN. Yes, I think so. I think having coordination and
a place where really, truly, detailed information about threats
and what to do about them is put at and made available to small
businesses, would be excellent.
Mr. MANKOWSKI. Just as a comment on that as well, one of
the areas as far as coming out with too much specifics as to
what you need to do, you are then laying out the playing field
for what the criminals need to do to get around your system.
That was evident, 2 years ago when the IRS released that no
more than three refunds in a calendar year can go into a
specific bank account. Through a lot of reverse engineering,
they found out that if you start putting a zero before the
account number and a second number and a third zero, it was
tricking the IRS systems and the banks were disregarding it. It
is nice to have the education, but they need to be aware that
too much specifics as to what you are doing or what you need to
do, you are laying out a simple playing field for the bad guys
to just circumvent.
Mr. OLDHAM. I think consolidating information in a place
like the SBA would be very helpful. Mr. Dunn had mentioned the
FCC planning tool earlier, which is a good start, but that is
an agency that has jurisdiction over telecommunication
companies. I do not think a small retailer or other companies
of that nature would be going to the FCC's website. I think you
want to be able to have those resources in a place that folks
are willing to call or to search for.
Mr. PAYNE. Sure. I think it would be a natural depository
of information. They are already dealing with the agency, so
that is something that might make sense.
Unfortunately, even when consumers receive notification of
a security breach, many of them do nothing about it or just do
not know what to do and the next steps to remedy the breach.
What should they do to protect themselves from increased risk
of identity theft?
Mr. SNOW. I have got a number of levels of security systems
that I have put in place. Number one, I have an external server
provider that has a junk mail box. So anything that does not
look accurate or looks not quite right, it goes directly into
the junk mail. I have an internal system within my network in
the building that also looks at that, and that has a separate
junk mail file. So if it gets through the first level of
protection, it then goes to the second level, at which point
the user would have to override that junk mail from both
levels. That is one.
Going back to your other question, I think for me as a
small business owner, consistency is very important. As the
other members mentioned, every state has a different
jurisdiction, and for me as a small business owner, I have
customers all over the world. If I were ever to be breached and
that data was accessed, I would have a number of different
jurisdictions to go after and figure out what I need to do.
There is a tremendous cost in that.
Mr. DUNN. I think to the point of defense in depth and not
relying on any single point of failure, that is pretty key. The
concept of having several things that ultimately would have to
be bypassed is typically the best approach instead of just
having one particular thing.
Mr. OLDHAM. One thing that your question raises is the fact
that many Americans are receiving these breach notification
letters and they all give the same advice: monitor your
accounts, sign up for credit monitoring. It seems like maybe a
better way of getting at that is general consumer education as
opposed to forcing companies to send out these notifications
that many of us receive every week, every month, and doing it
maybe a slightly different way that is more impactful for the
consumers.
Mr. MANKOWSKI. Finally, from a tax perspective, people,
taxpayers, if they do receive one of these breach notifications
and find out that they have been a victim of identity theft,
they need to not only report it to the three credit agencies,
they should also file a specific form with the IRS, which would
put them on notice that they were a victim and that to be
careful for a fraudulent tax return coming in from them.
Mr. PAYNE. Thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you very much. The gentleman's time
is expired.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is the
Vice Chairman of this Committee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Oldham, quick question for you. We have seen that cyber
attacks come in all shapes and sizes and go after businesses of
all shapes and sizes, including government agencies, such as
the NSA and Office of Personnel Management. While no one thinks
that one size can fit all, should not every business and
government agency that handles highly sensitive data have some
reasonable, but also mandatory, policy and procedure in place
for security data against loss and theft?
Mr. OLDHAM. Absolutely there should be policies in place
that is standard and mandatory at any government agency that
handles sensitive data.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. It is interesting. Mr. Snow talked about
an insurance policy in place. Can you elaborate just a bit, Mr.
Snow, with regards to availability and cost and coverages of
insurance policies that are out there for cyber attacks? Does
it count for your monetary loss or losses to your customers?
Does it also cover the liability exposure that you may have to
other customers that do business with you?
Mr. SNOW. My understanding is it covers the notification
mandates that are required around the country. What would
happen, from my perspective, is that I would notify the
insurance company, and they would immediately come to my aid in
terms of notifying all the customers that their data may have
been breached, and also to provide that security to the
individual that had the breach in terms of credit reporting and
other things. That was my understanding. That was the least
expensive of the policies that are out there. There is a whole
gamut of different insurance policies that you can get, I am
sure covering all the way up to the large liabilities. We have
also, on top of that, an umbrella policy that we hope will
cover what we feel--in our case we have a $2 million liability
policy--we hope that we will not exceed that in any particular
breach, but it is an uncertain area.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Mr. Oldham, you advise people on the risks
that they incur. I would assume you have a pretty good
knowledge or extensive knowledge of the availability of these
things and how far they go and the costs?
Mr. OLDHAM. Insurance policies. I am not an insurance
lawyer, but certainly that comes up in cases. There is a wide
range. To the cost in general, it depends on the number of
pieces of data, such as affected individuals. If I am advising
a client who has to give notifications in 30 different States,
that is 30 different statutes that have to be reviewed to do
that.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. So it is basically a policy that is
tailored to the individual risk?
Mr. OLDHAM. Yes, again, I am not an insurance lawyer, but
when these insurance policies do come up and we have to look at
them, there is a great variation. I am not aware of a standard
insurance policy, and I think Mr. Snow, that is probably what
your experience was that you were talking about, the
marketplace is so new at this point.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. It seems to me that that is a burgeoning
area of need, obviously, and so we will see how it develops.
Along that line, Mr. Dunn, you mentioned a while ago that
for small businesses that do business with the government, is
there a possibility of compromising government information with
those businesses and, therefore, they are exposed for a
liability situation? Is there something in the contract that
protects them, or do they need to be covering a risk there? How
does that work?
Mr. DUNN. I do not know necessarily about a contractual
obligation. I think from the perspective of interconnecting
systems or share of data there is a liability in either
direction. If an attacker was to gain access to a small
business that services a government client, the assumption is
either the value of the data or some direct connectivity to the
government agency may exist.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. We have an exposure there you need to be
careful of, right? As a business, you are going to have to have
some sort of, I would think, an insurance policy or some bond
of some kind that would protect you in case something went
wrong.
Mr. DUNN. I think the whole area of cybersecurity insurance
is quite new and fairly immature. I do not know an awful lot
about it, but I often wonder what do you have to do in order to
be insurable and how do you stay insurable. That may have some
kind of compliance or regulatory check.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. I have always thought that the insurance
companies are going to drive this issue because at some point
they are the ones that are going to have to insure the issue,
and therefore, they are going to demand certain standards. When
those standards are out there, they are going to be the ones
driving how this is all done.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Hanna, who is the Chairman
of the Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you all
for being here.
I want to talk about a bill--Mr. Payne actually mentioned
it inadvertently--I coauthored with Derek Kilmer from
Washington. It is the Improving Small Business Cybersecurity
Act of 2016. We have 900 small business development agencies
around the country. This bill, which would cost, we estimate
almost nothing, would authorize and change the Small Business
Act and direct these SBDCs to offer cyber support services to
small businesses, again, at no additional cost. We would simply
be leveraging the SBDCs cyber support services, DHS, and
Department of Homeland Security, and the Small Business
Administration would simply be required to review current
Federal programs and develop, along with the SBDC, a
cybersecurity strategy to help in all communities throughout
the country. I want to ask you a question, Mr. Dunn, and anyone
who wants to weigh in, it sounds like this problem is, at the
very least, a moving target, and it is not just a moving
target; it is an intellectually moving target. It is a one-
upmanship. It is a constant game, cat-and-mouse type of thing.
You mentioned in your statement, Mr. Dunn, and I apologize
for being late to this hearing, training needs to be offered
but it tends to be too general. Is it a practical thing to talk
to a small business person who may have one or two people and
still have enormous impact potential against them. Is it
practical in today's world to ask a person to be up to speed in
the way they need to be, not just today but going forward. How
do you manage that Mr. Oldham, anybody interested in answering
that?
Mr. DUNN. The concept is giving them-specific advice on the
things that really matter to them. If the example is perhaps
they want to offset their email services to a cloud provider,
telling them specifically the settings that would be useful to
turn on and the benefits is better than just telling them about
general awareness concepts about the dangers of email, for
example.
Striving for this education around data as being the factor
considered the most, you do not have to be up on all the
security concepts that currently are happening, but you do have
to understand what data you have, the value of it, and then
what you should do based on the different value of the
different data that you have.
Mr. HANNA. In that sense, Mr. Oldham, anyone, so it is
practical to do certain minimal things that help people broadly
to limit the possibility of an attack? Mr. Oldham?
Mr. OLDHAM. I think when you step back to the risk
management aspect and not just to the zeros and ones, it is
very important, as Mr. Dunn said, to focus on what the issue
is, and it is usually driven by the types of data. Certain data
is more sensitive than other data. Providing high-level
guidance that says cybersecurity is important, you should have
good cybersecurity, is not helpful to small businesses. It is
helpful to provide targeted advice that is practical and
granular to their specific situation.
Mr. HANNA. The Small Business Development Centers around
the country, the 900, would it be possible for them to
establish a basic format that would help the majority of small
businesses out there without making it too complicated,
difficult, and would it be helpful?
Mr. OLDHAM. I think it would be helpful as long as they
have the right expertise going into that guidance. One of the
issues that happens in this space is guidance gets put out but
it does not evolve with the threat. That is one of the big top-
level messages, this threat evolves rapidly, and so do the
legal requirements.
Mr. HANNA. If the Small Business Development Centers were
able to do this updating, they could be a source in that
community, rather than so many randomly small businesses trying
to do it on their own and maybe not being entirely effective in
that?
Mr. OLDHAM. It sounds very promising. Yes.
Mr. HANNA. Thank you. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CHABOT. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I want to thank our witnesses for being with us here today.
They have helped to clarify just how vulnerable many small
businesses and individuals are to cyber attacks. It is a
growing and evolving problem, and you have helped shed some
light on what should be done to combat it. For that we thank
you very much.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. Without objection, so ordered. If there is no further
business to come before the Committee, we are adjourned. Thank
you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statement of

Nicholas A. Oldham

Counsel

King & Spalding LLP

before the

U.S. House of Representatives

Small Business Committee

April 20, 2016

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The views and opinions expressed in this statement are mine and
do not necessarily reflect the views or opinions of King & Spalding or
any of its clients.

I have been involved in cyber issues for many years--as a
former federal prosecutor at the U.S. Department of Justice and
now as an attorney with King & Spalding. In my practice, I
counsel clients, both large and small, on the legal aspects of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cybersecurity risk management.

Today, I focus my testimony on the cybersecurity landscape
for small businesses, and on three areas of particular
concern--the cybersecurity education gap, the need for
cybersecurity initiatives to be calibrated for small
businesses, and the need to clarify and simplify the current
regulatory environment.

Background

We are living in exciting times. Digital assets and
connected systems have generated new products and services,
redefining how business is conducted and services delivered.
But the truth is that we are only at the beginning of the
beginning when it comes to understanding the implications of
our reliance on this interconnectivity and the dangers that
cyber threats present.

Our interconnectivity is growing at an astonishing rate,
with some estimates that there will be as many as 50 billion
devices connected to the Internet by 2020. As a result, we are
marching toward an infinitely connected world: always online,
our information moving from network to network and device to
device.

Partly as a result of this interconnectivity, businesses
are gathering and utilizing an ever-growing amount of
information to improve their business practices and better
serve their customers. Today, every online communication,
transaction, and anything else you can think of can be captured
and stored, and then transmitted electronically anywhere and at
anytime. This interconnectivity, especially including the
Internet of Things, holds tremendous promise for consumers and
companies.

It also creates new challenges in terms of cybersecurity
because anything connected to the Internet can be hacked. Cyber
threats vary from the technologically sophisticated to the
surprisingly low tech methods such as ``social engineering''
and spear phishing. A recent RAND Corporation study found that
over a quarter of American consumers received a notice that
their data was stolen within the past year alone. Forbes
recently reported that cyber-attacks cost businesses an
estimated $400-500 billion per year, and because many cyber-
attacks are not reported, it is believed that the real number
is significantly higher. These reports underscore the
significant costs of preparing for, responding to, and
recovering from cyber incidents.

Where do small businesses fit in this landscape? The
interconnected world enables small businesses to develop new
products and services and compete across the globe. However,
growing cyber threats presents greater challenges to the same
small businesses, which can lack the tools needed to
effectively cope with the growing danger.

Small businesses are appealing targets. Small businesses
often have more digital assets than individual consumers, but
their resources may not allow for the same level of focus on
cybersecurity as large companies.

Businesses of all sizes need adequate cybersecurity
education, but it can be difficult for small businesses to find
the right information and training.

Small businesses also often feel the impact of cyber
threats differently than large companies. Establishing
effective cybersecurity and incident response mechanisms is
complicated and can be expensive. When any business implements
mitigation measures or responds to a cyber incident, it can
lost significant time and money. The costs can sink a small
business. Small businesses get burned at both ends--they are
less likely to have the resources to prevent breaches and they
also may have fewer resources to respond to those breaches.

From Cyber Threat Awareness to Cyber Risk Management

In June 2011, various Committees in both the House and
Senate held hearings regarding data breaches at Sony and
Epsilon Data Management. In March 2012, then-FBI Director
Mueller gave a now famous speech at the RSA Conference in San
Francisco. His oft repeated quote is that ``there are only two
types of companies: those that have been hacked and those that
will be.'' These events were key, early moments that helped
raise awareness of cyber threats. We have much farther to go in
terms of awareness and, perhaps more importantly, companies
need to move from awareness to expertise in managing the new
normal of cyber threats.

As a lawyer, I do not manage corporate networks or conduct
vulnerability testing. Rather, I believe that cybersecurity is
as much a people and process issue as it is a technical issue.
I focus on the people and process side of the equation,
addressing the legal and business cybersecurity risks faced by
companies including cybersecurity risk governance, compliance,
and incident response processes. I also help companies comply
with breach notification obligations, interact with various
regulators, and manage their responses to regulatory actions or
litigation. The legal and business costs, including compliance
costs, drain on employee time and morale, and reputational
damage, can be significant.

The Cybersecurity Education Gap

Before spending precious resources on increasing
cybersecurity measures, it is natural for small businesses to
carefully weigh the cost of putting new measures into place
versus the cost to the company of the inevitable cyber incident
if it does not take action. Because of the enormous potential
costs of a cyber incident, which is difficult to quantify,
companies may find that it is far more expensive to not
implement basic security measures. The problem here is that
there is a cybersecurity education gap: small businesses may
not be able to get the information they need to properly assess
and mitigate these costs.

Bridging this education gap can be difficult for small
businesses, especially those that lack the resources to hire
specialized employees or cybersecurity experts. Basic resources
are available online, but even where they provide crucial
information, they can be difficult to find, are rarely updated,
or are inadequate.

On the legal compliance front, the Federal Trade Commission
recently released a new web-based tool for developers who make
health-related apps. The tool asks developers a series of 10
high-level, yes or no questions related to their apps covering
topics such as the apps' functions, data they collect, and the
services they provide. Then, based on the answers to the high-
level questions, the tool identifies four potentially
applicable federal laws. While useful as a starting point for
introducing and orienting developers and other healthcare
industry players to the legal thicket affecting health apps,
the tool provides high-level guidance on the basics of only a
few relevant laws.

The FTC's tool is one example of an approach geared toward
educating the public on legal compliance. The tool is somewhat
promising, but does not cover all relevant laws and does little
more than point the developers to summaries of the relevant
language. This approach, however, could go a long way toward
helping small businesses stay informed on cybersecurity legal
best practices, provided such tools are expanded to cover a
broader set of laws and give more specific, timely information.

In many ways, cyber threats have analogs to traditional
crime. Ransomware is cyber extortion, spear phishing is nothing
more than a con artist taking advantage of the ubiquity of e-
mail. Hackers, moreover, are like burglars. They use their
``gloves,'' ``dark clothes,'' and ``tools'' to get inside a
network, stealing digital loot along the way. In the
traditional crime scenarios, small businesses would likely call
the local police department for best practices in preventing
these crimes or responding to them. In the digital crime
scenarios, there is no one logical place to call. The
government may have a role in bridging the cybersecurity
education gap by encouraging the development of cybersecurity
education resources and connecting them to those who need them
in the private sector.

Existing Programs Are Not Geared Toward Small Businesses

Many of the cybersecurity initiatives receiving the most
attention are not necessarily tailored to take into account the
realities of small business owners. Standards seem to be
coalescing around the NIST Cybersecurity Framework in some
areas, for example, which is a promising development. This has
the potential for simplifying the landscape for small and large
businesses alike.

The current iteration of the NIST Framework, however, is
not particularly geared toward the needs of small businesses.
The Framework itself can be difficult and expensive to
understand and implement regardless of business size, and until
it is better tailored to small businesses, for some of them it
may just be one more program that they cannot afford to keep up
with. Perhaps more importantly, a small business might become
subject to a cybersecurity framework by virtue of its
contractual relationship with a partner that passes its
cybersecurity obligations through its supply chain. In this
case, the small business might agree to obligations under the
cybersecurity framework without the same level of vetting it
might undertake if it were adopting the framework from scratch,
and thereby inadvertently expose itself to significant
liabilities and expose itself and its partners to significant
cyber risks.

While good cyber hygiene is important, to improve the NIST
Framework, and similar programs and policies, the government
should make a serious effort to increase the involvement of
small business owners in all phases of the legislative and
rule-making process. Until small business concerns are fully
baked into these standards, they could face serious challenges
of adoption.

The Current Regulatory Regime Is Difficult to Navigate

The current regulatory regime for cybersecurity presents
additional difficulties for small businesses, who will
inevitably struggle to determine both (1) what cybersecurity
measures they are required to enact, and (2) when a breach or
attack does occur, what procedure the law requires them to
follow.

There are currently 51 different state or territory laws
that pertain to the notifications a company that has been the
victim of a data breach provide to its customers. They are
inconsistent with each other in a variety of ways.
Additionally, several states have enacted laws requiring
companies to put ``reasonable security measures'' in place.
What ``reasonable'' means in this context is evolving and can
differ by jurisdiction and industry. I have seen a growing
number of federal regulatory agencies stepping into the same
space.

The cost of ensuring compliance with laws for any company
is enormous even before taking into account the cost of
litigation and reputation damage if a breach does occur. Small
businesses in particular are vulnerable to these costs because
they can consume a much larger proportion of their available
funds. Small businesses would benefit from a public sector
approach that lowers the cost of compliance and the cost of
implementing best practices.

In short, there is a need to clarify and simplify what
companies must do. Because of the complicated and evolving
landscape, the on-the-ground expertise of the private sector
must necessarily play an important role in these efforts.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I look forward to your questions.
NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF CPA PRACTITIONERS

22 Jericho Turnpike, Suite 110          T: 516-333-8282

Mineola, NY 11501                    F: 516-333-4099

Chairman Chabot, Ranking Member Velazquez and members of
the Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. My
name is Stephen Mankowski. I am a Certified Public Accountant,
Executive Vice President of the National Conference of CPA
Practitioners, (NCCPAP - the countries' second largest CPA
organization) and a member of the American Institute of CPAs
(AICPA). NCCPAP is a professional organization that advocates
on issues that affect Certified Public Accountants in public
practice and their small business and individual clients
located throughout the United States. NCCPAP members serve more
than one million business and individual clients and are in
continual communication with regulatory bodies to keep them
apprised of the needs of the local CPA practitioner and its
clients. Accompanying me is Mr. Sanford Zinman, National Tax
Policy Chair of NCCPAP.

My firm, E.P. Caine & Associates CPA, LLC, has been
preparing tax returns for over 30 years. My firm annually
prepares well over 2,000 small business and individual tax
returns as well as sales tax returns, payroll tax returns,
highway use tax returns and Forms W2 and Forms 1099
informational returns. We are in the trenches with clients
discussing their tax, financial and personal issues, and the
impact events and proposed tax law changes may have on them.
Although our clients are mostly in the Pennsylvania, New York,
New Jersey and Delaware areas, we serve clients in over 30
states and also provide services to clients in Canada and
Europe. In this respect our practice is the same as many
members of NCCPAP and other smaller CPA firms throughout the
United States.

NCCPAP has been at the forefront of identity theft issues
through our advocacy and testimony at prior hearings dealing
with ID theft in June 2012. The initial hearings focused on the
refund scams that were prevalent at the time, such as Mo Money.
NCCPAP has remained vigilant on the topic and has been
discussing these issues annually when our members meet with
Congress and their staff and with IRS representatives. Our
members have helped guide numerous taxpayers who have been
victims of ID theft to navigate through the IRS to minimize the
risk of further consequences.

ID theft has been growing exponentially for years. It seems
that no matter what controls are put in place, criminals have
better and more focused resources to circumvent these
safeguards. All businesses are at risk, from the largest to the
smallest. Weekly, we are hearing about the latest business to
be a victim of some level of cybercrime or ID theft. Mr.
Richard Snow, who is also on the panel of witnesses today, has
been a victim.

All businesses are at risk, but CPA firms and tax
practitioners are at a greater risk. The IRS reminds tax
preparers that they must be vigilant with their system
integrity. The criminals are aware that the ``prize'' for
breaching tax practitioner systems could yield them not only
names and social security numbers, but also several years of
earnings as well as bank information and dates of birth. Thus,
the IRS recommends that tax preparers create a security plan.
IRS Publication 4557, Safeguarding Taxpayer Data, provides
suggestions and a checklist. My firm has reviewed the
Publication, continually trains our staff and, along with our
IT consultants, monitors our information and controls to ensure
that our offices not only meet but exceed these suggestions.
Our network logs usage form all users and is monitored to
ensure no unauthorized access. This includes staff with remote
access to our server. We also require a user id and passwords
to gain access to all of our software packages. Not all firms
have been as fortunate regarding cyber security. Two Midwestern
firms were compromised this tax season and had fraudulent
returns filed through their electronic filing identification
number (EFIN).

I was able to speak with a partner at one of the affected
firms. They were under the impression that their systems were
secure. However, the breach occurred after installing a new
copier system that had not been properly secured within their
network. Once they determined that they did in fact have a
breach, they attempted to contact the IRS. Unfortunately, there
is no easy means to identify the proper area within the IRS to
contact. Ultimately, it took nearly one month for a response
from the IRS.

Ensuring the security of client data has been and remains
the goal of my firm and we take that task very seriously.
Although our software has the ability to auto-generate the PINs
for electronic filing (EF PIN), we became aware that the EF PIN
was using a portion of the taxpayer SSN. We have opted to not
use this part of our software and have chosen to manually enter
the EF PIN. Some tax software packages use a random five-digit
number and we have suggested our software provider offers the
same option. Taxpayers are also able to obtain their own
specific EF PIN through the IRS website through the entry of
select information. Currently, this system is too new to
ascertain the true effectiveness of the program; however,
concerns exist as to whether the return would reject if this
number was not used or what would happen if the taxpayer lost
this number. It is not clear if there is a mechanism to
retrieve the number from the IRS.

Practitioners are also reminded to protect their EFIN. The
IRS suggests practitioners log into e-services on a regular
basis and verify the number of returns processed for their
EFIN. While the number probably will not be exact due to the
timing of return processing and updating of this service,
significant differences could be a cause for alarm.
Practitioners should contact the IRS e-Help Desk immediately if
the difference is excessive. At the beginning of this filing
season, the tax software community requested that tax
practitioners update their EFIN authorization letter before
they start using their EFIN. This is just another step in
preventing potential unauthorized access to a practitioner
EFIN. While in many cases the timing of this request might not
have occurred at the most opportune time, such as when the
first returns were to be filed, it sent a signal to the
practitioner community that the software vendors understood the
issues and were working in conjunction with practitioners to
address ID theft.

While firms that electronically submit tax returns are
required to obtain an EFIN from the IRS, paid preparers
initially included their social security number on tax returns
and in 1999 were first offered the ability to use a Preparer
Tax Identification Number (PTIN). The requirement to include
the preparer's firm information, which includes their employer
identification number, began in 1978. Given the risks of firm
ID theft, why has the IRS not adopted a firm PTIN?

There are two primary reasons that criminals attempt to
breach systems--the challenge and/or for the information
contained in the systems, both reasons for IRS action. The IRS
has been transitioning to modern technology within its network
protocols to enhance safeguards. During this transition, the
IRS has encountered many of the same compatibility concerns
that affect most businesses. As a CPA, I became aware of this
when the IRS announced the planned retirement of the Disclosure
Authorization (DA) and Electronic Account Resolution (EAR)
options on IRS e-services in August 2013. When the tax
practitioner community complained that the elimination of these
options would have a significant impact on their practices, we
were told that the platform on which these services were
designed was not compatible with the new system architecture
and the initial costs to rewrite the programming was excessive.
The IRS has looked at a relaunch of these services in the
future, but the added authentications might make the systems
overly burdensome.

In March 2015, one tax software vendor had its electronic
processing systems compromised to the extent that the state of
Minnesota and subsequently all states temporarily ceased
accepting electronically filed returns from that vendor. One
positive result of this situation was the formation of the IRS
Commissioner's Security Summit, which initially included
representatives from state governments, banking and the
software community. This group approach was a positive signal
from the IRS that the issues of identity theft and data
security required a multi-faceted approach to work at stemming
the increases in data security and ID theft. Their initial
focus was addressing and stopping suspected fraudulent returns
through the implementation of protocols to address issues with
tax returns before processing and during the initial
processing. According to a recent General Accounting Office
(GAO) report, it is estimated that during the 2014 filing
season the IRS paid approximately $3.1 billion in fraudulent
refunds while preventing $22.5 billion. This was before the
creation of the Security Summit.

In its initial year, the Summit estimates that it has
prevented in excess of three million fraudulent returns from
being processed and refunds issued during the 2015 filing
season, but many fraudulent returns are still getting through.
The Summit has not been expanded to include tax practitioners.
The next level of focus needs to be on securing the refund
process. According to Senator Wyden, the IT budget within the
IRS is now operating at a level lower than it was six years ago
due to budget cuts. The criminals, however, have ample cash and
sophisticated systems. They continually attempt to reverse
engineer the security measures implemented by the IRS. One
recent instance occurred when the IRS announced that only three
IRS refunds would be able to be direct deposited into a bank
account in any calendar year. It was determined that adding
zeros before the account number would trick the IRS systems to
think it was a different account number and allow the refunds
to be deposited. It satisfied the IRS systems while being
disregarded by the financial institutions. This was a case that
I believe the IRS learned a valuable lesson--while you can
publicly address the solutions being implemented, you should
not provide the specifics. The limitation of refunds was
designed as a deterrent, but ultimately only served as a means
of preventing tax preparers from illegally collecting the fees
from a taxpayer refund.

The timing of the receipt of data by the IRS often comes
into question. Often fraudulent returns are submitted with
refunds transmitted long before the data needed to verify the
income and the tax withholding is received by the IRS.
Businesses filing Forms W-2 on paper are required to submit the
data by the end of February, while electronic filers had an
additional 30 days. In addition, an automatic 30-day extension
had been available. Because of the delay in submission of these
information returns, the criminals have begun filing fraudulent
W-2s. In an effort to counter this practice, Congress has
removed the automatic extension for filing paper or electronic
information returns. However, a time discrepancy still
remained. The Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015
(PATH) clarified and simplified these dates. For tax years
beginning in 2016, Forms W-2s will be required to be submitted
to Social Security and Forms 1099-MISC will be required to be
submitted to the IRS with the same due date as to the
recipient. This accelerated timeframe should pose a significant
hindrance for those who submit fraudulent returns. However,
there is still the issue that the IRS will start processing tax
returns during the month of January, usually on or about
January 20, leaving a window for fraudulent tax returns to be
submitted and processed before the IRS has the opportunity to
match data.

The IRS has estimated that it averages approximately one
million breach attempts daily. However large that number might
be, as a taxpayer I would expect that every attempt would be
defeated. Unfortunately, over the past year, the IRS has had
actual system breaches. First, the IRS online transcript
program, ``Get Transcript'', was compromised in May 2015 and
the number of accounts that the IRS admitted were affected has
doubled several times. In February 2016 the IRS announced the
affected accounts exceeded 700,000. The second breech that
occurred recently related to the Identity Protection PIN (IP
PIN) retrieval tool that is contained on the IRS website and is
more troubling than the prior breach. The taxpayers who have IP
PINs have already been victims of tax refund fraud and obtained
the six digit IP PIN to prevent further unauthorized access or
filings. This tool had been using the same interface as Get
Transcript but had remained available to the public and,
unfortunately, those less scrupulous. Finally, the IRS took
this page offline in February 2016, nearly nine months after
the initial Get Transcript breach.

The March 2016 GAO report identified that the IRS has
improved access controls, but noted that weaknesses still
remain. One of the primary concerns addressed by the GAO
surrounds the authentication of the user ID. The IRS has
employed a multifactor approach using two or more factors to
achieve authentication. This provides the basis for
establishing accountability and for controlling access to the
system. Their systems require that Homeland Security
Presidential Directive 12-Compliant Authentication be
implemented for IRS local and network access accounts. This
involves password-based authentication with passwords that are
not found in dictionaries and expire at a maximum of 90 days.
This same protocol should be implemented for all user accounts,
including e-services.

The direct deposit of refunds is a fast, inexpensive and
relatively secure means of issuing refunds. The IRS utilizes
banking's ACH system, whereby a refund goes to a selected
financial institution based upon their respective routing or
ABA number. If an account number exists within the institution,
the refund goes into the account. The IRS is mandated to
process refunds within 21 days, unless additional processing
time is required. Prior to the current Modernized e-File (MeF)
system, the IRS had been operating on a ``accept by Thursday,
refund following Friday'' schedule. Often under the MeF system,
refunds have been processed even quicker. Taxpayers have grown
accustomed to getting the quick refund and now wonder if there
is a problem when it is taking longer than a week for their
refund to appear in their account.

Social Security Administration uses a banking ``pre-note''
to verify the accuracy of the recipient's banking information
prior to the initial payment. The financial institution has
five days to verify the information and notify SSA if there are
errors or discrepancies. Failure to notify SSA could result in
the institution being held liable for the funds if the funds
are misdirected. Unfortunately, the IRS refund system does not
include pre-note account verification. Funds are simply
transmitted through the ACH network to the respective
institution. Once deposited, there is no control on the usage
of funds and often where there is fraud those deposits are
moved immediately upon receipt. The implementation of a pre-
note system could result in a significant reduction of the
annual $3.1 billion misappropriation of government funds.

As discussed, Congress has mandated 21 days for refunds to
be processed. While it is easy to understand that taxpayers
want their refunds processed as quickly as possible, one must
ask a simple question. Is paying a tax refund in seven to ten
days a prudent use of taxpayer dollars? A recent survey by
Princeton Research Associates noted that 22% of taxpayers
surveyed would wait up to six to eight weeks for their refunds
if they knew it would combat identity theft. NCCPAP members
feel that simply using the pre-note technology that already
exists and is used throughout the financial industry would
allow taxpayers to receive their refunds promptly while
reducing fraud.

Unfortunately, despite all of the efforts of the IRS and
Congress to curb ID theft, often the cause is unscrupulous
preparers that are often unregulated by any authority. NCCPAP
urges Congress to pass legislation to provide the IRS the
necessary authority to regulate all tax preparers and required
paid preparer to meet minimum standards. Currently, only CPAs,
EAs and attorneys are subject to the requirements of IRS
Circular 230.

In conclusion, ID theft is an issue that initially gained
traction with Congress in 2012. Much has occurred since the
initial hearings and, unfortunately, the criminals have taken
more steps to obtain information than the IRS has been able to
block. The IRS is not alone in this battle. It seems that not a
week goes by where there is not news of a major corporation
announcing that their systems had been hacked. Taxpayers have
become victims of ID theft through these breaches and do not
necessarily understand the importance of contacting the IRS.
While knowing that the IRS successfully thwarts approximately
one million breach attempts each day is comforting, we should
keep in mind that even one successful breach could be
catastrophic to not only the IRS but to the taxpayer. Often,
taxpayers do not realize they have been a victim of ID theft
until their electronically filed tax return gets rejected. Once
a taxpayer has been victimized, they expect to obtain an IP PIN
from the IRS and starting in January 2017 they will. In
Florida, Georgia and Washington, DC where ID theft has been
rampant, the IRS implemented a voluntary IP PIN program.
Unfortunately, this program failed to achieve the number of
participants to make the program successful.

Taxpayers are urged to protect their personal data, but
with widespread Internet usage, online shopping and criminals
waiting to pounce on unsuspecting victims, ID theft continues
to grow. Individual and businesses remain targets of
cyberattacks and must remain cautious when opening emails and
attachments, visiting web pages and simply paying for the
family groceries.

There are several electronic filing options available to
taxpayers. Many taxpayers use Free File, thirteen IRS-approved
free e-filing tax service sites. In a recent audit performed by
the Online Trust Alliance (OTA), six of the thirteen websites
failed due to poor site security and not taking steps to help
protect consumers from fraudulent and malicious email.

IRS Commissioner Koskinen had the foresight to convene the
initial Security Summit in 2015, which has proven to be
successful. Unfortunately, the criminals always seem to be
pushing the envelope further and further. Their approach is
more focused and better funded. The Security Summit has now
expanded its focus to include additional user groups, including
tax practitioners, to further address cyber security and
develop a multi-tiered approach to combat it. The only way to
truly combat ID theft is to incorporate input from various
sectors of the marketplace. This is a problem impacting
businesses and taxpayers worldwide and will require global
efforts to minimize and hopefully resolve. NCCPAP calls on
Congress to provide the necessary funding to continually
monitor, modernize and upgrade IRS systems to minimize and
eliminate data security breaches. The first step would be
Congress reauthorizing Streamlined Critical Pay Authority to
allow the IRS secure top IT talent without a three to six month
waiting period.

Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony and
I welcome your questions.

Respectfully submitted,

Stephen F. Mankowski, CPA

Executive Vice President, NCCPAP

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
