- TRUSTWORTHY AI: MANAGING THE RISKS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TRUSTWORTHY AI: MANAGING THE RISKS
OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 29, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-70

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-617PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             JAY OBERNOLTE, California
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         PETER MEIJER, Michigan
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                 MIKE CAREY, OHIO
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. HALEY STEVENS, Michigan, Chairwoman
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa,
PAUL TONKO, New York                     Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

September 29, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Haley Stevens, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Randy Feenstra, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    10
Written Statement............................................    12

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    13

Witnesses:

Ms. Elham Tabassi, Chief of Staff, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    17

Dr. Charles Isbell, Dean and John P. Imlay, Jr. Chair of the
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Mr. Jordan Crenshaw, Vice President of the Chamber Technology
Engagement Center, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    36
Written Statement............................................    38

Ms. Navrina Singh, Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Credo AI
Oral Statement...............................................    49
Written Statement............................................    51

Discussion.......................................................    61

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Ms. Elham Tabassi, Chief of Staff, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology.....    86

Mr. Jordan Crenshaw, Vice President of the Chamber Technology
Engagement Center, U.S. Chamber of Commerce....................    87

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Document submitted by Representative Brad Sherman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``Engineered Intelligence: Creating a Successor Species,''
Representative Brad Sherman................................    92

TRUSTWORTHY AI: MANAGING THE RISKS
OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:42 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Haley Stevens
[Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Welcome to the Research and Technology
hearing to examine the harmful impacts associated with
artificial intelligence (AI) systems, as well as the
opportunities with our artificial intelligence systems, the
activities that academia, government, and industry are
conducting to prevent, mitigate, and manage AI risks as these
new technologies proliferate.
I'm thrilled to be joined by this distinguished panel of
witnesses, all of whom are in the room with us today. It is
great to see your faces and to be together the first time since
a March 2020 hearing, I believe.
It is also of deep importance to be discussing the benefits
and the challenges of artificial intelligence, the potential to
influence many aspects of our lives and support our economic
and national security. The applications in our everyday lives
span from merely convenient like recommending your next movie,
to transformational, like aiding doctors in earlier detection
of disease. In my home State of Michigan, advances in
artificial intelligence by automakers are accelerating the
development of autonomous vehicles that will lead to reduced
traffic and increased road safety. Artificial intelligence
systems are also increasingly used to analyze massive amounts
of data to propel research in fields to enhance our
understanding of the universe and cosmology, to synthetic
biology, to weather prediction. Call our ancestors.
But ill-conceived or untested applications of artificial
intelligence have also on occasion caused damage. We have
already seen ways AI systems can amplify, perpetuate, or
exacerbate inequitable outcomes. Researchers have shown that AI
systems making decisions in high-risk situations, such as
credit or housing, can be biased against already disadvantaged
communities, causing harm. This is why we need to encourage
people developing or deploying AI systems to be thoughtful
about what they're putting out into the world. We must develop
the tools, methodologies, and standards to ensure that AI
products and services are safe and secure, accurate, free of
harmful bias, and otherwise trustworthy. We are in a moment of
trust.
Since taking over this gavel of the Research and Technology
Subcommittee a few years ago, I have worked with my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle to promote trustworthy AI. We're
working together. I was proud to secure trustworthy AI
provisions in the CHIPS and Science Act that was passed and
signed into law just last month, which also promotes the--or
includes the Promoting Digital Privacy Technologies Act, which
passed the House and awaits a vote in the Senate, supports
privacy-enhanced data sets and tools for training AI systems.
Additionally, this Committee led the development of the
2020 National AI Initiative Act to accelerate and coordinate
Federal investments in research standards and education of
trustworthy AI. In that act we also directed NIST (National
Institute of Standards and Technology) to develop an AI Risk
Management Framework (AI RMF) to help organizations understand
and mitigate the risks associated with these technologies.
We're all excited to be having today's hearing and to
discuss the progress of this work and the many other things
that NIST is doing to promote trustworthy AI. Academia and
industry are supporting ethical approaches to artificial
intelligence. Universities across the country are adopting
principles for responsible use of AI and incorporating ethics
into their computer science (CS) curricula. Industry is moving
past theoretical principles into practical approaches to
mitigating AI risks. There's more to do, there's jobs to be
had, and people's lives are being impacted.
With that, we're here in Congress to ensure that the United
States continues to lead the world in artificial intelligence
and trustworthy artificial intelligence. And we thank our
witnesses for their time.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Stevens follows:]

Good morning and welcome to today's Research and Technology
hearing to examine the harmful impacts associated with
artificial intelligence systems, and the activities that
academia, government, and industry are conducting to prevent,
mitigate, and manage AI risks. I am thrilled to be joined by
our distinguished panel of witnesses. It is great to be with
you all in person today, and I look forward to hearing your
testimony.
Artificial intelligence has the potential to benefit many
aspects of our lives and support our economic and national
security. The applications in our everyday lives span from
merely convenient, like recommending your next movie, to
transformational, like aiding doctors in earlier detection of
disease. In my home state of Michigan, advances in AI by
automakers are accelerating the development of autonomous
vehicles that will lead to reduced traffic and increased road
safety. AI systems are also increasingly used to analyze
massive amounts of data to propel research in fields to enhance
our understanding of the universe in cosmology to synthetic
biology to weather prediction.
But ill-conceived or untested applications of AI have also
caused great harm. We have already seen ways AI systems can
amplify, perpetuate, or exacerbate inequitable outcomes.
Researchers have shown that AI systems making decisions in
high-risk situations, such as credit or housing, can be biased
against already disadvantaged communities.
This is why we need to encourage people developing or
deploying AI systems to be thoughtful about what they are
putting out into the world. We must develop the tools,
methodologies, and standards to ensure that AI products and
services are safe and secure, accurate, free of harmful bias,
and otherwise trustworthy.
Since taking over the gavel of the Research and Technology
Subcommittee, I have worked with my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle to promote trustworthy AI. I was proud to secure
trustworthy AI provisions in the CHIPS and Science Act--which
the President signed into law last month. My Promoting Digital
Privacy Technologies Act, which passed the House and awaits a
vote in the Senate, supports privacy-enhanced datasets and
tools for training AI systems. Additionally, this Committee led
the development of the 2020 National AI Initiative Act to
accelerate and coordinate Federal investments in research,
standards, and education of trustworthy AI. In that Act, we
also directed NIST to develop an AI risk management framework
to help organizations understand and mitigate the risks
associated with these technologies. I look forward to hearing
about the progress of this work and the many other things NIST
is doing to promote trustworthy AI in today's discussion.
Academia and industry are also supporting ethical
approaches to AI. Universities across the country are adopting
principles for responsible use of AI and incorporating ethics
into their computer science curricula. Industry is moving past
theoretical principles into practical approaches to mitigating
AI risks. But there is still much more to do.
I'm looking forward to hearing more about this work from
our witnesses today and to discussing what we here in Congress
can do to ensure the United States leads the world in
trustworthy artificial intelligence. I'd like to again thank
our witnesses for joining us today.

Chairwoman Stevens. With that, the Chair is going to
recognize Ranking Member Mr. Feenstra for an opening statement.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for holding
this important hearing today. I very much value of this
hearing. And I also want to thank Ranking Member Lucas for
attending today. I'm very grateful for that also. And also to
the distinguished panel that we have before us, it's--I
appreciate the time and effort that you have taken to come here
and to give testimony on this important topic.
Artificial intelligence is fundamentally changing the way
we solve some of our society's biggest challenges. From
healthcare to transportation, commerce to cybersecurity, AI
technologies are revolutionizing almost every aspect of our
daily life. But with every new and emerging technology comes
new and evolving challenges and risks. Over the years, the
Science Committee has held several hearings on AI, discussing
challenges rang ranging from ethics to the work force needs. I
hope we can use today's hearing as an opportunity to further
these important discussions and shed light on the importance of
enabling safe and trustworthy AI.
To do that, we have to first define what makes AI safe and
trustworthy, and I believe our witnesses can help us shed light
on that today. But in general, I think we can agree that safe
and trustworthy AI will meet certain criteria, like including
accuracy, privacy, and reliability. Additionally, it is
important that trustworthy AI systems utilize robust data,
while also protecting the safety and security of the user data.
Some other important factors of trustworthy AI includes
transparency, fairness, accountability, and the mitigation of
harmful biases. These factors are particularly important to
keep in mind as these technologies are being deployed for the
use in our daily lives. It is also critical that the data used
in AI technologies is accurate because the input data is the
foundation, the literal foundation of AI. So that must be our
general goal, transparent and fair AI with accurate data and
strong privacy protections. We can ensure that by having the
standards and evaluation methods in place for these
technologies.
The integration of trustworthy AI in key industries has the
most potential use and significant competition to advance U.S.
industry. AI and other industries of the future like quantum
science can revolutionize how business and economics operate,
improving efficiency, expanding services, and integrating
operations. The key to these benefits, of course, is the
trustworthy of AI.
Here in Congress, Members of the Science Committee
introduced the bipartisan National Artificial Intelligence
Initiative Act in 2020, which was made into law through the
Fiscal Year 2021 NDAA. The legislation created a broad national
security to accelerate investments of responsible AI research,
development, and standards, as well as education for AI work
force. It facilitated a new public-private partnership to
ensure that the United States leads the world in the
development and the use of AI systems.
Related to today's hearing, the initiatives require the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST, to create
the framework for managing risk associated with AI systems and
best practices sharing to advance trustworthy AI systems.
As a leader in AI research, measurement, evaluation and
standards, NIST has been developing their voluntary AI Risk
Management Framework since this last July. The framework has
been developed through a consensus-driven, open, transparent,
and collaborative process with multiple workshops for industry
to provide input. I look forward to hearing more about the
progress NIST is making in implementing this directive and
finalizing this important guidance from Ms. Tabassi. I believe
that AI risk management from this framework will be critical
for our industry to better mitigate risk associated with AI
technologies, as well as promote the incorporation of
trustworthiness in every stage from design to evaluation of AI
technologies.
I'm also looking forward to hearing from the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce to learn more about the work through the Commission
on the Artificial Intelligence Competitiveness, Inclusion, and
Innovation and how they are working to help build customer
confidence in AI technologies.
I want to thank our witnesses again for their
participation. I thank Madam Chair for putting this hearing on.
And with that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Feenstra follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for holding today's hearing
on this important issue.
And thank you, to our distinguished panel of witnesses for
joining us heretoday. Artificial intelligence is fundamentally
changing the way we solve some of our society's biggest
challenges.
From healthcare to transportation; commerce to
cybersecurity; A.I. technologies are revolutionizing almost
every aspect of daily life. But with every new and emerging
technology comes new and evolving challenges and risks. Over
the years, the Science Committee has held several hearings on
A.I., discussing challenges ranging from ethics to workforce
needs.
I hope we can use today's hearing as an opportunity to
further these important discussions, and to shed light on the
importance of enabling safe and trustworthy A.I. To do that, we
have to first define what makes A.I. safe and trustworthy. I
believe our witnesses can help shed light on this today.
But in general, I think we can agree that safe and
trustworthy A.I. will meet certain criteria like including
accuracy, privacy, and reliability. Additionally, it is
important that trustworthy A.I. systems utilize robust data
while also protecting the safety and security of user data.
Some other important factors of trustworthy A.I. include
transparency, fairness, accountability, and mitigation of
harmful biases. These factors are particularly important to
keep in mind, as these technologies are being deployed for use
in our daily lives.
It is also critical that data used by A.I. technologies is
accurate because the input data is the foundation of A.I. So
that must be our general goal: transparent and fair A.I. with
accurate data and strong privacy protections.
We can ensure that by having standards and evaluation
methods in place for these technologies. The integration of
trustworthy A.I. in key industries has the potential to be a
significant competitive advantage for U.S. industry. A.I. and
other industries of the future like quantum sciences can
revolutionize how businesses and economies operate, improving
efficiency, expanding services, and integrating operations. The
key to these benefits, of course, is the trustworthiness of
A.I.
Here in Congress, Members of the Science Committee
introduced the bipartisan National Artificial Intelligence
Initiative Act of 2020, which was made law through the FY21
NDAA. This legislation created a broad national strategy to
accelerate investments in responsible A.I. research,
development, and standards, as well as education for the A.I.
workforce. It facilitated new public-private partnerships to
ensure the U.S. leads the world in the development and use of
responsible A.I. systems.
Related to today's hearing, this initiative required the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to create
a framework for managing risks associated with A.I. systems and
best practices for sharing data to advance trustworthy A.I.
systems. As a leader in A.I. research, measurement, evaluation,
and standards, NIST has been developing its voluntary A.I. Risk
Management Framework since last July. The framework has been
developed through a consensus-driven, open, transparent, and
collaborative process with multiple workshops for industry to
provide input.
I look forward to hearing more about the progress NIST is
making in implementing this directive and finalizing this
important guidance from Ms. Tabassi. I believe the A.I. Risk
Management Framework will be a critical tool for industry to
better mitigate risks associated with A.I. technologies as well
as promote the incorporation of trustworthiness into every
stage from design to evaluation of A.I. technologies.
I am also looking forward to hearing from the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce to learn more about their work through the
Commission on Artificial Intelligence Competitiveness,
Inclusion, and Innovation, and how they are working to help
build consumer confidence in A.I. technologies.
I want to thank our witnesses again for their
participation. Madam Chair, I yield back.

Chairwoman Stevens. At some point in time, they will recall
and remember that we had today's hearing that is now actually
both meeting in person and virtually, so a couple of reminders
to Members. First, Members and staff who are attending in
person may choose to be masked. It's not a requirement. Any
individuals with symptoms, a positive test, or exposure to
someone with COVID-19 should wear a mask while present.
Members who are attending virtually should keep their video
feed on as long as they're present in the hearing. Members are
responsible for their own microphones. Please keep your
microphones muted or off unless you are speaking.
Additionally, if Members have documents they wish to submit
for the record, please keep them--or please email them to the
Committee Clerk, whose email address was circulated prior to
the hearing.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking Member Feenstra,
for holding today's hearing. And welcome to our esteemed panel
of witnesses.
We are here today to learn more about the development of
trustworthy artificial intelligence and the work being done to
reduce the risks posed by AI systems.
Recent advances in computing and software engineering,
combined with an increase in the availability of data, have
enabled rapid developments in the capabilities of AI systems.
These systems are now deployed across every sector of our
society and economy, including education, law enforcement,
medicine, and transportation. These are sectors for which AI
carries the potential for both great benefit, and great harm.
One significant risk across sectors is harmful bias, which
can occur when an AI system produces results that are
systemically prejudiced. Bias in AI can amplify, perpetuate,
and exacerbate existing structural inequalities in our society,
or create new ones. The bias may arise from non-representative
training data, implicit biases in the humans who design the
system, and many other factors. It is often the result of the
complex interactions among the human, organizational, and
technical factors involved in the development of AI systems.
Consequently, the solution to these problems is not a purely
technical one. We must ensure that the writing, testing, and
deployment of AI systems is an inclusive, thoughtful and
accountable process that results in AI that is safe,
trustworthy, and free of harmful bias.
That goal remained central in our development of the
National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act, which I led
alongside Ranking Member Lucas and which we enacted last
Congress. In the National AI Initiative Act, we directed the
National Science Foundation (NSF) to support research and
education in trustworthy AI. As we train the next generation of
AI researchers, we must not treat ethics as something separate
from technology development. The law specifically directs NSF
to integrate ethics research and technology education from the
earliest stages and establishes faculty fellowships in
technology ethics. The recently enacted CHIPS and Science Act
further directs NSF to require ethics statements in its award
proposals to ensure researchers consider the potential societal
implications of their work.
As we will learn more about today, the National AI
Initiative Act also directed the National Institute of
Standards and Technology to develop a framework for trustworthy
AI, in addition to carrying out measurement research and
standards development to enable the implementation of such a
framework.
While AI systems continue to make rapid progress, the
activities carried out under the National AI Initiative Act
will be key to grappling with the sociotechnical questions
posed by rapidly advancing AI systems.
I look forward to hearing more from our witnesses today and
to discussing what more the United States can do to ensure we
are the world leader in the development of trustworthy AI.
Thank you, and I yield back my time.

Chairwoman Stevens. And at this time, I'd like to introduce
our witnesses. Our first witness is Elham Tabassi. Ms. Tabassi
is the Chief of Staff for the Information Technology Laboratory
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology. She
leads NIST's trustworthy and responsible AI program that aims
to cultivate trust in the design, development, and use of AI
technologies by improving measurement science, standards, and
related tools. Ms. Tabassi is a member of the National AI
Research Task Force and has been at NIST since 1999.
Our next witness is Dr. Charles Isbell. Dr. Isbell is the
Dean and John P. Imlay, Jr. Chair of the College of Computing
at Georgia Tech. His recent work focuses on building autonomous
systems that can interact with large numbers of other
intelligence agents, including humans and AI systems. Dr.
Isbell also studies the effects of AI bias and pursues reform
in computing education, focusing on broadening participation
and access. He is an elected fellow of AAAI (Association for
the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence), ACM (Association
for Computing Machinery), and the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences.
Our third witness is Mr. Jordan Crenshaw. Mr. Crenshaw
serves as the Vice President of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's
Technology Engagement Center. He also manages the Chamber's
Privacy Working Group and which is comprised of nearly 300
companies and trade associations in which developed model
privacy legislation and principles. Prior to his current
position, Mr. Crenshaw led the Chamber's Telecommunication and
E-Commerce Policy Committee, which analyzes Federal privacy,
cloud computing, broadband internet, e-commerce and broadcast
policies.
Our final witness is Ms. Navrina Singh. Ms. Singh is the
Founder and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Credo. Credo AI
helps organizations to monitor, measure, and manage AI
introduce risk. Prior to co-founding Credo AI, Ms. Singh was
the Director and Principal of Product in Microsoft Cloud and
AI, where she built natural language-based conversational AI
products. Currently, Ms. Singh serves as a member of the
National AI Advisory Committee, which is tasked with advising
the President and the National AI Initiative Office on topics
related to the National AI Initiative.
As our witnesses know--should know, you will each have 5
minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will
be included in the record for the hearing. They're great
testimonies. When you have completed your spoken testimony,
we'll begin with questions. Each Member will have 5 minutes to
question the panel.
We will start with Ms. Tabassi.

TESTIMONY OF MS. ELHAM TABASSI, CHIEF OF STAFF,

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY,

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Ms. Tabassi. Good morning, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking
Member Feenstra, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee.
I am Elham Tabassi, and I serve as the lead for the Trustworthy
and Responsible AI program at the Department of Commerce's
National Institute of Standards and Technology known as NIST.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on NIST's effort
to advance the trustworthy and responsible development and use
of artificial intelligence. This Committee is well aware of the
importance of advancing research and standards to cultivate
trust in AI. Thank you for your dedication to this important
issue and for your support of NIST's role.
Artificial Intelligence holds the promise to revolutionize
and enhance our society and economy, but the development and
use of these systems are not without challenges or risks.
Through robust collaboration with stakeholders across
government, industry, civil groups, and academia, NIST works to
advance research, standards, measurements, and tools to manage
these risks and realize the full promise of this technology for
all Americans.
Among its work, NIST is developing the AI Risk Management
Framework, or AI RMF, to provide guidance on mapping,
measuring, and managing risks associated with AI. Like the
well-known cybersecurity and privacy frameworks, the AI RMF
will provide a set of outcomes that enable dialog,
understanding, and actions to manage AI risks. Critically, the
framework will focus on managing risks not just to
organizations, but also to individuals and society. This
approach is reflective of the sociotechnical nature of AI
systems as a product of the complex human, organizational, and
technical factors involved in their design and development.
As is the case with all our publications, NIST is taking a
stakeholder-driven and open process to coordinate the
development of the framework. From the start of this initiative
last year, NIST has engaged a broad range of stakeholders,
including through several workshops and public comment
opportunities. Based on stakeholder feedback, and consistent
with congressional direction, NIST is on track to publish the
final AI RMF 1.0 in January 2023. The technology and standards
landscape for AI will continue to evolve. Therefore, NIST
intends for the framework and related guidance to be updated
over time to reflect new knowledge, awareness, and practices.
Building off the RMF there is much more work to do to
develop additional guidance, standards, measures, and tools to
evaluate and measure AI trustworthiness, especially for
specific characteristics and use cases. For example, NIST has
significantly expanded its research efforts to mitigate harmful
bias with a focus on sociotechnical approach.
To support the advancement of AI standards, NIST seeks to
bolster knowledge, leadership, and coordination on AI,
including by engaging with other government agencies within
United States and internationally. NIST engages with partners
around the world, including through the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD, and the U.S.-EU
Trade and Technology Council (TTC) to advance shared goals in
trustworthy and responsible AI.
NIST also coordinates with other Federal agencies and leads
several policymaking and interagency efforts. This includes
administering the National Artificial Intelligence Advisory
Committee or NAIAC, which advises the President and the
National AI Initiative Office.
Advancing research and standards that contribute to more
secure, private, fair, rights-affirming, and world-leading
digital economy is a top priority for NIST. Thank you for the
opportunity to present on NIST's activities to improve
trustworthy and responsible AI. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Tabassi follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Dr. Isbell.

TESTIMONY OF DR. CHARLES ISBELL,

DEAN AND JOHN P. IMLAY, JR. CHAIR

OF THE COLLEGE OF COMPUTING,

GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Isbell. Thank you, Subcommittee Chair Stevens, Ranking
Members Feenstra and Lucas, and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee. I'm Charles Isbell. I'm a Professor in and Dean
for the College of Computing at Georgia Tech. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here today.
So by way of explaining my background, let me note that
while I tend to focus on statistical machine learning, my
research passion is actually interactive artificial
intelligence. As noted at the top of the hearing, there, the
fundamental research goal is to understand how to build
autonomous agents who must live and interact with large numbers
of other intelligent agents, some of whom may be human. But I'm
also an educator. As such, I spend much of my energy focusing
on providing access to all those who wish to be a part of this
ongoing conversation around the role of AI and computing in our
lives. My discussion today and answers to your questions you
ask will be informed by both my research and educator selves.
So let us begin this discussion by defining our terms.
There are many potential definitions of AI. My favorite one is
that it is the art and science of making computers act the way
they do in the movies. In the movies, computers are often semi-
magical and anthropomorphic. They do things that if humans did
them, we would say they required intelligence.
This definition is borne out in our use of AI in the
everyday world. We use the infrastructure of AI to search
billions upon billions of documents to find the answers to a
staggering variety of questions, often expressed literally as
questions. We use automatically tagged images to organize our
photos. And we use that same infrastructure to plan optimal
routes for trips, even altering our routes on the fly in the
face of changes in traffic. In fact, we let our cars mostly
drive themselves in that very same traffic playing the role of
a tireless chauffeur.
As noted by the Chair, we're able to automatically detect
tumors from X-rays, even those that are trained--that trained
doctors find difficult to see. We let computers finish our
sentences as we type text and use search engines, sometimes
facilitating a subtle shift from prediction of our behavior to
influence over our behavior. Often, we take advantage of these
services by using our phones to interpret a wide variety of
spoken commands.
So in some very important sense, AI already exists. It is
not the AI of fanciful science fiction, neither benevolent
intelligence working with humans as we traverse the galaxy, nor
malevolent AI that seeks humanity's destruction. Nonetheless,
we are living every day with machines who make decisions that
if humans made them, we would attribute to intelligence. And
the machines often make those decisions faster, and some might
argue better, than humans would.
Yet like all computing systems, at bottom, AI simply makes
us more efficient. It amplifies our ability to make decisions,
including bad ones, all too often automating the biases baked
into our data and that of its developers. By way of example,
according to the Marshall Project, most States use some form of
automated risk assessment at some stage in the criminal justice
system. We set out to predict recidivism as if that means the
chance of committing a crime again, when in fact, what we're
actually predicting is the chance of being arrested and
convicted again. As with the shift from predicting behavior to
influencing it, this distinction is subtle, but important.
Without recognition of the difference, one can create a
feedback loop and make things worse, without even noticing it.
Although we sometimes act as if the machine is doing the
work, it is worth noting that these machines are making
decisions with us, with humans. They are partners, and as with
any partner, it is important that we understand what our
partner is doing and why. To make AI trustworthy, we need a
more informed citizenry, something we can accomplish by
requiring that our AI partners are more transparent on the one
hand, but that we are more savvy on the other.
So speaking of definitions, by transparency, I mean that an
AI algorithm should be inspectable, that the kind of data the
algorithm uses to build its model should be available, and the
decisions that such algorithms make should be understandable.
In other words, as we deploy these algorithms, each algorithm
should be able to explain its output. ``This applicant was
assigned this score because'' is more useful and less prone to
misuse than just ``This applicant was assigned this score.''
But to really understand such machines, much less to create
them, we should strive for all of our citizens to not only be
literate, but to be competent. That is, they must understand
computing and computational thinking and how it fits into
problem solving in their everyday lives. In the long term, one
of the key solutions to AI bias will be bringing a wider group
of people into computing education and into machine learning
more specifically. We have to improve the number and the
diversity of those entering the field and participating in and
influencing the conversation because it is the right thing to
do, but also because it is the only way for us to compete.
It should not be lost that putting these two thoughts
together suggests that the process by which we build AI
algorithms is a shared effort that requires a wide swath of
citizens to be informed and engaged and for developers to
accept the responsibility for including the users of and
sometimes targets of those systems in the development process
itself. As a field, we have not caught up to the reality of the
responsibility that we hold, and it is something that we simply
must do. We must move from tool sets and skill sets to
mindsets, incorporating responsibility in all that we do from
the ground up.
I'm very excited for this hearing. I think advances in AI
are essential to our economic and social future. These are all
areas in which funding--the funding power of the National
Science Foundation and NIST as well can make a huge difference.
So thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Isbell follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. OK, Georgia Tech, you convinced me. I'm
signing up for his class.
Dr. Isbell. Done.
Chairwoman Stevens. All right. With that, we're going to
hear from Mr. Crenshaw for 5 minutes. Thanks.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JORDAN CRENSHAW, VICE PRESIDENT

OF THE CHAMBER TECHNOLOGY ENGAGEMENT CENTER,

U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Chair Stevens, Ranking Members
Feenstra and Lucas, and Members of the Research and Technology
Subcommittee. Good morning, and thank you. My name is Jordan
Crenshaw, and I'm the vice president of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce's Technology Engagement Center. It's my pleasure to
talk to you today about how we--business, government, and
citizens--can work together to build trustworthy artificial
intelligence.
AI is changing the world as we know it. By 2030, AI will
have a $16 trillion impact on the global economy. But from a
practical level, what does that mean? AI is helping forecasters
and emergency management better track the intensification of
hurricanes and chart out evacuation and emergency preparedness.
It's allowing researchers to more easily pinpoint virus
mutations and tailor vaccines for new variants. It's also
bolstering our cyber defenses against an evolving digital
threat landscape. And finally, AI has the potential to fill the
gaps where we have worker shortages, like patient monitoring
where we have nursing shortages, and help tackle supply chain
issues where we have a lack of available truckers.
The United States is not operating in a vacuum. Its
strategic competitors also realize the benefits of this crucial
technology. For example, prior to the invasion of Ukraine,
China and Russia agreed to cooperate on developing emerging
technologies, specifically noting artificial intelligence. When
it comes to AI, we are in a race we must win. AI is here now,
and it's not going away. We cannot ignore it, and we cannot
afford to sit on the sidelines and allow those who do not share
our democratic values to set the standard for the world.
For the research and deployment of AI to be successful,
Americans must have trust in the technology. And while AI has
many benefits, as I previously mentioned, in the wrong hands
like those of our adversaries, there could be harms. Americans
are united in the belief that we must beat our competitors as
well. In fact, according to polling by the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce, 85 percent of Americans believe the United States
should lead in AI, and nearly that same number believes that we
are best positioned as a nation to develop those ethical
standards for its use.
We agree. It's why the Chamber earlier this year
established its Commission on AI Competitiveness, Inclusion,
and Innovation, led by your former congressional colleagues,
Representatives John Delaney and Mike Ferguson, and it's
comprised of experts in business, academia, and civil society.
The Commission has been tasked with developing policy
recommendations in three core areas: trustworthiness, work
force preparation, and international competitiveness. Our
Commission held field hearings in Austin, Silicon Valley,
Cleveland, London, and here in D.C.. And we've heard from a
variety of stakeholders and look forward to presenting you with
our recommendations early next year.
In the meantime, while we wait for the Commission to
finalize its report, we offer the following observations about
what it will take to maintain trustworthy AI leadership. The
Federal Government has a significant role to play in conducting
fundamental research in trustworthy AI. The Chamber was pleased
to see passage of the CHIPS and Science Act and hopes to see
the necessary appropriations to carry out the science
provisions. We encourage continued investment in STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) education. We need a
trained, skilled, and diverse work force that can bring
together multiple voices for coding and developing systems.
AI is only as good, though, as the data it uses. That is
why it is key that both government and the private sector team
up to ensure there is quality data for more accurate and
trustworthy AI. Governments should prioritize improving access
to its own data and models and ways that respect individual
privacy. At the same time, while we talk about privacy, as
Congress looks to address these types of issues, it's important
that we look at issues to determine whether or not we inhibit
the collection of sensitive data and other types of data that
could inhibit deploying trustworthy AI systems.
Fourth, we need to increase widespread access to shared
computing resources. However, many small startups and academic
institutions lack sufficient computing resources to help
develop solutions to artificial intelligence. That's why
Congress took the critical step of establishing the Research--
passing the Resource Task Force Act of 2020. Now the National
Science Foundation and the White House's Office of Science and
Technology Policy should fully implement the law and
expeditiously develop a roadmap to unlock AI innovation across
multiple stakeholders.
Finally, we also are encouraged and are thankful for the
work by NIST in its development of the AI Risk Management
Framework, which is a consensus-driven, cross-sector, and
voluntary framework to leverage best practices.
These recommendations are only the beginning. And I thank
you for your time to address how the business community can
partner with you to maintain trustworthy AI leadership. We
thank you for your leadership, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crenshaw follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you.
With that, Ms. Singh, yes.

TESTIMONY OF MS. NAVRINA SINGH,

FOUNDER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CREDO AI

Ms. Singh. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Feenstra and Lucas,
and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today and to be part of this distinguished panel of
witnesses. My name is Navrina Singh. I'm the Founder and CEO of
Credo AI, a venture-backed startup. In addition, I'm a member
of the National AI Advisory Committee that is advising
President Biden as part of the National AI Initiative.
Trustworthy artificial intelligence is a topic that is
deeply personal to me. Growing up in India as a girl who
aspired to be an engineer, I learned early on that I faced an
uphill battle for no reason other than my gender. Part of my
passion for the subject and the main reason I founded Credo AI
in March 2020 is because I experienced firsthand what is at
stake. While AI is an exciting and ultimately very useful
technology, unless we create a culture of accountability,
transparency, and governance around it, we risk unchecked
growth and algorithms that may unintentionally encode the same
types of societal ceilings and perceptions that I experienced
as a girl in India and that many others still experience today.
Members of the Subcommittee know very well the power and
potential of AI when used responsibly. While it is a
transformational technology that is evolving rapidly, I realize
that there are different points of view on its perceived
advantages. But one thing we can all agree on is AI is not
going away, which is why we owe it to ourselves and to the
world that our children will inherit to ensure robust
compliance and governance structures to keep pace with the AI
development.
As the Subcommittee studies the question of how to manage
AI risk and build trustworthy AI, we think three key
considerations merit special attention. First, I want to focus
on full AI lifecycle, from design to development, to testing
and validation, to production and use. That means building AI
systems responsibly continuously. It is fit for purpose, fair,
transparent, safe and secure, privacy-preserving, and
auditable.
Second, context is paramount. We believe that achieving
trustworthy AI depends on shared understanding, that governance
and oversight of AI is industry-specific, application-specific,
model-specific, and data-specific to ensure that it is fit for
purpose. This necessitates a collaborative approach to metric
alignment, and associated assessments.
Third, transparency reporting and system assessments are
critical for responsible AI governance. Reporting requirements
that promote and incentivize public disclosure of AI system
behaviors act as a key driver for establishment of standards
and benchmark. And fundamental to this is access to compliant
and comprehensive data for assessments. For these reasons, we
at Credo AI advocate for context base, full AI lifecycle
governance of AI systems with reporting requirements that are
specific, regular, and transparent.
If you truly want to be a global leader in AI, then our
focus should be on building responsible technology aligned with
our societal values. Responsible AI is also a competitive
advantage. It allows companies to deploy AI at scale with
confidence, and this transparency promotes trust with consumers
in this technology. Government has a critical role to play
here, working together through public-private partnerships to
ensure the right set of standards exist to further innovation
in the space. And we urge the policymakers and standard-setting
bodies to prioritize establishing context-focused standards and
benchmarks that are globally interoperable and can help
eliminate some of the guesswork.
My 8-year-old daughter told me recently that she wants to
be an inventor and a social media influencer when she grows up.
While I'm grateful that in this country my daughter will have
the opportunity to follow her dreams, we owe it to her and the
generations that will follow to ensure that we build AI which
is developed responsibly and ethically.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Singh follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Well, thank you.
And at this point, we're going to turn to our first round
of questions, and the Chair is going to recognize herself for 5
minutes.
In hearing your testimony, as I reflect on my time pursuing
a master's in philosophy of which my parents never understood
why I got, but we were asking the ethical question about
artificial intelligence that some ask in the theoretical space
that can a AI replace human behavior? Can--does AI threaten
what we do as people seeking to overtake, you know, the
decisions that we make as people?
Today's hearing is a little bit more instructive to the
theoretical question. Today's hearing is saying, hey, we have
artificial intelligence, and it is being utilized, but how is
it being utilized? How is it being implemented? And is it
implementing fairly and accurately for the best outcomes for
society and for humanity?
So in 2019, NIST developed the strategy for Federal
engagement in developing technical standards and tools for
artificial intelligence. And, Ms. Tabassi, I'm just wondering
if you could touch briefly because your testimony got me
thinking on this, what was included in this strategy and why it
is important that we have strategies for engaging in the
development of technical standards for artificial intelligence.
Has NIST's work on AI management framework revealed new or
underdeveloped areas for standardization with regard to
trustworthy AI systems? And then, because we want to hear from
you on that, but then I want to hear from, I guess, Crenshaw,
Mr. Crenshaw, about the--you know, how beneficial it is to
industry actors for the Federal Government to lay out
priorities and standards for critical technologies and
artificial intelligence. Are you using these?
But let's start with you, Ms. Tabassi.
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you very much for the question,
Chairwoman. Yes, in 2019, we developed a plan for Federal
Government engagement in development of technical standards,
and it has several recommendations on bolstering research
that's really important for development of good, technically
solid, scientifically valid standards, but also importance of
public-private partnership and coordination across the
government on bolstering our engagements in the standard
development and importance of international cooperations on
development of standards that are technically sound and correct
but also reflect our shared democratic values.
Let me also say that it also lists standards that are
related and needed for a trustworthy, responsible AI and of
course, many of the standards that's happening for information
technology and software systems can be related to artificial
intelligence and can be used there but also need for other
standards for addressing issues such as bias and explainability
and trustworthy.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And, Mr. Crenshaw, I mean, are
you using these or, I mean, is this helpful to what you were
talking about?
Mr. Crenshaw. The NIST process is incredibly helpful. It is
getting the conversation started and providing the guidance
that's necessary for industry to look to. It's incredibly
important, too, to have buy-in from the affected stakeholder
community. And I have to applaud NIST for the work that they
have done through their multiple rounds of comment, their
multiple rounds of public engagement and public meetings to
really get this right. And I think it's incredibly important,
the work they are doing, that there is a set of guidelines for
industry to look to. I think, you know, on the domestic level,
that that is a guiding light for industry.
I would note, it's also important to remember standards
bodies internationally as well. In order for us to maintain our
leadership in this front, we need to make sure that we have
American interests represented with American businesses and
American policymakers being aware of that. We do know that our
competitors are trying to pack those bodies, and we want to
make sure that we are represented as well. I think yesterday--
--
Chairwoman Stevens. So are you suggesting more investment?
Mr. Crenshaw. I'm suggesting more participation, so----
Chairwoman Stevens. Well, we did just reauthorize NIST,
but, you know, Dr. Isbell, what I was kind of getting at was
the Turing test, which I know you're familiar with. But I don't
know if that's really the question now, is it, you know, in
terms of improving these outcomes with AI? And maybe this is
too philosophical of a question, but is it the Turing test that
that we should be focused on or what is the question that we
should be focused on with the fair implementation of AI across
a multitude of sectors that are determining our economy at
grand scale with 5 seconds left?
Dr. Isbell. There is no question too philosophical. The
short answer is, it's not the Turing test. It's about the
actual impact and outcomes on real people. And you have to
bring those real people in to understand those outcomes.
Chairwoman Stevens. And with that, I'm going to now
recognize Mr. Feenstra, our Ranking Member, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Stevens--Chairwoman
Stevens, and thank you for those questions. Thank you again for
all witnesses. I really enjoyed your testimonies.
You know, there's extensive research going on in my home
State and my universities and--concerning AI, how it's being
applied now and into the future. Iowa State's AI Institute for
Resilient Agriculture is bringing together experts to lay the
groundwork for developing AI-driven predictive plant models to
increase the resiliency of agriculture. Researchers at the
University of Northern Iowa are aiming to use AI to improve
healthcare outcomes, increase privacy, online security, and
create predictive maintenance systems for our products. And
then in the University of Iowa, they're utilizing AI to improve
the effectiveness of cancer screenings, as well as the work to
identify and address biases in AI and healthcare models. You
know, these are just a few examples that are out there, and
they're limitless.
And I would just like to say, Dr. Isbell, I'm an academic
also, and I teach--or did teach consumer behavior. And when you
start looking at consumer behavior, there's a tremendous amount
of AI being used, good and bad.
Ms. Tabassi, I understand that AI won't be replacing
doctors, all right? I understand that, won't be replacing
nurses. But we also have the opportunity to learn about
healthcare-related AI and research, as I just mentioned.
Fostering trust in AI will be critical to utilizing
applications such as these in the healthcare sector. And this
is just one example.
My question to you, if I can flip my page, can you explain
how an AI Risk Management Framework will--broadly applied
across the different sectors and industries to minimize the
negative impacts of AI systems and maximize positive outcomes?
You can use any specific sector examples in healthcare if you
wish, but I'd like to know more about that.
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you so very much for the question,
Ranking Member Feenstra. And all of the examples that you said
just show the potential of AI to really change our lives for
better. I'm going to use the last example that you brought up,
the cancer screening. So if you have a cancer screening tool,
first, as mentioned several times, we wanted to make sure that
it's accurate, it's working well, but beyond that the accuracy
should also be balanced with associated risks and impact that
it can have. So the question comes up about the bias or
fairness. Does it advantage or disadvantage certain
demographics? Beyond that there's questions about the
vulnerability and security and resilience of the AI model, we
all hear that AI systems are brittle. Can that cause negative
consequences? The issue of the privacy, the data that's used to
train the models, can we make sure that the privacy is
preserved and the training data are not inferred from the
models?
And then on top of that is we heard about the
explainability also. If the tool comes out and gives, for
example, an outcome or prediction that there is a cancer there,
that's a very serious message to be carried to the doctor to
the patient. So explainability on how the model decides that
there's a cancer there, and another level of complexity, the
explanation needed for physician versus technician versus
patient is different. AI RMF is trying to provide a shared
lexicon, interoperable way to address all of these questions,
but also provide a measurable process, metrics and methodology
to measure them and manage these risks.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you so much for that. That's great
information.
Mr. Crenshaw, in your testimony you say that trust is a
partnership? I 100 percent agree. And only when government and
industry work side by side can trust be built. How did NIST
work with industry in developing the AI Risk Management
Framework? And how is having a tool like the framework going to
strengthen consumer confidence when it comes to building trust
in the AI systems?
Mr. Crenshaw. Well, I think as I said, Congressman, trust
is essential. And I think NIST has done a great job of really
instilling trust in their work with the business community by
being open and transparent. If you look at the the comment
record, it's comments from across the board, everyone from
civil society all the way to industry and developers. And
they're really looking to develop a robust record. That I
believe is a really great example for other agencies as they're
looking at tackling this issue to look at. So they've had
multiple stakeholder sessions. They've come in and actually
spoken with our members and tried to get a good feel for where
they're at. And it really--the partnership has been excellent,
and I think it's a great example for other agencies moving
forward in this space.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Mr. Crenshaw, I have questions for
Dr. Isbell and Ms. Singh, but I ran out of time. So with that,
thank you for your testimony. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And with that, we're going to
hear from Dr. Foster for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So my first general question is this discussion converging?
You know, I've been chairing the Task Force on AI and Financial
Services for the last several years, and it strikes me that the
complexity of AI behavior is increasing much more rapidly than
our ability to categorize and regulate it. You know, an example
of that is a simple neural net classifier that's operating on a
static data set to calculate credit scores or something like
that has a relatively--it's an enormous, but it's a relatively
finite range of behaviors to categorize, OK?
On the other hand, interactive AI, which is an agent which
is learning from other intelligent agents and guiding its
behavior, has an enormously larger space of behaviors to
characterize. And I just don't even see how you can possibly
explain how an intelligent agent might react in any given
circumstances. Like you can say general things like, you know,
this child is a fast learner but makes a lot of mistakes, but
that doesn't give you the granularity of detail you need.
And so I'm just wondering, since you've been all thinking
about this, do you get the feeling that it is converging or
not? No? Dr. Isbell?
Dr. Isbell. The short answer is no. The problems that we're
talking about are exponential. All of our solutions are linear.
You might as well ask the question whether human behavior is
converging and we know how to understand or regulate that. And
of course, the answer is no, but that does not mean that there
are not things that we can do to make progress. And I do think
a lot of the discussions that we've had just in the last couple
of years around fairness, accountability, thinking about how to
educate people to be in the--to be a part of these discussions
do make real progress, and that progress doesn't--is very
sudden, and makes very sudden changes, so it's a good thing.
Mr. Foster. Any other thoughts on this? Yes, Dr. Singh?
Ms. Singh. Congressman, I think that's a great question. I
believe we are making progress toward convergence. But one of
the key areas that I spoke about earlier is how important
context is to this work. So one of the core acts that we have
as standards emerge in this space is really thinking about
context, the applications, and how we can make progress toward
the right metrics and assessments, along with the specific
reporting requirements. And we are seeing globally as well as
the great work that NIST is doing that there is a convergence
that has started to happen in terms of having those contextual
conversations.
Mr. Foster. Any other thoughts? It's a huge question. Let's
see--many of you have emphasized education and the need for an
educated public. So if you had to choose between a public that
knew statistics or knew calculus, which would you take? I'm a
physicist, so I naturally lean toward calculus, but it seems
like what I use every day as a politician, statistics are
relevant. And probably for AI, I think you're in the same bin.
And do you have any--well, all right, Dr. Isbell--but you have
to deal with curricula, so you're on the seat again.
Dr. Isbell. I'm not speaking for all of my colleagues. I
think the answer is, if I had to choose for most people, it
would be statistics, but I'd also like them to know information
theory and linear algebra. But fundamentally, it's about
problem solving around data mattering as opposed to just the
algorithms and the processes that you go through. And with that
you can solve a lot of the problems or at least address and
think about the problems that are coming down the pike.
Mr. Foster. Any other thoughts from any of you? What do you
use every day, statistics or calculus? I think--yes, machine
learning. It's--backpropagation is the chain rule, and I don't
think there's much other calculus anywhere in it. But anyway,
the--now, actually, this was for Mr. Crenshaw. You've
emphasized international competition, and it strikes me that a
lot of the countries that are clobbering us, you can't get out
of high school without knowing calculus and probably
statistics. There's all sorts of people showing up at school
boards, you know, unhappy that we're not supporting their
preferred theology or mythology. But very few school boards are
being inundated by people, you know, demanding that our kids
know statistics and calculus. What--is there some--is there
work to be done there?
Mr. Crenshaw. There's definitely work to be done on the
education front. We need to prioritize STEM education to ensure
that we have the fundamental knowledge base for students across
the country to get into this field because we are going to need
more coders and ethicists in this field who actually can assist
with our leadership.
The other thing I think would be important to note, too, is
that we also need to make sure that we have talent in this
country and retain talent and still attract talent. And one of
the things that we found out through our AI Commission is that
we, you know are going to lose the talent race if we don't deal
with our immigration issues in this country as well and make
sure that we can retain talent after we've educated them here
in the United States, make sure that we can keep our talent to
ensure that we have people who know how to make ethical AI
work.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. And we in a bipartisan way on this
Committee have been doing everything we can to try to drag that
across the finish line. I think we came within one Senator of
doing something significant in the CHIPS and Science.
Anyway, my time's up and will yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. And with that, we will hear from the
Ranking Member of the Full Committee who we're so grateful is
here, Mr. Lucas for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Ms. Tabassi, in the
AI Initiative that we passed in Congress last year, we gave
NIST the difficult task of defining what makes AI safe and
trustworthy. Can you walk us through the process of how NIST
determined that definition of trustworthiness? And while you're
thinking about that, do you think this measure of
trustworthiness also helps with the measuring of fairness in AI
systems, please?
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you so very much, Ranking Member Lucas,
for the question. In terms of the process of developing a
definition of the trustworthiness, I want to thank the kind of
work that has been mentioned about the NIST process. But the
process has been an open, transparent, collaborative process.
There has been many definitions and proposals for definition
for trustworthiness, so we ran a stakeholder-driven effort to
converge to the extent possible on the definition of the
trustworthiness. And that, as was mentioned, include rounds of
workshops and public comment and a listening session. So that
was the process.
Your second part of the question is about the fairness. So
fairness is one of the aspects of the trustworthiness as it's
mentioned in the AI RMF. And fairness, as it was mentioned, is
a complicated concept because it can depend on societal values
and can change from context to context. But that's also part of
one of the aspects of the trustworthiness mentioned in the AI
RMF.
Mr. Lucas. Ms. Singh, in your testimony, you illustrate why
you cannot have a one-size-fits-all definition of an
algorithmic fairness. How does the AI Risk Management Framework
exemplify this?
Ms. Singh. As I previously stated, I really commend NIST
for the Risk Management Framework and how they're thinking
through not only mapping different applications, but measuring
and then overall management of those. At Credo AI, we are
really focused on operationalizing responsible AI tenets and
ensuring that continuous oversight and governance is provided
of these systems. And I think for us it is really critical that
there are governance assets based on the context of AI
application that gets generated that inspires that trust that
Ms. Tabassi was just talking about.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Crenshaw, do you foresee U.S. industry
widely adopting and utilizing the Risk Management Framework
since it's a voluntary tool, or will it need to be
incentivized? While you're thinking about that, do you
anticipate U.S. standard bodies will play a role in encouraging
the utilization of the framework?
Mr. Crenshaw. I think there's definitely a role there. I
think they also have really gotten the conversation out about
the need to develop standards. When it comes to the NIST Risk
Management Framework, I think what we've seen of it is
promising. Obviously, we'll have to comment on the final
product when it comes out. But I think it is a promising
product. And, you know, I think, given the fact that we've had
such robust stakeholder input, I do anticipate that, you know,
given the direction things are going, we definitely could see
stakeholder engagement to support the framework. And I think
that's a good thing because we need guidelines and standards to
get behind so we can develop trust.
Mr. Lucas. Ms. Singh, do you have any thoughts on this
point?
Ms. Singh. I think multistakeholder engagement is going to
be critical in the process. And as--you know, we've been
invited to give feedback on the NIST RMF, and we've done that
actively over the past couple of months. As mentioned, I think
there's a little bit more work to be done in terms of ensuring
that we are looking at different applications and context.
Mr. Lucas. Ms. Tabassi, any thoughts?
Ms. Tabassi. In terms of the adoption, I think that the
adoption and use of the AI RMF would be based on the value that
it provides and also giving awareness that these things exist
is also very important. I thank again the Committee and all of
my panelists for the kind words about the process. And in terms
of the context and specific use, agreed that a lot more work
needs to be done. And we have a call for contribution
particularly for that.
Mr. Lucas. One last question, and I come back to you, Ms.
Tabassi. Why is it important for democratic nations to lead the
development of international standards for trustworthy AI
systems?
Ms. Tabassi. I believe it's important to affirm our shared
democratic values of openness, protection of democracy and
human rights, and design and develop technologies that
operationalizes those values. And we need standards for
technologies that are rights-affirming and show those values.
Mr. Lucas. Just the way I intend to answer questions about
that in my town meeting someday. Thank you. Yield back, Madam
Chair.
Chairwoman Stevens. With that, we are going to hear from
the Congresswoman from North Carolina, Ms. Ross, for 5 minutes
of questioning.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Stevens and
Ranking Member Feenstra. And thank you to the panelists for
joining us today. On April 29th of last year [inaudible]
represents a larger problem of cybersecurity and privacy issues
in this country. AI innovation happens fast, and we need
legislation that's equipped to grow into this quickly expanding
sector. For my constituents in the Research Triangle and for
national security more broadly, we need to invest in long-term
structural infrastructure that ensures better cybersecurity and
privacy in our tech sector. We also need to look at how AI
affects the arts and our creators, and we all have many of them
in our district. So I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses on how we can ensure that systems of machine learning
can be created with consideration for individual privacy,
corporate privacy, intellectual property, and national
security. But since none of the folks who have asked questions
yet have talked about intellectual property, and I serve on the
Judiciary Subcommittee on that, I'm going to ask Ms. Tabassi--
I'm sorry if I mispronounced your name--to say I want to thank
you for your important work on the draft of the Artificial
Intelligence Risk Management Framework.
But I also want to talk a little bit about intellectual
property because the United States takes our intellectual
property protections very seriously. And without those
protections, there's a significant threat to American
creativity, ingenuity, jobs, and our economy. And AI offers
opportunities to artists and creators to enhance the creation
process in many ways, but that also presents risks. And there
are services and sites available today that use art, books,
music, and other American-made works as inputs to train AI.
Based on what is happening with image-generating AI
currently on the web, we can already see that artists will have
to compete with AI creations in their own style and trained on
their own content when they were either--neither consulted nor
compensated for this. And as a matter of fact, there was a
recent article that I just read about that. Is this issue on
NIST's radar screen, and what can we do about it?
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you so very much for the question,
Congresswoman. And we have actually received comments to that
effect to AI RMF. And that's a serious problem, certainly
something that would be part of the discussions in the future
drafts of the RMF. A lot of work needs to be done, and that
would definitely be part of the discussion. Thank you.
Ms. Ross. OK. I do have a couple of other questions. Dr.
Isbell, your written testimony talks about the Marshall Project
and the use of risk assessment in the criminal justice system.
How can transparency increase the ability of individuals to
protect their information and avoid undue scrutiny? And to whom
should individuals direct their concerns if they believe that
their data has been misused?
Dr. Isbell. So it's a very--it's actually quite a difficult
problem because the data that we have is out there everywhere,
and we leave a trail everywhere that we go. Fundamentally,
there has to be policy and there has to be infrastructure. This
is a role that government has to provide a mechanism by which
people can can deal with issues where their data had been
misused. It is not a thing that will naturally come from
industry. It is not a thing that naturally comes from the
educational sector. It is something that has to be dealt with
by the legal system.
Ms. Ross. And can you tell us about any law enforcement
practices that we should be aware of as we're considering
changes to the legal system?
Dr. Isbell. Well, I think the short answer is you have to
think very carefully about and look at the way that the systems
that are out there are currently being used and how they're
currently being misused. And having done that, it takes you
down a path toward understanding how you have to try to address
those one at a time. It's a pervasive thing that touches
everything. I--we don't have time to talk about this now, but
you--earlier, someone made a comment that doctors will not be
replaced by AI. Well, they're already being replaced by AI, and
they're being done in an unregulated way that's having an
impact on people. And you have to be--you have to recognize
that and you have to address it context by context and one case
at a time.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And with that, we're going to
hear from Dr. Baird of Indiana for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I appreciate you and
Ranking Member Feenstra for holding this important hearing. And
I really appreciate, I always do, the expertise of the
witnesses and their ability to answer our questions and it's
very important and very specific.
My first question goes to Dr. Isbell. And I want to know
what role have universities played in the development of the AI
Risk Management Framework? And more broadly, how are
universities helping to shape the future of AI by engaging in
public-private partnerships, Dr. Isbell?
Dr. Isbell. So the--higher education in general is--
universities have participated by being invited in and being a
part of the conversations. Individuals and organizations have
continued to participate in all of these discussions around
standards, including things that NIST has done, but also
through operations of institutes that have been created, for
example, by NSF. What the universities do, what our role is, is
to do the basic research that exists to create the basic
research, ask the basic questions, and then educate the
students who are going to go forward and to do that work. A lot
of the work that we do, a lot of where we play that role isn't
actually identifying the fundamental problems. That is sort of
what academic freedom allows you to do, and that's what we
continue to do. The environment that we create is one that is--
that allows us to ask these questions and to make them
available for industry, to make them available for government
to take the next step. That's what we do.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you very much. Ms. Tabassi, to your
knowledge, has the People's Republic of China developed a
similar tool to the AI Risk Management Framework? And what
about any of our allies? And so what role if any has NIST
played in sharing findings and the best practices with the
international community, particularly our allies? So if you
have any thoughts in that area, I would appreciate it.
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you so very much for the question,
Congressman. In terms of cooperation and collaboration with our
allies, the stakeholder engagement effort that we run includes
our international partners, so they have been involved in terms
of providing input to the AI RMF, coming to our workshops and
participating in those events, but we also interact with them
and talk with them in forums such as Trade and Technology
Council, QUAD, or OECD. So there is a good, strong, robust
engagement going on that way.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Then my last question goes to Ms.
Singh. So in creating the tools to help companies develop
responsible AI, what are some of the most common concerns with
AI systems that your company has seen?
Ms. Singh. Thank you so much for that question. You know,
if responsibly and not built artificial intelligence is going
to have very varying impacts on different use cases. So across
the companies that we work with, one of the things that is
critical is, again, really having a holistic view of from the
time you're designing the AI system to the actual use, making
sure that you're interrogating the technical systems, you're
interrogating the processes, as well as you're interrogating
the outputs. So this goes back to really identifying any
unintended consequences that could appear in the entire AI
lifecycle.
Mr. Baird. Thank you very much. And I appreciate the
witnesses' responses. And with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mr. McNerney [presiding]. Well, I was going to--I think I'm
the next questioner, and I was going to thank the Chairwoman
for this great hearing, but I certainly want to thank the
panelists. Your testimony is great. What a great, incredible
subject. I want to get right to questions though.
Ms. Tabassi, how might standards and assessments be
developed and--for explainability and interoperability
Ms. Tabassi. We do that the same way that we do for any
type of other standards. With true stakeholder engagements and
working with a whole community. Broad stakeholder engagement
underlines everything we do at NIST and explainability,
interoperability are difficult, complex topics. We do have some
foundational research going on. Our researchers are working on
this, but we also augment it with the work of the whole
community.
Mr. McNerney. OK. Well, I've been on standards committees,
and I know what kind of work goes on. So you're saying it's a
similar process or would be a similar process?
Ms. Tabassi. Correct. Part of it, doing the internal
research, providing technical contributions, working with the
whole community on strengthening the research and taking the
contributions to the standard development organizations and
hopefully see them through become international standards.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Dr. Isbell, in math and physics, systems and solutions are
considered unstable if small changes in the initial conditions
result in large changes in the solutions and outputs. Are AI
systems unstable in terms of the data input? And, if so, how
can that be mitigated?
Dr. Isbell. Some of them are. There's a wide range of ways
of doing AI and machine learning. Some of them are quite
stable, and some of them are less stable. There's a lot of
theory behind this and a lot of work that's been done over
decades to get there.
I think the most important thing actually is not the sort
of instability that you're talking about with small changes but
that we don't actually understand how the set of parameters
that go into the way that we build these systems have that
impact. It's actually less about the data in that sense and
more about the way that we build the systems in the first
place. And that has remained largely unexplored.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you. That'd be a great area for
research. Thank you.
Ms. Tabassi, can you touch briefly on what's included in
the strategy of engaging technical standards for tools for
artificial intelligence?
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you for that question, Congressman. And,
yes, happy to. So that strategy for working toward the standard
was developed in 2019. And we are basically implementing the
recommendations of that plan since it has been developed in
2019. What's in the plan? Basically talks about standards,
standard development processes, talks about AI standards,
what's needed, and concludes with recommendations on what's
needed to maintain U.S. leadership in development of the
technical standards and recommendations very broadly is about
strengthening research for development of scientifically valid
standards, public-private partnership, to be able to do that
research and build those foundations, and international
cooperations for development of standards.
I just also want to note, that plan was also developed in a
stakeholder-driven effort with a lot of input from the
community.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. So what what extent is the United
States already collaborating with the EU and other likeminded
nations on developing standards for trustworthy AI?
Ms. Tabassi. Multiple ways. One of them is by expert-to-
expert scientists working on what we call pre-standardization
research to actually provide the scientific foundations for the
standards and then cooperation by to the standard meeting and
seeing them through to become international standard, but also
at the forum such as TTC and QUAD.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you.
Mr. Crenshaw, I didn't want to leave you out. Would the
Chamber and presumably many U.S. businesses support the
development of a United States AI regulatory law?
Mr. Crenshaw. I think, given the state of the technology,
we believe it's premature to get into prescriptive regulation.
We support voluntary frameworks like we see at NIST. A few
areas, though, I think, you know, we would like to see
regulation is for things like consumer privacy. We'd like to
see a national standard put in place. But at the same time, we
want to make sure that the process at NIST can work itself out
first before we start making any kind of determinations on
regulation. And it's also an issue, though, our own AI
Commission is working through as well to make recommendations
for.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. My time has expired, and I'm going
to call on Mr. LaTurner. You're up for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. Ms.
Singh, in your testimony, you talk about the need for
policymakers to establish benchmarks for fairness when it comes
to responsible AI, yet you also talked about how industry-
specific and context-driven artificial intelligence factors
preclude standard-setting bodies from creating a one-size-fits-
all metrics. In a context-specific field, how can Congress
create meaningful regulation that ensures AI systems retain
algorithmic fairness?
Ms. Singh. Thank you so much for that question. I think the
work that NIST is doing is a good example of the public-private
partnership that is needed to ensure that we are doing
thoughtful policymaking and standards that are very context-
specific. As I've stated previously, you know, in artificial
intelligence, the question that we should be asking ourselves
right now is how can governance and oversight keep up with the
development of artificial intelligence? And so we believe that
standards are going to be critical, especially as we think
about transparency reporting. And transparency reporting, is
going to be a complete view into the AI lifecycle that can help
with benchmarking.
Mr. LaTurner. What could we be doing differently with our--
with Congress and the public-private partnerships? Do you have
any recommendations on how we could be doing it better?
Ms. Singh. Yes, thank you so much for that question. You
know, we've given some feedback to NIST on that. I think we
have to really step back and think about the AI application, as
well as what the impact to the stakeholders within that AI
application is. And I think going back to context-centric
metrics, as well as context-centric reporting requirements is
one of the first steps we believe is going to help move this
industry forward.
Mr. LaTurner. How can developing responsible AI give the
United States an economic and societal competitive advantage
over other countries
Ms. Singh. Thank you. I think that is a fantastic question.
We at Credo AI believe that responsible AI is a competitive
advantage because it is not only going to help United States
and the companies here deploy AI with confidence, but as we
make sure that the standards that emerge which are aligned with
our societal values, that is going to promote more consumer
trust, which, as you can imagine, is going to further bolster
our leadership in artificial intelligence.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Ms. Singh.
Dr. Isbell, you state in your testimony that there are many
occasions where tech workers cannot be certain how AI
algorithms reach the correct answer, and these algorithms are
known as, quote, black-box models. If for any reason these
types of algorithms reach an incorrect or biased outcome like
the ones you describe in your testimony, it can be nearly
impossible to diagnose. If we want to solve the problem of
black-box models by making an algorithm's data set more
transparent, then what countermeasures can we take to bolster
AI security from hackers? To your knowledge, are there any
examples of AI developers that have already--that are already
addressing this issue?
Dr. Isbell. So there's a great amount--there's a large
amount of work that's being done in academia at the level of
basic research to understand differential privacy, to
understand how it is that people can interfere and break into
the way that machine learning algorithms actually work. So
there's a lot of work. It's in early stages, but a lot of great
stuff is being done. How much of the--not a lot of that has
necessarily been deployed in the systems that are out there now
I think in large part because the incentives haven't
necessarily been there.
What drives industry and drives the people who build these
systems and deploy them to do--to touch on this is requirements
that either through the market or through policy, that if they
don't do this, they're simply not going to be able to deploy
their systems and to have them used and adopted by large groups
of people.
So there's a lot of work that's been done out there, a lot
of specific things. I would start with differential privacy,
and there's lots of researchers that have done great work on
this. But at the end of the day, it's really going to be about
creating the incentives for people to want to take advantage of
what we know in order to keep things secure.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And with that, we're going to
hear from Mr. Beyer of the Commonwealth of Virginia for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Madam Chair, very much. And thank the
witnesses for really interesting feedback. But also thank my
colleagues, Democrats and Republicans, for some very good
questions.
Ms. Tabassi, I know you take on this tremendous task of
managing, developing the AI Risk Management Framework. You
heard from Mr. Crenshaw what the Chamber is doing with its
commission. And I think you've heard pushback about how we're
not ready to have mandatory standards, that we're still so
early that we're--we don't want to overreact. We don't want to
overregulate. But at the same time is it not naive to think
that we can make this voluntary indefinitely, that at some
point there won't be a need for clarity in terms of what is
demanded and expected from businesses in AI?
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you very much for that very thoughtful
question, Congressman. So NIST AI RMF is a voluntary framework
just like any other frameworks that NIST has developed. And the
use and adoption of that, at least, I believe, would be based
on the value that it provides. And another strength of the
voluntary process that we are doing is based on the stakeholder
engagement and stakeholder-driven process that we are following
in development of this voluntary tool. It gives the opportunity
to the whole community to provide their input, their comments.
So by the end, the final tool would be a more effective
resource that everybody that participate in development of that
would have a buy-in in that.
So by that, I think, having the value on using this and
having buy-in because of participation in the process of
developing it, would help with its adoption. NIST is a
nonregulatory agency, and the things we put out are voluntary.
Mr. Beyer. We know that, so thank you. I understand you're
nonregulatory and ultimately it will come back to us and then
come back to us just based on dangers.
Dr. Isbell, I was fascinated by your testimony. Because so
much of what we talked about today is concern about biases, but
you also had a wonderful paragraph about the upside of machine
learning and artificial intelligence. Can you expand on that a
little bit? It seems to me that we as human beings dramatically
underestimate the potential for what artificial intelligence
can bring humanity.
Dr. Isbell. So there's a particular law, and I forget
what--escapes me right now. But what the law says is that we
overestimate the short term and we underestimate the long term.
And I think that's exactly what's been happening with AI. There
was a lot of hype back in the 1970's and 1980's before the AI
winter with all the great changes that AI was going to bring to
the world. They were wrong. They were overhyped.
But it's turned out that the impact that AI has had has
been profound and far deeper than anything anyone even imagined
back then. It has infiltrated every part of our life, and I use
infiltrate in a positive way. We will be doing a better job of
detecting when people are sick in ways that we were never able
to do. We will be able to help people to make decisions they
otherwise would not have ever been able to make. We will be
able to connect with one another in ways that we have not been
able to connect with one another before. And a large part of it
will be because of computing, and it'll be because of AI. It's
all very positive. The opportunities in front of us are huge,
and it will take us--it will help us to solve big problems that
we currently have a hard time thinking through and those
problems over decades and even over centuries.
The problem that we have, of course, is that we have to set
up the incentives to allow people to do that, and we have to
make certain that everyday people understand enough of what's
actually going on so that they can make rational decisions
about how to use that technology in their own lives.
Mr. Beyer. Dr. Isbell, I'd love to have a question for the
record if you could find one of your research assistants to
find out the name of that law.
Dr. Isbell. I will.
Mr. Beyer. Dr. Vint Cerf told it to me 30 years ago, and
I've always attributed it to him, but it probably has a deeper
root.
Dr. Isbell. Absolutely.
Mr. Beyer. Very powerful.
Dr. Singh, one quick question. You know, we've been
struggling with facial recognition technology on police
bodycams. Now, is this something that you're working on, too,
that the notion that people of color, especially women of
color, are picked up inaccurately much more frequently than
others?
Ms. Singh. Thank you so much for that question. We at Credo
AI work across a diverse range of applications, including
facial recognition. And as I stated previously, I think any
artificial intelligence that is not developed responsibly is
going to impact all of us, and especially the marginalized
communities, which in the past have been excluded because of
gender, ethnicity, color, are at a higher disadvantage here. So
building responsible AI is not just competitive advantage, but
it is going to serve humanity really well.
Mr. Beyer. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. And with that, we're going
to hear from Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Member
Feenstra, for holding this hearing. Thanks to all the witnesses
for your testimonies.
Ms. Tabassi, we talked a little bit about the AI Risk
Management Framework, and that was helpful. I'm curious, has
China developed a similar tool? What is China doing
specifically around this?
Ms. Tabassi. Right. So I believe it was in 2017 that China
put a very ambitious domestic AI plan out. To the best of my
knowledge, there isn't anything that they're doing similar to
the AI RMF. If they're doing it domestically, I don't know.
But--yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Crenshaw, I'm going to switch to you for a second.
Unlike most countries that have a top-down, government-led
approach, the United States has a bottoms-up, industry-led
approach to standards setting, which I think is appropriate. We
employ a voluntary system which relies on industry
participation and leadership. This market-driven approach
enables competition, ensures transparency, and takes advantage
of consensus-building to drive us to the best possible
outcomes. Can you explain how the U.S. approach to AI through
the AI Risk Management Framework drives innovation?
Mr. Crenshaw. Well, I think it's interesting to know,
during one of our hearings, we actually had one of the cochairs
of the National AI Advisory Committee come testify, Miriam
Vogel. And she said the reason we needed to maintain leadership
in this country is because we have a brand of trust compared to
other countries. And it's important that we have standards in
place that are voluntary, that will be adaptable to this new
and developing technology but at the same time will look at
things like risk. And it's important that we have real firm
guidance in place.
And another--I think, as I said before as well, when it
comes to international standards bodies, we need to make sure
that the United States is well-represented. The CHIPS and
Science Act actually helped provide funding to ensure we can
participate in that space. But, you know, at the same time,
too, as companies look at things like developing implementation
for compliance or following guidelines, if they go out there
and say we're following this guideline and then they're found
not to be, there is some teeth there.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Mr. Crenshaw. So there are agencies that can enforce there
as well.
Mr. Gonzalez. Great.
Mr. Crenshaw. So there is great trust to be had by
establishing leadership and trust against other countries.
Mr. Gonzalez. Dr. Isbell, with your role on campus as a
Professor and Dean, what do you believe the appropriate role of
the university is--are in shaping the future of AI?
Dr. Isbell. Twofold. One is to do research. We have one of
the best systems in the world around basic research. Our
research ones are amazing. And all the way down to our research
twos and even our community colleges are able to bring people
in and to think about and engage in the conversation around AI
or any other large, important issue. So the research is
important, and maintaining and supporting that is important.
But the second and perhaps the most obvious is the
fundamental mission, which is educating people, not just
educating the people who are going to do the research, but I
think importantly, and especially when it comes to AI and
machine learning, is educating everyone else who is not going
to do AI and machine learning research but will be affected by
it, who will be adjacent to it, and will be far away. As I told
my son who's deeply into history, you will not be able to get a
degree in history in 5 years without knowing machine learning
and AI because it's still going to be data-driven. And so our
responsibility is to make certain that everyone is a part of
that conversation.
Mr. Gonzalez. Great. And then I agree 100 percent on the
research point, actually, on both points. But, you know, one
thing we talk about a lot on this Committee is how do we get
the research--the incredible research that's happening on our
university campuses out into the public space and then driving
innovation in the private sector? So what do you think we need
to be doing to have a--I'll just call it a more robust sort of
flywheel of research taking place on college campuses, leads to
innovation, leads to private companies, et cetera, et cetera?
Dr. Isbell. So we actually do pretty well with that, I
think, but I think the biggest problem right now is that
there's a mismatch between what the company--pick whatever your
favorite company is--wants to do in the next 6 months to a year
versus what the basic research that's looking out 5 or 10 years
actually is. Support through organizations like NSF, for
example, to help partner with those companies, to partner with
industry to help do the basic research, universities, I think,
is the best way to get that translational work done from the
lab out into the world. And when it works, it works very well.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you.
With that, we'll hear from Congressman Sherman of
California for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, and thank you for allowing me to
participate in this Subcommittee's hearing. Without objection,
I'd like to enter into the record an article I wrote 22 years
ago, ``Engineered Intelligence: Creating Our Successors'
Species.''
My line of questioning is going to be about things that
won't affect us until the second half of this century. But
since they relate to whether humankind will continue to be in
domination of the planet Earth, they're important. We're--right
now, the computer engineers and the bioengineers are racing to
create a new level of intelligence. And the last time there was
a higher level, a new level of intelligence appeared on the
planet is when our ancestors said hello to Neanderthal. It did
not work out well for Neanderthal.
So my focus is on whether we're going to see artificial
intelligence that has general intelligence, self-awareness, and
what I call the ambition, or survival instinct, or care. And
that third thing I should go into more, I tend to think that
our successor species would be biological because even the
dumbest worm seems to care if you try to turn it off or kill
it, whereas the smartest computers we have so far don't care if
you unplug them.
So my concern is what are we doing to prevent or monitor
for general intelligence, self-awareness, and ambition or
survival instinct? Or are we just going to ignore those issues
and focus on things that affect us in the next decade? Ms.
Tabassi?
Ms. Tabassi. Thank you very much, Congressman, for the
question. It's hard to determine when or if we can reach or the
community can reach to an artificial general intelligence. I
will say that that's----
Mr. Sherman. Well, I think we're going to get there
someday.
Ms. Tabassi. Right.
Mr. Sherman. We just don't know----
Ms. Tabassi. Very good, very good. So we don't know when
we're going to get there. So from the NIST point of view, we
think that that's one reason to work on foundational
principles. That's why it's now timely----
Mr. Sherman. Is anybody doing any technical research about
how we can get very useful computers, that we somehow put
something in there, a governor if you will, that prevents
general intelligence or prevents self-awareness, or prevents
ambition and caring? Is anybody doing the research as to how we
can get what we want without getting what we don't want?
Ms. Tabassi. I'm not aware of that research being done at
our laboratory at NIST, across the academia, and the community.
I don't know. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Sherman. I'll ask the other witnesses. Is anybody aware
of us trying to prevent, as we try to harvest the benefits of
artificial intelligence, the creation of an ambitious, self-
aware computer that may very well decide that we're irrelevant
to this planet? Is anybody figuring out how to do that, or is
it just an issue we're all aware of but aren't really trying to
confront? Does anyone just--yes, Mr.--yes, Doctor?
Dr. Isbell. So I guess the--yes, and thank you for the
question. Actually, you know, one of the reasons I got into AI
in the first place were these what I'd consider pretty
existential and philosophical questions around what does it
mean to build intelligence? I think the answer is that people
discuss these issues all the time. They try to figure it out,
they try to work it through. We don't have any large research,
at least that I'm aware of, any large research agendas around
preventing the issue--preventing general intelligence in part
because we have no idea how to get there from here. And I think
one of the things that I would leave----
Mr. Sherman. What about those two other issues, how to
prevent self-awareness, how to monitor for self-awareness, how
to prevent ambition or survival instinct, how to monitor for
survival instinct?
Dr. Isbell. I don't think it's done in those terms. I don't
think it's done in those terms. It's done in simpler terms
around preventing harm.
Mr. Sherman. Well, we're going to concentrate on the harm
that could occur in the next decade----
Dr. Isbell. That's right.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. The Nation or artists that lose
their creativity and the benefits of their creativity, and it
doesn't seem like anybody's worried about the problems we'll
confront in the second half of this century. And with that, I
yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And with that, we're going to go
to another round of questions because we're just having so much
fun here. And the Chair is going to recognize herself for 5
minutes. I think this question about where and how we're
determining the ethics is very important. Obviously, we have so
much respect for NIST and an understanding of the role that
standards play. We could go philosophical again and ask our
standards, ethics, and how the ethics arrive out of standards
that come from rigorous processes that are inputted by--you
know, we talked about the companies, we've heard from Dr.
Isbell about the people, the people element that needs to get
involved with the standards.
But, Dr. Isbell, some universities are already including
ethics as a curriculum and long have. You go into a philosophy
department, you're going to get an ethics course. Hopefully,
people take it. But ethics as a curriculum requirement for
computer science degrees in particular, a great start, but it's
often obviously sometimes a separate course and may not be
directly connected to what students are learning in other
courses.
You've changed your approach at Georgia Tech, and so I just
wondering if you could elaborate on what you're doing to
integrate ethics education and how you're assessing its
effectiveness. And I also just--because that's a question I
know you can answer it, but I just really want to applaud you
for a segment in your testimony that I encourage everyone to
look at where you said computing has long been an intellectual
wild west where things change so fast that the priority was
always to fix--to find what's next, to find the better
solution. Now, we've succeeded in finding solutions so good
that they are intertwined in nearly every area of our personal
lives and communities. So can our laws move fast enough? Can
our ethics move fast enough? And where and how do we find this
arising? Thank you.
Dr. Isbell. Sure. Thank you for the question. I really
appreciate it. I will say that, you know, people in my field
have spent 40, 50 years trying to convince everyone that what
we did was really important, and it turns out, we were right.
And then what we're living with now are the consequences of
having been right.
So when it comes to ethics and responsibility, I think
the--you know, Georgia Tech, we've had that as a requirement
for CS going back at least about 30 years. But what we had done
wrong--and not just us, but I think the way that we approached
this--is that we treat it, as you say, a separate class,
something that gets stapled on at the end. It's a requirement.
Nobody takes it till their last semester. It doesn't get
integrated into the rest of the curriculum and it can't.
So one of the things that we did recently is we kept it as
a requirement, and we made it a prerequisite for our junior
yearlong design classes. So by the time you're a sophomore, you
know just enough to be dangerous. You're at a place where
you're being forced to think carefully about the consequences
of the systems that you build, and then you're asked to build
such a big system. This is before you take Intro to AI. This
before you take Intro to Machine Learning. This is before you
take Introduction to Cybersecurity and Privacy. So it puts you
in a place where the people further down the chain can actually
now ask you the direct questions that they couldn't do before
because you wouldn't have the language or the experience to be
able to do that.
That is what's important. When we claim that something is
important, we have to operationalize it in our curriculum in
the way that we teach people from the very beginning and not
toward the end, which is the natural thing to do if you aren't
very careful about how important you think that it is.
Chairwoman Stevens. And certainly to Mr. Crenshaw, I'm sure
you have some some thoughts about this as well. And, you know,
we applaud the the point about, hey, we want to drive a--you
know, American leadership of what we're doing with artificial
intelligence.
And thank you, Ms. Singh, by the way. I've just so
thoroughly enjoyed your--not only your testimony, but the
answers to your questions. But how do we balance these things
out, right? You know, we sometimes see, you know, too much of a
good thing, per se. And we don't--you know, we like standards.
We're doing standards. You've said you like the risk
management. But, you know, in some ways, right, we see
companies getting pushback because they haven't self-regulated
and the ethics component isn't there. And so, you know, where
and how do we find that balance? And maybe that's articulated
through boards. Which--how does that populate? And maybe Ms.
Singh can chime in, too.
Mr. Crenshaw. I think it's critically important, one note
to make, that we have the critical decisionmakers in companies
involved in this process as well. Not only do technologists
have a role, but C-suite does as well. And also, you know, we
need more education out there about the need to build in
ethical AI into standards for companies and how they operate.
I've talked to some companies that are actually developing
their own ethical frameworks and have full-time ethicists who
are being brought on. We had a hearing actually at the
Cleveland Clinic about 4 months ago in which they've now
brought on an ethicist as well, as they're using AI to treat
their patients. So it's important, and I think companies are
beginning to see this.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes.
Ms. Singh. Thank you, Chairwoman. I think, today, we've
established that AI is not a technical problem. It's a
sociotechnical problem that really needs multistakeholder
perspective and viewpoints. So I totally agree that there is a
need for education. There's a need for involvement from
multiple stakeholders. But if I may, I think the companies we
work with, they're still struggling with what does good look
like. And this is where we believe that government has a
critical role to play in thoughtful policymaking and in these
standards to at least give that context to these companies
because everyone right now, even if they're trying to self-
regulate, do not know what does good look like. So our ask
right now is really making sure that there is more transparency
around how these systems are built and deployed.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes, right. And there's also certainly
examples from throughout history where the notion of good has
gotten it wrong.
But with that, why don't I turn it over to Mr. Feenstra,
for 5 minutes of questioning. Thank you.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm so glad that we
could have an extra round of questions.
And Dr. Isbell, thank you again for all your comments. I've
been enjoying listening to you. And, as academics, to me, the
challenge is--I finished my dissertation on maternity
healthcare in rural America. And the challenge is, you know, we
talk about ethics, but there's this fine line of how we access
data and the barriers that are put on to try to get the data.
And so how do we thread that needle of, you know, there's a
need to have the data and to create trustworthy AI systems, and
yet there's that balancing act of ethics. Can you dive into
that a little bit?
Dr. Isbell. I mean, I do have my opinions about how to
solve all problems around ethics, which is a very deeply
difficult question. I think the best way of thinking about it
is to help people to articulate explicitly what it is that--
what the tradeoffs are and where they want to live in that
space of tradeoffs. If people can understand the tradeoffs,
they can make informed decisions. I guarantee you that, first
off, there's more data out about you out there in the world
than you have ever imagined and that people know more about you
than you wish that they did, and that could be a good thing
because one day, it may save your life. On the other hand, it's
a lot--it's your privacy, and it's who you are, and people
shouldn't just be able to get access to that data just because
they can.
Mr. Feenstra. Is there any data, though, that you'd say
that would be beneficial that, you know, you look at and say,
OK, this is captive that we can't get at that might be helpful
as we move into trustworthiness and AI?
Dr. Isbell. I think that that's a conversation that
involves, as we've been saying all along, all the stakeholders
who are involved.
I will add one thing, though, which is, although I think
that bottom-up thinking is good and it's something that's
driven us to innovation, it says right there in this chamber
that, ``Where there is no vision, the people perish.''
Mr. Feenstra. That's right.
Dr. Isbell. And the vision has to come from elected
officials, it has to come from government, and it has to be a
conversation about where it is we agree we want to go.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes, I agree. Thank you, very, very good and
thoughtful words.
Ms. Singh, very intrigued by what your organization does.
So if you look at how we build the appropriate safety and
security into products, do you do you see a role in government?
Or how do we incentivize going down this path, especially in
the private sector? I mean, I think the private sector has some
accountability in going down this path. But do you see anything
that we can do? You know, we can put parameters, I get that.
But we also, to me, have to do something to allow people to say
I want to. Do you have any thoughts on that?
Ms. Singh. Thank you so much for that question because I
certainly do have many thoughts on it. But one that I would
love to reemphasize here is the companies we work with right
now, they are recognizing the importance of transparency
reporting and disclosures because that transparency is helping
them build trust with the consumers and truly get that
competitive advantage. While one of the reasons that these
companies are not sharing these transparency reports broadly is
because they don't know how their competitors or others in the
market stack up to it.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes.
Ms. Singh. So at Credo AI, we are big proponents of you
know, the government coming up with standards that cannot only
mandate disclosures, but I think we will--it will propel a
thoughtful benchmarking across these AI applications.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes, I mean, that's a great thought, that you
can be protective in your data, but if we say--if the
government says, wait a minute, this is universal data that
everybody could use, that can be a gamechanger a little bit.
Again, ethics plays a vital role in that. Thank you.
With that, I am out of time. Thank you.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes. And we'll hear from Dr. McNerney
for 5 minutes of additional questioning.
Mr. McNerney. Well, good. Now that you're back, I can thank
you for having this hearing. It's great. And again, I want to
thank the witnesses.
Ms. Singh, I feel bad about leaving you out first round,
but I have two big concerns about AI, and I'll throw the first
one to you. The first one is--and machine learning, which has
really overtaken AI--that AI will overtake an increasing number
of decisionmaking from humans, pushing us more and more into
irrelevance and sort of dehumanizing us. What can we do to
prevent that, you know, pushing us aside with the
decisionmaking capability of AI?
Ms. Singh. Thank you so much for that question. You know,
with any disruptive technology, be it AI, we see there are huge
economic impacts. And we see that in, you know, changes in work
force, the role that humans will play in the future of work.
But as we step back and think about it, I think we have a great
opportunity right now to invest more in education. As Dr.
Isbell mentioned, I'm excited his son is going to be getting
educated on AI because I think that's going to be critical. But
thinking about reskilling and upskilling in this age of AI is
going to give us a competitive edge.
Mr. McNerney. So that's a great answer, educate more people
so that we can utilize the AI in a more productive way than
letting it make decisions for us. That's basically what you're
saying, right?
Ms. Singh. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. McNerney. Very good. OK. Thank you.
The next one, I guess I'll go to Dr. Isbell again. AI--one
of my other concerns about AI is that it's being used to
monitor humans and our behaviors, our habits, especially either
in autocratic nations or by businesses that would like to be
able to influence our decisionmaking in terms of the way we
spend our money. What do you think is a way to mitigate that
issue?
Dr. Isbell. So first off, you're right, that's exactly what
happened, and it's been happening for a long time. Black Friday
is a thing that happens because it gets people to buy things,
right, so this is hardly new. What has happened is computing
and AI has made it much more efficient and easier to deploy.
My answer to that--I have two. One is that it's education.
It's making people aware of what's happening and allowing them
to make reasonable decisions. The other is that there are
policies and there are technical mechanisms that we can employ.
We can encourage people to develop and to deploy that will
allow them--that will allow people to understand what is being
happened--what is happening to them. You are in fact being
studied. You--your data is in fact predicting this behavior,
and you're doing this. And giving people the tools, not just
the stuff that they know--the education they learn on their own
but the technical tools that allow others to monitor the
monitors, that is a place that has a lot of potential and not
one that we've invested a great deal into.
Mr. McNerney. Well, the French postmodernists in the
1930's--1930's and 1940's were sort of warning us that the
government would be getting more and more information about us
and being able to use that information to control our political
decisionmaking as individuals, and that's sort of what I was
worried about. And now what we're seeing with social media is
that these--some of these companies are using information to
direct people into political bubbles that may advocate violence
or other sorts of extreme behavior. And I think that's one of
the issues we have--that I'm having with how do we tamp that
down? Do you have any recommendations, Mr. Crenshaw, on how we
could go about doing that?
Mr. Crenshaw. Well, I think when it comes to anytime we're
looking at the use of algorithms, we have to look at it from a
risk-based approach. And I think we also need to realize that
there are some benefits also to artificial intelligence that
we've seen. And, you know, one of the things I wanted to note
is that what we've learned is that the more people know about
AI, the less scared or concerned they are about it. And I think
that's why education about artificial intelligence is so
important. But companies also need to build in ethics and
ethical decisionmaking into their AI as well, too. And we see
companies that are leading in this space.
Mr. McNerney. But it's hard to regulate that. And I'm
thrilled that we're hearing about companies hiring ethicists,
but how do we get that as a part of the corporate mindset that,
you know, we need to do this in the future? So--it's not
something we can regulate I don't think.
Mr. Crenshaw. I agree that C-suite needs to be involved. It
needs to be part of corporate culture is building in ethics
into artificial intelligence. But at the same time, I think
with the work we're seeing at agencies like NIST are getting us
in the right direction toward where we want to be.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. And with that, I don't
believe we have any other questions. So we're going to bring
the hearing to a close. Do we have one more? Oh, did Baird come
back? OK, hold on. I'm not closing. Where is he? Dr. Baird?
He's not coming? Well, we got questions for the record, too.
OK. We're prepared to close. All right. Well, we're prepared to
close. But honestly, we're not going to close the door on the
conversation because this has only brought up more questions.
And in fact, we could probably have a hearing on a couple of
different subsets that we discussed today. I believe with this
Committee, and as Mr. Gonzalez who, you know, we have been so
privileged to work with during his couple of terms here in the
Congress, mentioned, you know, taking research applications,
commercializing them, recognizing where our economy filters in.
We also recognize that we're in a leadership moment, and
this is--you know, we have been deeply privileged to have Dr.
McNerney through his tenure, his mighty tenure in the Congress
on this Committee, and he's so, so dedicated to this Committee,
but this is a leadership moment for the United States of
America. And we are going to shape how the world's going to go
on this. We want to be able to shape how the world's going to
go, and we've got to be prepared to do some of the deeper work.
It's not just the question of harm, but it's also the questions
of, you know, the meta challenges that come before us that are
somewhat brought on by AI. It's forcing us to be more
collaborative. It is forcing us to come together in ways that
we didn't last century.
I left out that I was working at a digital research lab
before coming to this body and we did the taxonomy, Mr.
Crenshaw, on the IoT (Internet of things) jobs, you know, how
companies are going to have to hire. We did this in partnership
with Manpower Group and a host of other industry and academic
partners. Digital ethicists came up. That was one of the job
profiles we came up with. That was just 5, 6 years ago. And I
mentioned Turing test, and we were so possessed when I was in
school by the Turing test, like we thought that was going to be
the question. And Mr. Sherman sort of got to that in his
questions, you know, are we worried about replacing humanity?
No, we are talking about what Mr.--or Dr. Isbell said in his
testimony, culture, changing culture and how we influence
culture through the laws we pass in this body.
And we have been addressing some meta challenges. I didn't
have the privilege of having Mr. Feenstra here last term, but I
know we would have been working together on the trade deal, the
USMCA (United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement). You have unions
and the Chamber came together to pass USMCA. This time around,
we passed Inflation Reduction Act. For the first time ever, you
know, we're dealing with climate. You've got the environmental
groups and the industry partners, my automakers saying they
want the same thing.
So these digital applications, these complex artificial
intelligence systems that we're putting into place, they're
asking us to come together. So, Ms. Tabassi, I--you know, we're
going to come back to you because we just--we think NIST solves
all of our problems, the mighty agency that can with a little.
And we're excited about that, and we--and we're going to come
visit you and we're going to talk about how you're stitching
together with your risk management what Dr. Isbell said and
what Ms. Singh is saying. Who's at the table? Who's at the
table? You know, we solve some problems in ones and twos, and
then we look at some of the broader challenges. But overall,
we're wildly optimistic. We're working on the vision, and we're
excited that we had this time together today. Hopefully, the
rest of the Congress tunes in on C-SPAN later.
But with that, we're going to close it. We're going to
leave the record open for a couple of weeks for additional
questions for the record, and our witnesses are excused. Thank
you.
[Whereupon, at 12:29 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Document submitted by Representative Brad Sherman

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
