- PAPER MILLS AND RESEARCH MISCONDUCT: FACING THE CHALLENGES OF SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PAPER MILLS AND RESEARCH MISCONDUCT:
FACING THE CHALLENGES
OF SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 20, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-65

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-028             WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAY OBERNOLTE, California,
AMI BERA, California                   Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                MIKE CAREY, OHIO

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

July 20, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Jay Obernolte, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    12
Written Statement............................................    12

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    13

Witnesses:

Dr. Jennifer Byrne, Director of Biobanking, New South Wales
Health Pathology; Professor of Molecular Oncology, University
of Sydney
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    18

Mr. Chris Graf, Research Integrity Director, Springer Nature;
Chair of the Governance Board, STM Association Integrity Hub
Oral Statement...............................................    25
Written Statement............................................    27

Dr. Brandon Stell, Neuroscientist, French National Centre for
Scientific Research; President and Co-Founder, The PubPeer
Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    36
Written Statement............................................    38

Discussion.......................................................    43

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Jennifer Byrne, Director of Biobanking, New South Wales
Health Pathology; Professor of Molecular Oncology, University
of Sydney......................................................    56

Mr. Chris Graf, Research Integrity Director, Springer Nature;
Chair of the Governance Board, STM Association Integrity Hub...    59

Dr. Brandon Stell, Neuroscientist, French National Centre for
Scientific Research; President and Co-Founder, The PubPeer
Foundation.....................................................    63

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Documents submitted by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``Neutron Production and Absorption in Uranium,'' H.L.
Anderson, E. Fermi, and Leo Szilard........................    66
``Uranium: Neutron Production and Absorption,'' B. Foster and
E. Perlmutter..............................................    71
Letter, Allison C. Lerner, Inspector General, National
Science Foundation.........................................    74

PAPER MILLS AND RESEARCH

MISCONDUCT: FACING THE CHALLENGES

OF SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHING
----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 20, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill
Foster [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Well, thank you. And this hearing will now
come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare recess at any time.
Before I deliver my opening remarks, I wanted to note that,
today, the Committee is meeting both in person and virtually,
which in my case is probably a good thing since I'm currently
on day five of self-isolation due to mildly symptomatic COVID.
I want to announce a couple of reminders to the Members
about the conduct of the hearing. First, Members and staff who
were attending in person may choose to be masked, but it is not
a requirement. However, any individuals with symptoms, a
positive test, or exposure to someone with COVID-19 should wear
a mask while present.
Members who are attending virtually should keep their video
feed on as long as they are present in the hearing. Members are
responsible for their own microphones. Please also keep your
microphones muted unless you're speaking.
And finally, if Members have documents that they wish to
submit for the record, please email them to the Committee
Clerk, whose email address was circulated prior to the hearing.
Well, good morning, and welcome to our Members and
witnesses. For today's hearing, I'm proud to announce that
Representative Perlmutter and I, in our copious spare time,
have been conducting experiments on a groundbreaking topic in
nuclear physics. We are excited to share the results of that
effort today as a preprint, and we plan to submit it to the
Reviews of Modern Physics.
Well, just kidding, folks. What I'm actually referring to
is an automated rip-off of a seminal paper published in the
Journal of Physical Review in 1939 by Enrico Fermi called
``Neutron Production and Absorption in Uranium,'' which has
certain applications and relevance to nuclear power and nuclear
weapons. We took Dr. Fermi's paper and ran it through a free
online fake text generator that uses artificial intelligence
(AI) to disguise plagiarism, and this took about 15 seconds. We
then took about five minutes to tweak a few sentences to
disguise the true source a little better. And once it was
ready, we ran this paper through two well-respected plagiarism
checkers. Each of these detectors found our fake paper was, and
I quote, ``100 percent unique and 0 percent plagiarism.'' Not
surprisingly, these fake content generators have presumably
been tuned up to generate low plagiarism scores, sort of the
spambot equivalent of the generative adversarial network AI
technique that's used to generate deep fake images and videos.
And we even sent it over to the Inspector General at the
National Science Foundation (NSF).
Now, any real human physicist peer reviewer for a journal
or an NSF grant proposal would notice immediately that this
paper uses silly technical jargon and plagiarizes from a very
famous paper, and they would also find it unconventional that
the report was authored by two sitting Congressmen and includes
an acknowledgement to our Ranking Member Jay Obernolte. But you
can imagine how bad actors might use tools as we did to sneak
plagiarized content past journal editors and peer reviewers.
The AI-assisted plagiarism tool we used to make this fake
paper is only one of the many in the arsenals of paper mills.
These are criminal enterprises that sell authorship credits for
the fraudulent papers they place in academic journals.
Scientific disciplines such as the life sciences, which rely
heavily on images to communicate the results of experiments,
are popular targets for fraud because of how easy it is to
manipulate images.
Now, with the advent of sophisticated natural language
processing software, it's becoming just as easy to churn out
fraudulent but outwardly coherent text. Add in a few basic
templates and the creation of hundreds of papers, complete with
figures and citations, becomes the work of an afternoon. And
much to the--this is much to the disgust of real scientists who
might spend months on a single paper.
The scientific community must rise to meet this challenge,
and it is already taking the first steps. Journals are looking
for new ways to collaborate in detecting fraud during the
review process. One recent effort is the STM (International
Association of Scientific, Technical, and Medical Publishers)
Integrity Hub, which would serve as a platform for journals to
share dedicated fraud detection tools. The first tool under
construction will flag the simultaneous submission of papers to
multiple journals, which is a strong indicator of paper mill
activity.
There's also a strong international community of
researchers unaffiliated with publishers, many of them
volunteers, who work to identify fraudulent papers following
publication. Just as automation is enabling those committing
fraud, it is also being used by these researchers to combat it.
Next-generation plagiarism checkers don't just compare text to
text, but intelligently scan for indicators of AI-generated
text. Other tools detect manipulated images or identify
erroneous science within the text of the paper itself. The
automation arms race is upon us. We are here today to discuss
how researchers and publishers can develop tools and policies
that will help them stay ahead of the paper mills.
As we discuss scientific misconduct today, one of the most
important things to keep in mind is the scale of the problem.
Hundreds of papers with signs of fraud are indeed a serious
concern. However, according to the NSF, a whopping 2.9 million
papers were published last year alone. The number of cases of
fraud must be viewed within that context. Creating and
maintaining a body of scientific literature without flaws of
any kind is an impossible quest, but published scientific
literature remains the greatest body of human knowledge in the
world, and it is our responsibility to look after its
integrity.
This effort begins with a public dialog. As Dr. Fermi said
famously, ``Whatever nature has in store for mankind,
unpleasant as it may be, men must accept, for ignorance is
never better than knowledge.''
I look forward to earning more knowledge today with the
help of our esteemed witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Foster follows:]

Good morning and welcome to our Members and witnesses.
For today's hearing, I'm proud to announce that
Representative Perlmutter and I have, in our spare time, been
conducting experiments on a groundbreaking topic in nuclear
physics. We're excited to share the results of that effort
today as a preprint. We plan to submit it to Reviews of Modern
Physics.
Just kidding. What I'm actually holding is a cheap rip-off
of a seminal paper called ``Neutron Production and Absorption
in Uranium,'' which was published in the journal Physical
Review in 1939. Its author was Enrico Fermi. We took Dr.
Fermi's paper and ran it through a free online text generator
that uses artificial intelligence to disguise plagiarism. This
took 15 seconds. We then took five minutes to tweak a few
sentences to disguise their true source a little better. Once
it was ready, we ran this paper through two well-respected
plagiarism checkers. We even sent it over to the Inspector
General at the National Science Foundation. Each of these
detectors found our fake paper was, and I quote--``100% unique,
0% plagiarism.''
Now, any real physicist peer reviewer for a journal or an
NSF grant would notice immediately that this paper uses silly
technical jargon and plagiarizes from a very famous paper. They
would also find it unconventional that the report was authored
by two sitting Congressmen and includes an acknowledgement to
Ranking Member Jay Obernolte. But you can imagine how bad
actors might use tools as we did to sneak plagiarized content
past journal editors and peer reviewers.
The AI-assisted plagiarism tool we used to make the fake
paper is only one of many in the arsenals of ``paper mills.''
These are criminal enterprises that sell authorship credits for
the fraudulent papers they place in academic journals.
Scientific disciplines such as the life sciences, which rely
heavily on images to communicate the results of experiments,
are popular targets for fraud because of how easy it is to
manipulate images. Now, with the advent of sophisticated
natural language processing software, it is becoming just as
easy to churn out fraudulent but coherent text. Add in a few
basic templates and the creation of hundreds of papers--
complete with figures and citations--becomes the work of an
afternoon, much to the disgust of real scientists who might
spend months on a single paper.
The scientific community must rise to meet this challenge,
and it is already taking the first steps. Journals are looking
for new ways to collaborate in detecting fraud during the
review process. One recent effort is the STM Integrity Hub,
which will serve as a platform for journals to share dedicated
fraud detection tools. The first tool under construction will
flag the simultaneous submission of papers to multiple
journals, a strong indicator of paper mill activity.
There is also a strong international community of
researchers unaffiliated with publishers, many of them
volunteers, who work to identify fraudulent papers following
publication. Just as automation is enabling those committing
fraud, it is also being used by these researchers to combat it.
Next generation plagiarism checkers don't just compare text to
text, but intelligently scan for indicators of AI-generated
text. Other tools detect manipulated images or identify
erroneous science within the text of the paper itself. The
automation arms race is upon us. We are here today to discuss
how researchers and publishers can develop tools and policies
that will keep them ahead of the paper mills.
As we discuss scientific misconduct today, one of the most
important things to keep in mind is the scale of this problem.
Hundreds of papers with signs of fraud are indeed a serious
concern. However, according to NSF, a whopping 2.9 million
papers were published last year alone. The number of cases of
fraud must be viewed within that context. Creating and
maintaining a body of scientific literature without flaws of
any kind is a quixotic quest.
But published scientific literature remains the greatest
body of human knowledge about the world, and it is our
responsibility to look after its integrity. This effort begins
with a public dialogue. As Dr. Fermi said famously--

``Whatever Nature has in store for mankind, unpleasant as
it may be, men must accept, for ignorance is never better than
knowledge.''

I look forward to earning some more knowledge today with
the help of our esteemed witnesses.
I now yield to Ranking Member Obernolte for his opening
statement.

Chairman Foster. And I now request unanimous consent to
include in the record for this hearing both the real paper by
Dr. Fermi and the fake one that we created, as well as a letter
from the NSF Inspector General about they--how they tried to
detect our sleight of hand.
Many thanks to Inspector General Allison Lerner, Dr. Aaron
Manka, and their colleagues for their help in this.
And now the Chair will now recognize the Ranking Member for
the Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Mr.
Obernolte, for an opening statement.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much, Chairman Foster, and
I'm sure everyone here on the dais joins me in wishing you a
speedy recovery and wishing that your illness remains
asymptomatic. We're looking forward to having you back with us
in person.
And I want to thank you for convening this hearing on an
incredibly important topic, the topic of research integrity. It
really is a topic that underpins our entire system of academic
research here in this country.
A couple of years ago, I went back to graduate school to
finish my doctorate, and finishing that dissertation was one of
the hardest things I've ever done in my life. An important part
of any research is to review the field of literature and the
body of work on your research topic to determine exactly what's
been done before and what the state-of-the-art in your research
is. And I'll tell you, as I was going through the research in
my field, it never occurred to me that some of those papers
might be fraudulent.
That's one of the reasons why this hearing is so important
is to call attention to what is a cutting-edge field in the
body of academic research and literature, you know, this
emergence of fraudulent research and paper mills and also to
cast some light on the ways that technology can both enable
this bad behavior by creating powerful tools that anyone could
use to generate fraudulent papers, but also in combating the
spread of fraudulent research by identifying the papers that
might have been generated with artificial intelligence
technology. So it's one of the reasons why I'm very much
looking forward to this hearing.
I actually think that this is one of the things that we
here in Congress can do very effectively, which is to
simultaneously be a podium for the dissemination of information
such as this because spreading awareness of this is going to be
key to preventing the proliferation of this bad behavior. But I
also think we have a role to play in catalyzing more research
into how prevalent this problem is, in funding some Federal
research into identifying the spread of the problem and
identifying not only the causes of the problem but also some of
the technology-based solutions to that problem, and in general
raising awareness of this issue. And I also hope that everyone
in the academic community joins us in recognizing just how
destructive these paper mills have the potential to be for
research integrity in general. I think the greater awareness
that we have not only this is a problem but the--of the need to
make severe penalties apparent for those who engage in
destructive behavior like this, I think that's going to be key
to controlling the spread of this problem.
So, Mr. Chairman, again, thank you very much for convening
the hearing. I'm looking forward to hearing from our witnesses.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Obernolte follows:]

Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening
this hearing. And thanks to our witnesses for appearing before
us today.
We are here today to discuss one of the most important
aspects of scientific work, and the objective trust it
instills, research integrity. As a member of the academic
community myself, I am both troubled and perplexed to hear
about the issue of paper mills. I am troubled because of the
potential harm that these fraudulent papers can do to the
scholarly record and perplexed by the motivations of
researchers who choose to buy papers from a paper mill.
There is a saying in academia, referenced in today's
Hearing Charter: ``publish or perish''. This mentality, along
with other stringent career requirements internationally, seems
to be driving some researchers to pad their resumes with paper
mill papers.
Given our role in authorizing and overseeing the national
research enterprise, I think it is important that we recognize
this dynamic, while also thinking about how we can prevent this
bad behavior. It is vital that publishers and universities
remain diligent in preventing these fraudulent publications,
and that there are consequences for engaging in this bad
behavior.
As so often happens, the advancement of technology is an
important tool to help the academic community rise to this
challenge. Emerging technologies like AI are being used today
to combat fraud by detecting plagiarism and faulty data. We
should be wary though, because as these tools advance, so do
tools to enable more bad behavior. One stark example is
presented today by Chairman Foster's experiment -using an AI
tool to create a fake academic paper. Even more problematic--
this paper was not flagged as plagiarism by advanced plagiarism
tools. Technology brings us new opportunities, but also new
challenges. To combat this fraud it is important that the
community remains diligent about the strengths and weaknesses
of technology, and considers how additional investments in
research can help to address this problem.
This is one area where I believe the Federal Government can
play an important role--funding additional research on fraud
detection. By placing emphasis and resources on research to
create tools to help detect and flag fraudulent papers, federal
research agencies can provide valuable input on what methods
and tools should be considered best practices.
I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses today.
Each of them represents an important perspective in the
academic community on how to combat this issue at a different
stage in the process.
Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening this hearing. And
thanks again to our witnesses for appearing before us today. I
look forward to our discussion.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Foster. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning. Today's hearing will consider what seems to
be a growing threat to the integrity of scientific publishing.
The number of papers retracted in 2021 crossed 3,500, and
volunteer sleuths find hundreds of cases of research misconduct
each year.
I do not want to suggest that scientific journals are not
paying attention to research misconduct. Quality control in
paper submissions is a journal's bread and butter. Their
reputations are a direct result of how successful they are in
keeping fraudulent content out of print. But I also understand
that if the goal is to keep 100% of fraud, fabrication, and
plagiarism out of print, the odds are not in their favor.
With the dawn of foreign paper mills, the production of
fraudulent content is now systematic. Language models powered
by artificial intelligence are growing more sophisticated every
day, making it easier than ever to produce fake content that
looks authentic, or plagiarize real content so that it looks
original.
As the methods of bad actors grow more powerful, we need to
consider whether the scientific publishing enterprise is arming
itself accordingly. Do journals have access to cost-effective,
automated tools to assist with detecting misconduct before they
even get to the peer review stage? Are there any automated
tools that peer reviewers themselves can use to assist in their
evaluation of original research? Are journals both motivated
and equipped to investigate and adjudicate in a timely fashion
any claims of misconduct that might be made about a paper that
they have already published? Do journals always make it clear
when it an article has been retracted for misconduct, so that
the influence of the offending science is curtailed
appropriately?
Our hearing today is focused on scientific journals, which
are privately managed and funded. Prevention and detection of
misconduct in federally funded research is its own critical
issue. But I want to underscore that because of how scientists
lean on the other work of others, scientific integrity in
privately-funded research is still a public good. Remember that
in order to ``see further'' in his research, Sir Isaac Newton
``stood on the shoulders of giants.'' Scientists use the
published work of others to inform their own findings. Those
other scientists are often halfway around the world, trying to
publish and get ahead in an environment that the United States
doesn't control.
If fraudulent work from any nation is allowed to persist in
the scientific literature, it can undermine the good faith
efforts of honest researchers. It can even influence laws or
the behavior of the public to disastrous effect. Consider the
fraudulent Wakefield paper, first published in 1998, which
suggested childhood vaccines cause autism. A savvy journalist
raised alarms about the critical flaws in this paper in 2004,
but it was not officially retracted until 2010. It wreaked
untold harm on public health in the interim.
I commend the volunteers like Dr. Byrne and Dr. Stell for
their dedication to integrity in the scholarly record. The work
that you and your peers do is a true service to the public. I
know that it is often done at great personal sacrifice. I also
want to commend Mr. Graf and STM for acknowledging the threats
to your industry and for pursuing some scalable tools to
address it. I look forward to hearing today about how
government can be a partner to you going forward.
I yield back.

Chairman Foster. And at this time, I'd like to introduce
our witnesses. Our first witness is Dr. Jennifer Byrne. Dr.
Byrne is a Professor of Molecular Oncology at the University of
Sydney. Her research has helped inform international debate on
systemic fraud within the preclinical research literature, and
she's an advocate for improved post-publication error reporting
and correction. Dr. Byrne was a keynote speaker for both the
2021 Computational Research Integrity Conference and the
Singapore Research Ethics Conference. She also chaired the
Paper Mill Symposium at the 2022 World Conference on Research
Integrity.
After Dr. Byrne is Mr. Charles Graf--Chris Graf, excuse me.
Mr. Graf is the Research Integrity Director and Leader of the
Editorial Excellence Team in Springer Nature. He also chairs
the Governance Committee of the STM Integrity Hub, an
initiative launched in early 2022 to help publishers
collaborate to protect research integrity. Mr. Graf previously
served as the Chair of the Committee on Publication Ethics, or
COPE, and as a member of the Program Committee for the Seventh
World Conference on Research Integrity.
Our final witness is Dr. Brandon Stell. Dr. Stell leads a
research team with the French National Centre for Scientific
Research, CNRS, studying the processing of sensory information
in the brain. In 2012, Dr. Stell co-founded the website
PubPeer.com to provide scientists with a forum to discuss the
published research literature. PubPeer has since grown to be
one of the leading sites for scientific discussion with a
dedicated community of users who have helped strengthen the
scientific record by exposing and correcting its weaknesses.
As our witnesses should know, each of you have five--
whoops--yes, excuse me. As each of you should know, you will
have five minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written
testimony will be included in the record for the hearing, and
you will all--when you all have completed your spoken
testimony, we will begin with questions. Each Member will have
five minutes to question the panel.
And we will start now with Dr. Byrne.

TESTIMONY OF DR. JENNIFER BYRNE,

DIRECTOR OF BIOBANKING,

NEW SOUTH WALES HEALTH PATHOLOGY;

PROFESSOR OF MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY,

UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY

Dr. Byrne. Thank you very much. So it's a pleasure to be
here today. And I would very much like to thank Chairman Foster
and Ranking Member Obernolte and all of the distinguished
Members of the Committee. So my name is Jennifer Byrne, and I
am a cancer researcher who has been studying what I believe to
be systematic research fraud for about the past seven years.
As we have heard, paper mills are commercialized
organizations that provide undeclared services to authors of
scientific and scholarly publications including fabrication,
fabricated data, and manuscripts. This represents a significant
threat to science in terms of both its practice and its
reputation. And the literature must take a no-tolerance
approach toward papers that may have been constructed solely
for career or commercial gain.
So there are a number of major factors that either drive
authors toward paper mills or enable their activities, the
first of which is unrealistic publication requirements that can
be leveled across a broad range of authors, such as academic
students and medical doctors, who may be--who may not be able
to achieve the publication requirements that their institutions
require of them.
But the--more in the field of publishing there has been an
increasing focus upon a commercial focus through increasing use
of author-paid publication services. These add to digital
publishing capacities over the last 20 years that have greatly
increased the capacity for papers to be published rapidly and
also have enabled the creation of new journals. In contrast,
the experimental sciences have not experienced the same
capacity to increase their rate of data production.
Finally, a very important issue is the imbalance that
currently exists between the production and the correction of
scientific and academic publications. So most systems require
appropriate balances between production and quality control.
For example, cooking in a kitchen requires somebody to clean
the kitchen afterwards. But at the moment in the scientific
literature, the activity of production is greatly--it greatly
overwhelms the capacity to clean and remove waste from the
literature. This is a major advantage for research fraud and
fraudulent publications because once they are published, they
are very difficult to remove.
So the scope of the presence of fraudulent papers from
paper mills within the scientific literature is largely unknown
and--because this has been understudied. We recently screened
just under 12,000 human gene research papers where we
identified over 700 papers with errors that could signal paper
mill involvement. Extrapolating from screening a very tiny
fraction of the literature, I would estimate that the human
gene literature contains more than 100,000 papers that have
been produced by paper mills. This is a very serious issue, and
the overall presence of paper mill publications and literature
could be much higher because, obviously, many disciplines
beyond human gene research have been targeted.
So the possible ramifications of large numbers of
fraudulent papers are very concerning. For the research
community, it is very likely that these papers are already
misleading researchers in their research directions. They can
damage research careers at all stages, encourage the support of
unproductive research directions, and slow research
translations through opportunity costs.
So clearly, given this scale of paper mill contributions,
automated tools are necessary for the identification of the
products of paper mills. We have used automation to screen
papers for wrongly identified nucleotide sequences. These are
reagents that are used in experiments, and their identities
cannot be determined by the human eye, but they can be verified
by appropriate detectors.
So the Seek & Blastn tool that was created by Dr. Cyril
Labbe in Grenoble in 2017 uses an automated system of
detection. Experience with this tool indicates that it provides
a scale that cannot be matched by human experts. But its
results need to be checked by humans in order to avoid false
accusations of research errors, and clearly, this type of
support can be difficult to obtain through research grants.
Tools such as Seek & Blastn can also be used by paper mills
to remove errors from their papers and create papers that are
more plausible and more likely to be published. So it is very
important in my view that we move toward targeting paper mills
through features that represent their business model as opposed
to features of their products.
Publishers are now likely to be actively screening
manuscripts for features of paper mills as an attempt to both
detect and deter future submissions. We have proposed that
another method that could be taken would be to require all
research manuscripts to be posted to preprint service at the
time of submission to reduce the duplicate submissions that
Chairman Foster referred to in his opening address. We also
believe that more aggressive steps are required to specifically
disrupt the paper mill model such as to delay manuscript
submissions through compulsory registrations at least one year
prior to manuscript submission. This would not deter
experimental scientists but would greatly damage the rapid
publication timeframes that paper mills rely upon.
We would also like to see journals turning the same tools
that they're using for screening manuscripts into their own
archives to identify the papers from paper mills that have
likely already been published and that are already misleading
researchers in their daily work.
The Committee on Publication Ethics has recently described
the need for retraction processes to rapidly adapt in response
to the possibility of paper mills. We have proposed that
journals could rapidly flag papers with verifiable errors using
neutrally-worded notices such as editorial notes before
investigation starts, as opposed to when they conclude so that
researchers can be aware of papers having problematic features.
So, in summary, paper mills represent an unprecedented
challenge to scientific and academic publishing, but they also
provide a tremendous opportunity to enact transformational
change. This can be achieved by increasing the oversight of
scientific publishing, recalibrating our capacity to correct
published information, as well as to produce new information
and overhauling the reward systems that underpin the careers of
researchers and other professionals who publish it within the
academic literature.
Thank you very much again for this opportunity to speak
before the Committee, and I'll be very happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Byrne follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And next is Mr. Graf.

TESTIMONY OF MR. CHRIS GRAF,

RESEARCH INTEGRITY DIRECTOR, SPRINGER NATURE;

CHAIR OF THE GOVERNANCE BOARD,

STM ASSOCIATION INTEGRITY HUB

Mr. Graf. Thank you, Chairman Foster and Ranking Member
Obernolte and esteemed Members of the Committee for inviting
me. I'll give an overview following Jenny Byrne's overview of
what research publishers are doing to safeguard research
integrity.
As introduced previously, I'm Chris Graf, the Research
Integrity Director at Springer Nature, which is one of the
world's leading research publishers and Chair of the Governance
Committee for the Integrity Hub, which is a collaborative tech
initiative from the STM Association, which is the global trade
body for research publishers.
My written testimony explains how the research publishing
sector is facing one of its current challenges, namely that of
paper mills and research misconduct. And I conclude in that
written testimony that the opportunities exploited by paper
mills are created somewhere upstream where research is done.
Publishers can and are doing more to stop papers from paper
mills, and other actors also have a responsibility, including
the organizations that fund and employ and set policy for
researchers and for research. I'd argue that's where the
solution lies in a broad coalition of those who are able to act
to make change happen.
I would like to use the rest of my five minutes for some
background. I'll talk briefly about science then briefly about
publishing, and then a little more extensively about paper
mills. First, science, so trust in science remains strong. The
2021 survey from NORC at the University of Chicago reports that
48 percent of Americans have a great deal of confidence in the
scientific community. And members of those scientific
communities published--well, my numbers say 5 million peer-
reviewed scientific articles in '21. That's from a dimensions
data base. That contrasts with the 2.9 million that the NSF
reported, so lots of millions, but somewhere between 2.9 and
five. Within that, if we zoom in a little on COVID, there are
now 630,000 COVID papers in the World Health Organization data
base for literature on COVID, on coronavirus disease. Half of
those were published last year in 2021. So that's a view across
science and a bit about publishing that science.
But we're here to talk about paper mills and misconduct. So
that's when things go wrong or actually very wrong. What
happens then? Well, you may know but we retract scientific
papers when un-addressable concerns are identified. Those
concerns range from honest and fundamental errors that might be
embarrassing for a researcher, but, you know, that researcher
should be applauded for addressing them and for retracting
those papers and clearing up the inaccurate information they've
published. And they range from those honest and fundamental
errors through questionable and misleading research, which
could be naive and might be negligent, but probably isn't
malicious, right through to misconduct, including that promoted
by paper mills.
And that kind of retraction doesn't happen often.
Historically, 4 in 10,000, peer-reviewed science articles are
retracted after publication. Zooming in to look at that through
the lens of COVID, about 300 of the 630,000 COVID papers
published so far have been retracted. And I think that's
similar to the general rate that I described earlier, 4 in
10,000.
You know, I think that's an indicator of significant and
successful investments made into quality and into integrity by
researchers first and also by publishers when it comes to
publishing them. I'd argue that the contribution that research
publishers make to quality and integrity is--well, I'd argue
it's true. It's based on years of collaborative efforts.
Publishers with other stakeholders for years have been
developing and sharing resources about how to manage honest but
fundamental mistakes through to the other end of the range that
we talked about earlier, to misconduct and systemic--systematic
manipulations.
And publishers continue to invest in screening for
integrity, including routine checks for plagiarism that we've
heard about, but they're being enhanced and improved, as well
as other indicators for ethics and quality like the disclosures
of conflicts of interest. Some publishers, as Jenny referred
to, are beginning to roll out screening for image manipulation,
which is a newer fingerprint that might indicate the presence
of a paper mill. And both of these require investments not only
in technology but in actual people to use that technology.
Even so, I agree that paper mills are a growing threat.
Evidence suggests they're operating with relative freedom. When
they find a way into a journal that has weak defenses, they
certainly exploit that, and they do cause real damage. We've
referred to that already. They steal credentials from
legitimate researchers, for example, they con their way into
editorial positions of power at journals, and then they use
that to their advantage. And that's identity theft, and that's
fraud. They do many other inappropriate things as well.
So let me close with what I think the challenge is.
Legitimate researchers currently benefit from a largely trust-
based system. Solving the paper mill problem without making
publishing harder and less trust-based for the vast majority of
legitimate researchers I think is the challenge. The new STM
Integrity Hub shows how publishers are taking collective action
and using their combined knowledge and technology to do just
that.
So that's where I'll end. Thank you for the opportunity to
present on how the publishing sector is responding to the
challenges of research misconduct. It really was a privilege
and is a privilege to be part of today's hearing. I genuinely
look forward to your questions and also to continue to serve in
any way that might be useful for you. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Graf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And next is Dr. Stell.

TESTIMONY OF DR. BRANDON STELL, NEUROSCIENTIST,

FRENCH NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH;

PRESIDENT AND CO-FOUNDER, THE PUBPEER FOUNDATION

Dr. Stell. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Obernolte, and
all distinguished Members of the Committee, it is an honor to
join the hearing today. I'm a U.S. citizen and neuroscientist
with the French National Center for Scientific Research and
President and Co-Founder of the PubPeer Foundation, which is a
nonprofit organization that maintains the website PubPeer.com.
My testimony today is my own and does not necessarily reflect
the views of the CNRS.
In the fall of 2012, I launched PubPeer with the help of
two colleagues, aiming to provide a forum for scientists to
discuss the scientific literature. Today, I run it with the
help of Boris Barbour, another CNRS researcher. My motivation
for the website is to capture discussions of the scientific
literature that we scientists typically have in the lab and
share them publicly to help other scientists evaluate the
scientific literature. The site has witnessed the emergence of
a community of expert reviewers and helped expose low-quality
research. The numbers--numerous regular PubPeer users are now
clearly more experts than most journal and institution staff
when it comes to the forensic examination of the literature. We
currently receive around 3,500 comments and 700,000 pageviews
per month.
Today, I will share insights from the first 10 years of
running this website. When we launched this site, we received a
flood of comments pointing out serious flaws in the literature.
It was as if there was a backlog of unprocessed problems, and
the website provided a new release valve to share them. Prior
to the website, the procedure for sharing such problems was to
write to the authors, their institutions, and the journals and
hope that one of them would correct the record. Even when this
process succeeded, it was extremely slow, and conflicts of
interest often discouraged any action.
The site allows this blockage to be circumvented. Issues
can be immediately displayed online so that anyone interested
can be made aware and authors can respond. Shortening by months
or often years the time it takes to find out about these issues
in the literature saves researchers' time and ultimately tax
dollars that would have been spent trying to build on flawed
research.
How can this be? How did these issues find their way into
the literature? Perhaps the underlying reason is not too
surprising. With the expansion of science, we continue to
create new and important advances at a faster rate than ever,
recent examples being development of vaccines during the
pandemic and the James Webb Telescope. However, this expansion
creates challenges for identifying and supporting the best
scientist and scientists--science and scientists.
Job postings for faculty researchers and funding
opportunities can now receive hundreds or thousands of
applications, and shortcuts for screening those applications
become more and more tempting. It's much faster to look up
metrics about a journal where an article is published than it
is to actually read the article. And applicants, perhaps
falsely, believe that those metrics are the key to the
advancement of their careers. In that atmosphere, it's easy to
see how many of these issues we see raised on PubPeer find
their way into the literature. Instead of publishing a boring
result in a journal with a lower metric, there are incentives
to select, misrepresent, or even falsify data in an attempt to
give a falsely positive result that would land in a journal
with higher metrics.
A sensational example of the problem is paper mills, which
produce articles for the sole purpose of artificially inflating
the publication and citation metrics, while hoping that nobody
ever reads them to see that they are fake. They do get
published, sometimes by reputable publishers, but perhaps
that's not too surprising since journals collect fees for every
article they publish, regardless of its quality.
Although I believe these paper mill articles cause little
harm to the overall progress of science since they would rarely
be confused for real scientific results by scientists, they do
highlight the underlying problem with scientific publishing.
Incentives need to shift to place higher importance on the
content of articles and not on the metrics.
How can we fix this problem? The metrics surrounding
articles are now ingrained in the community and unlikely to
disappear anytime soon, even if they should. Commentary on
sites like PubPeer can provide parallel sources of information
that can be much more informative. If scientific commentary
continues to grow and involve diverse sections of the
community, evaluation committees could start relying on it more
than the current metrics so that incentives might shift back
toward solid reproducible results that stand up to public
scrutiny.
If contributions to this body of evaluation were rewarded
when evaluating researchers for funding, promotion, and prizes,
it is likely that scientists would participate to a greater
extent. The Federal Government through its funding of science
could play a huge role, but that potential influence is largely
unrealized today. To our knowledge, funding agencies like the
NIH (National Institutes of Health) and NSF have no procedures
to exploit information available through community curation
sites like PubPeer.
In addition to providing evaluation of the publications
referenced in grant applications, the information from these
sites could be used to reward scientists that make exceptional
contributions to public evaluation.
I appreciate the Committee's interest in this very
important issue, and I thank you for your time and look forward
to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Stell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And at this point, we will
begin our first round of questions, and the Chair will now
recognize himself for five minutes.
So first, to all our--all of our witnesses here, in your
testimony, you all discuss the problem of incentives. The
scientific community, you know, still largely follows the model
of publish or perish where simply getting papers out the door
is a big component of advancing a career. And so, briefly, what
would be involved in generating better matrix--metrics that the
scientific community could use to assess the quality of the
research? For example, do the metrics adequately, you know,
punish the ratings of researchers that have a high rate of
retracted papers? Or maybe the traditional H index, you know,
which I presume has been badly corrupted by paper mills you
know, maybe it should--instead of being recorded as a positive
integer should be recorded as a complex number with both a real
and imaginary component for the H index.
So if you could just speak briefly on what improved metrics
are under under consideration at this point, and we'll go in
reverse order. And I'll start with Dr. Stell.
Dr. Stell. So I personally feel that metrics in general are
a horrible way of evaluating science. I think that we need to,
as a community, put more focus on the content of the articles,
read them, and evaluate scientists for what they publish and
not the metrics associated with those articles. And I think
that one way of accomplishing this is by creating this body of
information from scientists that are commenting on articles and
creating a secondary source of information in addition to these
metrics that will hopefully overtake the use of metrics one
day.
Chairman Foster. And, Mr. Graf?
Mr. Graf. Thank you. Yes, that's a good question. The
things that I read about research assessment will point in the
same sort of direction that Brandon just described, toward a
more qualitative approach to understanding the impact of a
piece of research. And in some nations that--I believe that's
done through descriptive case studies where researchers prepare
a report about a piece of work that explains its importance.
And then the Research Assessment body uses that, perhaps with a
suite of metrics, not relying on one, but with multiple metrics
to form an opinion and to reward that researcher. So I
definitely think the mood in the room is a distinct desire to
move away from reductive metrics and toward something that's a
lot more reflective, the complex nature of research itself, and
much more qualitative.
Chairman Foster. Yes, Dr. Byrne?
Dr. Byrne. Thank you. Just to add to those comments, I
think it's helpful if there are publication requirements
leveled on professionals, that those requirements or
expectations recognize people's training and capacity to
conduct research. Clearly systems where, for example, medical
doctors are required to publish papers when they have neither
the time, the resources, or the training to conduct research,
that seems like a bad system. I would prefer a medical doctor
to be assessed based upon their capacity to care for patients
and provide cures.
In terms of other forms of metrics, I think a number of
commentators have thought about the desirability of the journal
impact factor to also reflect other dimensions of publisher
activity such as the capacity to correct the literature, as
well as to produce it. Thank you.
Chairman Foster. And so another thing that I think has
occurred to probably all of us, reading your testimony, is the
role of government in supporting more and better automated
tools on this. Is that--you know, I loved, Dr. Byrne, your
analogy with waste removal, that we just need a system for
waste removal in the system. And so are--and we--you know, in
normal communities throughout the country, part of the budget
goes into waste removal, and maybe part of the solution is just
turning up the fraction of our municipal budgets we would
devote to that.
Are there specific proposals that you've seen that seem to
make sense for--you know, for putting more muscle into this
effort?
Dr. Byrne. Look, I think--I've thought about this a lot,
and it is unusual that science is so geared toward publication
or production and sort of relentless production without that
capacity to just cleanup every so often. So there could be a
system where, you know, a certain proportion of research
budgets could be devoted to that particular activity. Another
system could be that if you are given research funding to do
original research, that perhaps a proportion of that budget
could be also devoted to a certain kind of quality improvement
activity within the literature.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and my time is expired. But I
love the idea of financial incentive somehow. I've learned
and--when I moved from science to politics is that people
respond awesomely to them, so that if there was some bounty on
taking down garbage papers, I suspect we've got a very active
international community collecting that bounty.
And so at this point, I'd like to recognize the Ranking
Member for five minutes of questions.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
witnesses, a really interesting topic here.
So, you know, I think it's always interesting to
concentrate on the--you know, the most negative consequences of
the problem that we're discussing. So the attorneys call that
the parade of horribles, the worst thing that could possibly
happen. And in my opinion, when you're talking about paper
mills, we've got two potential consequences. You've got
fraudulent research getting rewarded by unqualified people
graduating or by unqualified people earning promotion, right?
So we can attack that perhaps with tools to identify these
fraudulent papers and hopefully create consequences for the
people that are using the paper mills.
But to me, the more consequential problem is the impact on
research integrity, this idea--and I think Dr. Byrne brought it
up a little bit--that we're--researchers might be misled in
their daily work by the presence of these fraudulent papers in
the body of literature.
But I want to tunnel down a little bit on the likelihood
that that would happen. And I'd like to open this up to anyone
that wants to comment of our witnesses on this because my first
question is, wouldn't--if you were an editor of a journal and
you're reviewing a paper that was submitted and it came from a
paper mill, wouldn't it be pretty immediately apparent? I mean,
right now, the paper that Dr. Foster generated, you know,
that--anyone with a technical background could read it and
realize that there were inconsistencies. But, you know, we're
looking at maybe one more generation ahead, you know, where AI
tools might create something that would convince someone that
wasn't an expert in the field. But if you're an editor in a
journal, I mean, you're familiar with what the state-of-the-art
is in various fields. Wouldn't you immediately know, you know,
reading a paper, well, this doesn't make any sense because, you
know, really what people--the topics of research are A, B, and
C, and, you know, this isn't even consistent with that.
Wouldn't people know about that?
Dr. Byrne. Thank you. Look, I might just--I'll stop and
just give a brief answer. I think that some paper mill papers
are actually highly plausible. They have already been accepted
for publication, which means they've passed editorial review,
they've passed peer review, and they've moved into the
literature. So they're actually highly plausible, and they very
closely resemble genuine papers. And I think that's the great
danger. I mean, I can certainly think of many researchers who
would read the kinds of papers that we study, particularly
students and early career researchers that have not spent 30
years reading the literature as I have. These papers are highly
plausible, and they are capable of misleading people purely
because of that.
Mr. Obernolte. Interesting.
Dr. Byrne. Thank you.
Mr. Obernolte. So a follow-on question, you mentioned peer
review. And I am astonished that peer review wouldn't help us
take care of this problem because, ostensibly, if you've got a
panel that's doing peer review on a paper, those people are
familiar with, you know, the cutting--the--where the cutting
edge of the research in that field is. I mean, I remember when
I was in graduate school. For, you know, one brief shining
moment, you're supposed to be the world's expert at a certain
very narrow field, and so one brief shining moment, you know, I
knew everything there was about public sector budgeting and
research on various budgeting methodologies because that's what
my dissertation was on. And at that moment if you had given me
a paper on something related to that field, I would have been
able to say, wait, I know there hasn't been any research on
that at all and this doesn't actually make any sense because
here are the topics that people are researching. So doesn't
good--a good peer-review system help us fix that problem?
Mr. Graf. May I take up the response there?
Mr. Obernolte. Dr. Graf, go ahead.
Mr. Graf. If I could try and tell a brief story to explain
why the--how the paper mills navigate around both editors and
peer reviewers, that might help. So, last year, I became aware
of an editor-in-chief of a journal who'd become concerned about
the volume of content being published and the scope of the
content being published in a guest-edited issue that he had
appointed a guest editor for. He emailed the guest-edited
issue, who he thought was--guest editor who he thought was the
guest editor for that issue. And the guest editor, she
responded saying this has got nothing to do with me. So then we
checked the email addresses and noticed that the guest editor
was using an email address very close to the email address of
the legitimate researcher who the editor-in-chief thought he'd
appointed but not the email address. And so our assumption is
probably the truth, that a paper mill has--was using identity
theft and identity fraud to place a fake guest editor in charge
of this guest-edited issue. That fake guest editor was then
appointing fake peer reviewers to fake peer review the content
and passing the content through as if it were legitimate and
essentially, you know, then triggering the publication of that
content.
So paper mills are devious and have worked ways around the
largely trust-based and professional courtesy-based system that
has been working quite well for decades, if not hundreds of
years, and we need to tool up to prevent that better.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Well, it's interesting. You just
raised a--well, perhaps we'll have a second round here. I see
I'm out of time, and I don't want to abuse the process. But
it's interesting that, Mr. Graf, you've just raised, you know,
kind of another follow-on problem, which is the corruption of
the peer-review process, in the service of these paper mills,
which, you know, I think is--you know, I put that up, along
with the other consequences of what we're discussing here. But
thank you very much. I'll yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I think we will attempt to
have a second round of questions if time and Members'
attendance allow.
We'll now recognize Representative Casten for five minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you so much. This is a fascinating
conversation. I want to just start--I want to understand from
Dr. Byrne in your research, do you have any sense--and I
realized that you've--you're trying to quantify it. Do you have
any sense of how much of the issue is plagiarism versus fraud?
Dr. Byrne. That's a very good question. We mostly--we don't
really study plagiarism in detail. My background as a molecular
biologist is the kinds of reagents that are used to construct
experimental results. So we study the reagents that are used
and whether those reagents are correctly identified. Sometimes
we do see reagents appearing across model papers when that
seems highly unlikely, so that indicates that there may be some
role for plagiarism. But we feel that it is more likely that
most paper mills are creating papers according to templates, so
they have a--kind of a basic skeleton of structure and then
they fill in the gaps in different ways. And they often----
Mr. Casten. OK. And----
Dr. Byrne [continuing]. Target topics that are not very
well understood and so peer reviewers have no knowledge of
these papers and so can't critique them.
Mr. Casten. And I ask this because it seems like the the
tools that we might have to address them are different, you
know, and there's ways to detect fraud, and there's different
ways to detect plagiarism. I'm curious for your thoughts--and I
guess this would apply in either case. There certainly has been
some talk in the--you know, especially in sort of the bioethics
community about should we mandate that researchers publish
negative results since there's no real incentive to do that?
And all of us who have ever worked in a lab knows that most
experiments don't get you publishable results. If--and I don't
know how we do that. But if we were to mandate that--you know,
that labs or researchers had to publish, you know, all their
experimental results even if they were negative, would that
help or hinder this problem?
Dr. Byrne. Look, I don't know. I think that the publication
of negative results is very important, but one of the issues
around publishing negative results is all of these publications
take time, and I think it will be difficult to incentivize that
process. I mean, researchers, like everybody, are more
interested in something that they are intrinsically interested
in, and sometimes they don't find negative results particularly
interesting. But I agree that I think we have to find ways of
removing this incessant focus upon results that must be
positive, and we need to be teaching our students that a
negative result is just as important as a positive result. It's
a result.
Mr. Casten. Yes, I mean, I wonder sort of, you know, to use
a bad baseball analogy, if I only knew that a hitter--if I only
knew the stats on a hitter when they got hits, I might not--you
know, I wouldn't know the difference between Ted Williams and,
you know, whoever's the third string on a baseball team. And so
if I knew a researcher was batting 800, I'd be a little
skeptical, right? Anyway----
Dr. Byrne. Yes, that's----
Mr. Casten. The--this is a very wonky one, and I suppose
this would only work for falsified data. There's this wonderful
little numerical trick that, you know, in any sequence of
numbers that sequential, if you look at the probability of the
digits, ones are more likely than twos, twos are more likely
than threes. Is there a way to automate that? You know, because
I would imagine if I'm--you know, if I'm reporting the number
of colonies in an agar plate, that's a very hard thing to fake
and--but it's algorithmically testable. Is that worth time? Are
people already doing that? Is that just a dumb thing that I
read about years ago that's not relevant today?
Dr. Byrne. No, no, it's certainly not a dumb thing. I mean,
people are certainly looking at that kind of thing,
particularly clinical trial data, patient data, where it's
actually very, very difficult to fake random data. So I think
the answer is that we need different kinds of tools for
different kinds of data and different kinds of science. And we
don't have all of those tools. We have some of them now, but we
don't have them all.
Mr. Casten. So my last question is sort of deeply
philosophical, and I'll try to get this off in a minute. It's
always struck me that whether you're doing basic science, you
know, at the lab bench or doing research, you know, going
through the literature review, I always thought Immanuel Kant
got it right, that, you know, all you can do is prove things
wrong, you can never totally prove them right. And things are
more likely to be true when you try to falsify them and fail.
And I think our human brains are really good at that kind of
analysis, you know, the--our ability to say, well, if this
thing is true and the causality arrow points in this direction,
then that would imply that this other thing is true. Let me see
if that's the case. And if not, I got some problems over here.
I don't know how you write algorithms to do that. I think our
brains are just sort of uniquely set up to do that. And it's
what the traditional peer review process is really good at.
Is that even a--is it even algorithmically possible to do
that sort of Kantian falsifiability? And if so, or if not, is
there any way to sort of satisfy that a paper that is deemed
worthy of publication someone has attempted to do that
falsifiability and failed? Does that make sense? I realized I'm
getting very philosophy of science there, but does that make
sense as an approach?
Dr. Byrne. Look, it makes sense. I don't know if it's
possible, but that's--I'm not an algorithm person, so, you
know, perhaps one of the other witnesses could answer.
Dr. Stell. So yes, I think that this would be possible.
This sort of thing might be possible. But I think that the more
algorithms we build, people are going to find ways around these
algorithms. And so I think that, you know, this is maybe not--
shouldn't be our focus is trying to find every individual
instance of fraud but changing the incentives so that fraud is
no longer a winning strategy, that we put the focus on the
content of the articles and make it so that it's just not
important to do fraud anymore.
Mr. Casten. Thanks. And I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. I'll now recognize
Representative Bice for five minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Chairman Foster, and thank you for
the witnesses for being with us this morning.
My first question really is to any of the witnesses, and
that is how long do you think that paper mills have been
impacting academia? And how many of them do you believe that
are based in Russia or China?
Dr. Byrne. I can start. In terms of how long they've been
operating, I don't think we have a clear answer for that. I
would estimate that at least since 2008, so possibly for about
15 years. In terms of the numbers of paper mills, again, if I
refer to the literature, a paper was written in 2013 that
estimated the number of of ghostwriters that were operating in
China at that time in 2011, they estimated nearly 1,800 full-
time-equivalent ghostwriters in China. There's been very little
research done on this topic, and so I think the answer is--you
know, the answers today are not clear.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. Mr. Graf, did you want to follow up
with that?
Mr. Graf. Thank you. I could add a little. I think it's
true that the strategies and tactics that paper mills have been
using since data Jenny Byrne cited have changed. In my--the
information I've studied, the use of AI and algorithms to
generate text in articles probably began around 2019, and
that's when you've got a massive change really in the tools
that paper mills have got available to them. So that talks both
to sort of how long and also to change in their practices,
which refers back to what Brandon said, which is the sort of
arms race thing. It really would be--it would be beneficial to
get out of the arms race because--and really address the
incentive system. I think that's probably the right way
forward.
Mrs. Bice. How do you--to follow up on that particular
point, Dr. Stell, how do you--what do you think we should be
doing to try to address this in a way that still allows for
researchers to be able to publish papers, but it's not solely
focused on the data? Where's the fine line there to be able to
publish a research paper that has value, that can be utilized
by the community, but yet isn't solely--isn't isn't focused on
specifically the data that's contained within it?
Dr. Stell. Thanks for the question. Yes, I think that
anything we can do to put more focus on the content of articles
is going to help enormously. And I think the one thing that
hasn't been done that could be done is rewarding people for
contributing to a body of commentary. If we have this body of
commentary, this is going to take the focus off of metrics and
put it on expert opinion of scientists. And if we can reward
expert scientists for their commentary, we're going to get more
participation, and then these evaluation committees are going
to start using that expert evaluation. And so I think that for
me the way forward is to just create another body of evaluation
parallel to metrics, which are going to continue to exist for a
little while but perhaps could be replaced by more expert
informative opinion.
Mrs. Bice. And on Dr. Graf's--I'm sorry, Mr. Graf's point
and, Dr. Stell, you're welcome to comment as on this, but I
think that the--one of the concerns I have being a Member of
the House Armed Services Committee is how do we ensure that
these research papers aren't being influenced by foreign
governments in a way that could have a negative impact on
security? Any thoughts there?
Dr. Stell. Go ahead, Chris.
Mr. Graf. No, I think it's a question about misinformation,
isn't it? And I don't think that the motives behind all of this
are to promote misinformation. I think they're the simplest of
motives. Paper mills want to earn money. They earn it when
researchers give it to them. Researchers want to earn money.
They earn it when they get a paper published and when they get
promoted. So I don't know. I don't have evidence to suggest
there's a conspiracy from foreign agencies going on.
Mrs. Bice. You don't think that there's sort of
falsification in a way that American academia would be impacted
by that falsification?
Mr. Graf. I don't think that the motives are to impact
American academia, no. I think the motives are very isolated to
the individual researcher who's buying this bogus service from
this--from the paper mill.
Dr. Stell. Can I jump in?
Mrs. Bice. I think my time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Well, thank you. And I think we will now
start a second round of questions, and so I will recognize
myself for five minutes.
So I'd like to return to the subject of trying to get the
financial incentives right. Because, as Mr. Graf pointed out,
that really drives a lot of this. You know, I've often
fantasized that if it cost people 50 cents to send me an email
and then they got the 50 cents back if I saw fit to respond to
it, that my spam filter would have a lot less work to do. And
so, first off, has anyone estimated how many man-hours would be
actually required to adequately peer review this flood of
papers and what the total cost of that would be and the cost
per paper?
Mr. Graf. Not to my knowledge.
Chairman Foster. Even order of magnitude? OK. If you can
just reply for the record, I'd be interested in that. Because
that's--you know, it seems like a daunting number of man-hours,
and you want to engage the best and brightest in any field
toward reviewing those papers, and it's a huge burden to put on
their time and might not be the best use of their time.
Mr. Graf. I can add a little information, but it's not
really about peer review. It's about the internal review in an
investigation of potential paper mill papers that I've been
conducting with my team. And that review has been ongoing since
September last year and has taken--I hadn't added up the
person-hours, but there's been a team of, let's say, five
people. It's more than five, so maybe it's between five and 10
people working at least part-time, sometimes full-time, on the
exercise, and they have spent money on consultants as well.
So--and that's been focusing on a total kind of universe of
about--where we looked at about 3,000 papers, so that's not
looking at the whole world, right? That's only looking at a
small part of the world. And there you go. That's the sort of
sketch that I've got for you, the amount of--for you about the
amount of effort that it's taken post-publication, not with the
peer-review community but with colleagues internally at a
publishing company.
Chairman Foster. Now, would a more significant cost to
submit a paper for review be an effective partial remedy, or
would that really place an unacceptable burden on emerging
researchers? You know, for example, if--you know, when you got
a grant, five percent of the grant money you could allocate
toward getting any publications reviewed, and then you'd spend
that money where you thought it would do the most good. Are
there incentives like that that could be put into place?
Mr. Graf. That's an interesting idea.
Chairman Foster. Has that ever been talked about?
Mr. Graf. Publicly, there's a couple of different campaigns
to--led--there's one led by James Heathers to--a gentleman
called James Heathers to claim payment for peer review. And
perhaps if--I don't know how much sort of ground that movement
has been made--has made. I do worry about equity and access to
publishing services.
Chairman Foster. Yes, so presumably, this would be based--
you know, the fees will be based on ability to pay based on
your situation and your country's situation.
Mr. Graf. Yes.
Chairman Foster. But--and that--but maybe that's a partial
solution. You also mentioned identity fraud, and there is a lot
of progress. In fact, where I'm marking up this week a bill
that we're pushing forward to secure digital identity. This is
just providing tools for individuals to prove they are who they
say they are online and also to attach verifiable credentials
to that digital identity so you can't fraudulently claim, you
know, basically, credentials that you haven't earned. And so is
that--is there--are there things underway in the academic
community already? It also provides a mechanism for punishing
people that abuse the system or at least identifying them so
that they can be dealt with with appropriate suspicion? Are
there any--anything along those lines underway?
Dr. Byrne. I think I can just speak to that briefly. So
there's a system of author identity called ORCID (Open
Researcher and Contributor ID) that has been running for some
time. Some journals are now requesting that all authors have
ORCID identities as a way of combating paper mills. But I think
paper mills are very adept at getting around these kinds of
fairly small hurdles that we place in front of them. So there
is evidence that paper mills then simply take out ORCID
identifiers for their potentially real or fake authors. So
that's a major issue, I think. I think that probably also
pertains to paying fees for submitting manuscripts. Paper mills
would probably be willing to pay those fees.
Chairman Foster. OK. But presumably when you claimed an
academic credential from--and then attempted to attach it to a
fake identity, at some point, the university whose academic
credentials are being stolen would blow the whistle on you.
Anyway, I will--I'm out of time here, and I'll yield to the
Ranking Member for five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you, Chairman Foster.
I want to talk a little bit more about research integrity
because I think that that is the most dangerous consequence of
these false and fraudulent papers floating around. So, you
know, the presence of misinformation is an issue that we are
dealing with as a larger society. It's not just academia, and
it's not just research, certainly no social media. There's lots
of information out there that's true, there's lots that's not
true, and there aren't a lot of tools for a user to try and
figure out what's--how to differentiate between those two.
But we've got a tool in academic literature that is not
available to social media, and that is the hierarchy of
different scientific publications. I mean to call something
literature ignores the complexity of the fact that scientific
publishing is not monolithic. And we've got journals that are
highly respected in their field and then journals that are less
so.
So, you know, a question for anyone who would like to
answer. Does--is there a way we can leverage that hierarchy?
You know, the fact that there are journals that can serve as
highly trusted sources of information, can we leverage that to
help us solve this problem?
Mr. Graf. If I may start, one of the things that we can do
is really get behind the transition, or transformation even,
away from subscription publishing to open-access publishing.
When we make all of the more trustworthy information that's
available in journals, including those of the top end of the
hierarchy, more open, it's there as a counterbalance to the
misinformation that is freely and openly available on the web.
So I think there's an argument there for that transformation to
open.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, Mr. Graf, I agree that that would be
great, but, I mean, there are monetization problems with doing
that. How would you solve those? How would you alter the
monetary incentives that empower this current subscription
model?
Mr. Graf. That's a whole query of its own. But yes, we're
working on that as--across the research publishing sector, and
we're, you know, intent on making the transformation--moving
the money that is currently being spent on subscriptions into a
way to enable the--those journals to then be open. So it's--
yes, it's complicated. And one type of openness won't suit all
research disciplines and all journals or regions on the planet,
but that's our goal.
Dr. Stell. One thing I would just like to add to that is
that there have been studies looking at the impact factor of a
journal and the number of errors that are found in the journal.
And the higher-ranking journals are not necessarily immune to
the problem. So I think if we start relying on these tiers to
tell us which is reliable information, it's not as accurate as
we would hope it would be.
Mr. Obernolte. Interesting. I wouldn't have guessed.
Dr. Stell, while I've got you, one of the things that I was
fascinated by is in the previous round of questioning you were
talking about how some papers, fraudulent papers had been
identified on PubPeer. And I'm wondering, you know, as we
grapple with this issue of eliminating the commercial and
academic incentives for publishing fraudulent papers, what were
the consequences for the authors of the papers that your
website identified? Did they have consequences?
Dr. Stell. There are examples of absolutely zero
consequences, but there are also examples of people being fired
from their positions for having been caught cheating and
exposed on PubPeer. So the consequences range.
Mr. Obernolte. So when people--when there were
consequences, what triggered the consequence? So if someone on
PubPeer looks at a paper and says this was generated by a paper
mill, here's my proof, here are the, you know, inconsistencies.
And so, you know, the PubPeer community agrees this paper is
fraudulent, does someone reach out to the employer of the
person, the author of this fraudulent paper and say that, you
know, if they cited this paper in their resume, then they were
hired under fraudulent, you know, circumstances? I mean, did
someone take that affirmative action?
Dr. Stell. That's a very good question. We're not part of
that process. What we do is we provide a platform for people to
discuss these things and make it public. And I have to say that
paper mills are a real minority of the discussions that happen
on PubPeer. But the fraudulent work is usually some sort of
image that has been copied, some data that has been
misrepresented. It's been exposed on PubPeer. That is public
for everyone to view, including the people's employers and
other committees. And so it's--presumably, it's taken up by
those people, and they're taking actions. It's not--we're not
part of anything other than making that information public.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Well, I see I'm out of time. I want
to thank everyone for the, you know, really interesting and
consequential hearing here. But let me reiterate my conviction
that when we're talking about the spread of disinformation, and
academic literature is no exception, I think that trying to
focus on eliminating all fraudulent papers is a fool's errand
because I think they're going to be out there, so I think the
better solution is to try and create trusted sources of
information where some peer-reviewed vetting takes place and
people can have a higher degree of trust in. And, you know, to
your point, it's clear that more work needs to be done there.
But, you know, certainly I think that's where the solutions are
going to be found.
Anyway, thank you, everyone, for the discussion. It's been
really interesting. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I just want to second the
Ranking Member's comments about the importance of trusted
sources. You know, it used to be--I--at least, I felt when I
was in my career in science, if you stood up and said something
that you know was not true, that that was a career-ending
thing. And now, you know, as I moved from science to politics,
it seems like you stand up and say something that's not true,
it seems to only increase your chances of reelection. And so we
have to do a better job, and science should continue to lead by
example of taking a very hard line when outright fraud is
detected. And I was encouraged to hear that at least some
universities are--you know, you're losing tenure and you're out
of here if you participate in any of this because that--it's
important. Science always operates at the edge of what is
known, and we cannot tolerate deliberate lying when we're
trying to flesh out the details of nature's complexity.
Now, before we bring this hearing to a close, I wanted to
thank again our witnesses for testifying. And the record will
remain open for two weeks for additional statements from the
Members and for any additional questions the Committee may ask
of our witnesses.
So the witnesses are now excused, and the hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:07 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Jennifer Byrne

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Chris Graf

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Brandon Stell

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Documents submitted by Representative Bill Foster

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
