- SILENT KILLER: THE RISING PROBLEM OF EXTREME HEAT IN THE U.S.

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SILENT KILLER: THE RISING PROBLEM
OF EXTREME HEAT IN THE U.S.

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 21, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-27

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-185PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         VACANCY
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                VACANCY
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Environment

HON. MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey, Chairwoman
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma,
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                     Ranking Member
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas               ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

July 21, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mikie Sherrill, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Stephanie I. Bice, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Chairwoman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Witnesses:

Dr. Vivek Shandas, Ph.D., Professor, Nohad A. Toulan School of
Urban Studies and Planning, Founder and Director, Sustaining
Urban Places Research Lab, Portland State University
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    19

Dr. Melissa Guardaro, Ph.D., Assistant Research Professor,
Healthy Urban Environments & Knowledge Exchange for Resilience,
Global Institute of Sustainability and Innovation, Arizona
State University
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    24

Mr. Shimon Elkabetz, CEO, Co-Founder, Tomorrow.io
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    37

Dr. Aaron Bernstein, MD, MPH, Interim Director, The Center for
Climate, Health, and the Global Environment, Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health, Pediatrician, Boston Children's
Hospital, Fellow, Adrienne Arsht--Rockefeller Foundation
Resilience Center
Oral Statement...............................................    44
Written Statement............................................    46

Discussion.......................................................    52

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Vivek Shandas, Ph.D., Professor, Nohad A. Toulan School of
Urban Studies and Planning, Founder and Director, Sustaining
Urban Places Research Lab, Portland State University...........    70

Dr. Melissa Guardaro, Ph.D., Assistant Research Professor,
Healthy Urban Environments & Knowledge Exchange for Resilience,
Global Institute of Sustainability and Innovation, Arizona
State University...............................................    72

Mr. Shimon Elkabetz, CEO, Co-Founder, Tomorrow.io................    76

Dr. Aaron Bernstein, MD, MPH, Interim Director, The Center for
Climate, Health, and the Global Environment, Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health, Pediatrician, Boston Children's
Hospital, Fellow, Adrienne Arsht--Rockefeller Foundation
Resilience Center..............................................    78

SILENT KILLER: THE RISING PROBLEM

OF EXTREME HEAT IN THE U.S.

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 21, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m.,
in room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mikie
Sherrill [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Sherrill. OK, the hearing will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at
any time. Before I deliver my opening remarks, I wanted to note
that today the Committee is meeting both in person and
virtually. I want to announce a couple of reminders to the
Members about the conduct of this hearing. First, Members and
staff who are attending in person and are unvaccinated against
COVID-19 must stay masked throughout the hearing. Unvaccinated
Members may remove their masks only during their questioning
under the five-minute rule. Members who are attending virtually
should keep their video feed on as long as they are present in
the hearing. Members are responsible for their own microphones.
Please also keep your microphones muted unless you are
speaking. Finally, if Members have documents they wish to
submit for the record, please e-mail them to the Committee
Clerk, whose e-mail address was circulated prior to the
hearing.
Good morning, and welcome to today's Environment
Subcommittee hearing to discuss the rising problem of extreme
heat in the U.S. I'd like to welcome and thank our esteemed
witnesses for participating in this very timely and important
meeting. Almost exactly a year ago this Committee held a
hearing on the intersections of extreme heat, COVID-19, and
environmental justice. I wish I could say things have gotten
better since then. While we can credit science for the rapid
development of multiple effective vaccines to combat COVID-19,
extreme heat has only worsened, and vulnerable populations
continue to be disproportionately impacted by both.
The recent record-breaking heat dome that devastated the
Pacific Northwest shattered our expectations of the severity of
extreme heat. Temperatures reached 40 degrees above average in
some places, causing pavement to buckle, streetcar cables to
melt, and at least 193 deaths across the region. One of our
witnesses, Dr. Vivek Shandas, went out and measured
temperatures during the heat dome. He found that in affluent
neighborhoods they reached 99 degrees, compared to 120 degrees
in the poorest neighborhoods in Portland, where the highest
number of deaths occurred. Most of these deaths were homeless,
elderly, outdoor workers, and those with underlying health
issues.
A rapid analysis by a global team of researchers found
that the Pacific Northwest heat dome would have been nearly
impossible without warming from greenhouse gases. This analysis
also showed that 2 degrees Celsius of warming would likely
cause severe heat events like this one to occur every five to
ten years instead of once every 1,000 years. NOAA (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) research also predicts
that generational heat waves could become annual events.
Extreme heat is one of the clearest signals of global warming,
with climate change making heat waves longer, more frequent,
and more intense. Extreme heat often occurs alongside drought,
wildfires, and other climate-fueled disasters.
We are seeing this firsthand in the West, which is
currently suffering from a historic drought period, and an
early and brutal wildfire season. In addition to extreme heat
events worsening, average temperatures are also on the rise
across the U.S., with some regions warming faster than others.
Close to my district, in New York City, temperatures have gone
up 3.3 degrees Fahrenheit on average since the advent of
satellite observations in the 1960's. The number of days per
year in New York City with a heat index of 90 degrees is
predicted to increase from 16 to 51 by midcentury with no
action to combat greenhouse gas emissions, according to a
report by the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Climate change is causing nights to warm even faster than
days across most of the U.S. This is particularly alarming for
human health risks, as cooler nighttime conditions usually
provide relief from a hot day, especially for those without air
conditioning. We need to also consider that cities are even
more susceptible to extreme heat and hot nights than rural
areas because of the built environment and lack of vegetation.
Surfaces like pavement, asphalt, and rooftops absorb and reemit
heat. This creates urban heat islands and causes temperatures
to be up to 10 degrees higher than surrounding areas.
As extreme heat ramps up in the U.S., so too will heat-
related illnesses and deaths. Extreme heat is the deadliest
natural disaster, killing more people than floods, tornadoes,
and other extreme weather events combined. The CDC (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention) officially reports that heat
kills more than 600 Americans a year, but other studies point
to this being a severe undercount. The number may be as high as
12,000 heat-related deaths in the U.S., with communities of
color and low-income communities most at risk. The harmful
effects of extreme heat to human health stresses our public
health system. It also widens gaps in equity, and leads to
losses in worker productivity, costing our economy billions.
Sectors such as agriculture and utilities are also vulnerable.
In 2015, NOAA, alongside the CDC, launched the National
Integrated Heat Health Information System, or NIHHIS. NIHHIS
works to reduce U.S. heat risks by developing science-based
products and services and building capacity, communication, and
public understanding of extreme heat. NIHHIS has--also
collaborates with other Federal agencies and with city and
State decisionmakers to co-produce actionable information
needed to inform their planning process. Additionally, the
National Weather Service (NWS) has updated its heat indices and
heat watches, warnings, and advisories. NWS has also devised a
prototype HeatRisk forecast to better communicate heat risk for
specific locations and identify the most at-risk groups. The
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) publishes an Excessive
Heat Events Guidebook. While some progress has been made in
recent years, so much more remains to be done on the Federal,
State, and local levels.
I look forward to hearing from our expert witnesses today,
who are at the leading edge of extreme heat research and
solutions, about the major research and coordination gaps that
remain and how additional investments and resources can help
fill them.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Sherrill follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to today's Environment
Subcommittee hearing to discuss the rising problem of extreme
heat in the U.S. I would like to welcome and thank our esteemed
witnesses for participating in this very timely and important
hearing.
Almost exactly a year ago, this Committee held a hearing on
the intersections of extreme heat, COVID-19, and environmental
justice. I wish I could say things have gotten better since
then. While we can credit science for the rapid development of
multiple effective vaccines to combat COVID-19, extreme heat
has only worsened, and vulnerable populations continue to be
disproportionately impacted by both.
The recent record-breaking heat dome that devastated the
Pacific Northwest shattered our expectations of the severity of
extreme heat. Temperatures reached 40 degrees above average in
some places, causing pavement to buckle, streetcar cables to
melt, and at least 193 deaths across the region. One of our
witnesses, Dr. Vivek Shandas, went out and measured
temperatures during the heat dome. He found that in affluent
neighborhoods they reached 99 degrees, compared to 120 degrees
in the poorest neighborhoods in Portland, where the highest
number of deaths occurred. Most of these deaths were homeless,
elderly, outdoor workers, and those with underlying health
issues.
A rapid analysis by a global team of researchers found that
the Pacific Northwest heat dome would have been nearly
impossible without warming from greenhouse gases. This analysis
also showed that 2 degrees Celsius of warming would likely
cause severe heat events like this one to occur every five to
10 years instead of once every 1000 years. NOAA research also
predicts that generational heat waves could become annual
events.
Extreme heat is one of the clearest signals of global
warming, with climate change making heat waves longer, more
frequent, and more intense. Extreme heat often occurs alongside
drought, wildfires, and other climate-fueled disasters. We are
seeing this firsthand in the West, which is currently suffering
from a historic drought period, and an early and brutal
wildfire season.
In addition to extreme heat events worsening, average
temperatures are also on the rise across the U.S., with some
regions warming faster than others. Close to my district, in
New York City, temperatures have gone up 3.3 degrees Fahrenheit
on average since the advent of satellite observations in the
1960s. The number of days per year in New York City with a heat
index of 90 degrees is predicted to increase from 16 to 51 by
midcentury with no action to combat greenhouse gas emissions,
according to a report by the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Climate change is causing nights to warm even faster than
days across most of the U.S. This is particularly alarming for
human health risks, as cooler nighttime conditions usually
provide relief from a hot day, especially for those without air
conditioning.
We need to also consider that cities are even more
susceptible to extreme heat and hot nights than rural areas
because of the built environment and lack of vegetation.
Surfaces like pavement, asphalt, and rooftops absorb and reemit
heat. This creates urban heat islands and causes temperatures
to be up to 10 degrees higher than surrounding areas.
As extreme heat ramps up in the U.S., so too will heat-
related illnesses and deaths. Extreme heat is the deadliest
natural disaster, killing more people than floods, tornadoes,
and other extreme weather events combined. The CDC officially
reports that heat kills more than 600 Americans a year, but
other studies point to this being a severe undercount. The
number maybe be as high as 12,000 heat-related deaths in the
U.S., with communities of color and low-income communities most
at risk.
The harmful effects of extreme heat to human health
stresses our public health system. It also widens gaps in
equity, and leads to losses in worker productivity, costing our
economy billions. Sectors such as agriculture and utilities are
also vulnerable.
In 2015, NOAA, alongside the CDC, launched the National
Integrated Heat Health Information System, or NIHHIS. NIHHIS
works to reduce U.S. heat risks by developing science-based
products and services and building capacity, communication, and
public understanding of extreme heat. NIHHIS also collaborates
with other federal agencies and with city and state decision
makers to co-produce actionable information needed to inform
their planning processes.
Additionally, the National Weather Service has updated its
heat indices and heat watches, warnings, and advisories. NWS
has also developed a prototype HeatRisk forecast to better
communicate heat risk for specific locations and identify the
most at-risk groups. The EPA publishes an Excessive Heat Events
Guidebook. While some progress has been made in recent years,
so much more remains to be done on the federal, state, and
local levels.
I look forward to hearing from our expert witnesses today
who are at the leading edge of extreme heat research and
solutions, about the major research and coordination gaps that
remain and how additional investments and resources can help
fill them.

Chairwoman Sherrill. The Chair will now recognize Mrs.
Bice for an opening statement.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, and I also want
to recognize Full Committee Chairwoman Johnson, who's joining
us remotely. Thank you for holding today's timely and important
hearing. I also want to thank our witnesses for appearing
before the Subcommittee and sharing their expertise with us
this morning.
This summer historic heat waves across the U.S. have been
making headlines week after week, and the impacts have been
tragic. Many outdoor businesses--business operations have been
curbed out of concern for operational safety, resulting in
significant economic losses. This comes on top of the crippling
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic we've already seen. Even more
tragic is the number of lives that have been lost in heat-
related deaths this summer alone. As a couple of our witnesses
will point out, heat-related deaths of Americans outnumber the
fatalities connected to all other natural disasters.
Although climate change is likely making the occurrence of
extreme heat more common, we cannot simply sit back and accept
such a fate. With greater innovation and strategic planning
from both the public and private sector, the negative effects
of heat waves and other extreme weather events can be better
mitigated, and lives can be saved. One such example of a
private entity acting now is Tomorrow.io, whose CEO (chief
executive officer) and Co-Founder, Shimon Elkabetz, is here as
a witness today.
While the National Weather Service provides important
weather forecasts and warnings, it can be hard for people to
interpret what this data means for them as individuals.
Tomorrow.io helps alleviate that confusion by communicating
weather forecasts in a clear, operationally focused manner. For
example, Tomorrow.io can monitor when and where heat will
exceed a specific threshold that will make an electric grid
susceptible to outages. Utility companies can use this
information to make more informed decisions regarding grid
operations. The risk of a power outage occurring can also be
conveyed to utility customers so that they may prepare backup
plans for staying cool.
Tomorrow.io is an excellent example of how commercial
enterprises can successfully collaborate with the Federal
Government to accelerate technological advances and improve
weather forecasts, as well as communication of forecasts.
Tomorrow.io uses publicly available data and incorporates it
into their own in-house models to provide more localized
forecasts. They also do so in this manner that, when utilized
by government agencies, can save millions in taxpayer dollars,
compared to an exclusive Federal operation. If encouraging more
public/private partnerships like this can save lives and money,
then by all means we should do all we can to increase the
participation of the private sector.
To close, I want to paint somewhat of a positive light,
because I believe societal progress is too often overlooked for
attention-grabbing headlines. It is important to remember that
the rising cost of disasters is closely related to the overall
rise in economic development. Extreme events are more costly
because we have more infrastructure to damage, not just because
of the complex relationship between intensity and climate. In
fact, direct economic losses from disasters, as a proportion of
global GDP (gross domestic product), have trended down over the
last 30 years. And just last week the Rhodium Group published a
report that predicted U.S. emission reductions could reach as
much as 30 percent below 2005 levels by 2030, exceeding the
Paris Accord goal of the Obama Administration.
We are on the right track, and it is always my goal to
make more progress, but before we take every negative headline
as an unavoidable future, we should first understand what we've
been doing right, what we need to fix, and how we can take
action to ensure our positive trends continue. Thank you,
Chairwoman Sherrill. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bice follows:]

Good morning Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you for holding
today's timely and important hearing. I also want to thank our
witnesses for appearing before the subcommittee and sharing
their expertise with us this morning.
This summer, historic heatwaves across the U.S. have made
headlines week after week and the impacts have been tragic.
Many outdoor business operations have been curbed out of
concern for operational safety, resulting in significant
economic losses. This comes on top of the crippling effects the
COVID-19 pandemic has already had. Even more tragic is the
number of lives that have been lost in heat-related deaths this
summer alone. As a couple of our witnesses will point out, heat
related deaths of Americans outnumber the fatalities connected
to all other natural disasters.
Although climate change is likely making the occurrence of
extreme heat more common, we cannot simply sit back and accept
such a fate. With greater innovation and strategic planning
from both the public and private sector, negative affects from
heat waves and other extreme weather events can be better
mitigated and lives can be saved. One such example of a private
entity acting now is Tomorrow.io, whose CEO and co-founder,
Shimon Elkabetz, is here today as a witness.
While the National Weather Service provides important
weather forecasts and warnings, it can be hard for people to
interpret what this data means for them as individuals.
Tomorrow.io helps alleviate that confusion by communicating
weather forecasts in a clear, operationally focused manner. For
example, Tomorrow.io can monitor when and where heat will
exceed a specific threshold that will make an electric grid
susceptible to outages. Utility companies can use this
information to make more informed decisions regarding grid
operations. The risk of a power outage occurring can also be
conveyed to utility customers so that they may prepare back-up
plans for staying cool.
Tomorrow.io is an excellent example of how commercial
enterprises can successfully collaborate with the federal
government to accelerate technological advances and improve
weather forecasts, as well as communication of forecasts.
Tomorrow.io uses publicly available data and incorporates it
into their own in-house models to provide more localized
forecasts. They also do this in a manner that, when utilized by
government agencies, can save millions in taxpayer dollars
compared to an exclusive federal operation. If encouraging more
public-private partnerships like this can save lives and money,
then by all means we should do all we can to increase the
participation of the private sector.
To close, I want to paint somewhat of a positive light,
because I believe societal progress is too often overlooked for
attention grabbing headlines. It's important to remember that
the rising cost of disasters is closely related to the overall
rise in economic development. Extreme events are more costly
because we have more infrastructure to damage, not just because
of the complex relationship between intensity and climate. In
fact, direct economic losses from disasters, as a proportion of
global GDP, have trended down over the past 30 years.
And just last week, the Rhodium Group published a report
that predicted U.S. emission reductions could reach as much as
30% below 2005 levels by 2030, exceeding the Paris Accord goal
of the Obama Administration.
We're on the right track and it is always my goal to make
more progress. But before we take every negative headline as an
unavoidable future, we should first understand what we have
been doing right, what we need to fix, and how we take action
to ensure our positive trends continue.
Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill. I yield back.

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. And we're honored to have
the Full Committee Chairwoman, Ms. Johnson, with us today, and
the Chair now recognizes the Chairwoman for an opening
statement.
Chairwoman Johnson. Good morning, and let me welcome all
of our witnesses, and thank you for all of you joining us
today. I'd like to welcome everyone to this hearing to discuss
the very pressing problem of extreme heat in this country.
Being from Texas, my constituents and I expect to prepare for
high summer temperatures. However, other parts of the country
do not have the infrastructure needed to handle extremely high
temperatures. Just last month, news reports documented the
record-breaking heat dome in the Pacific Northwest. In
Portland, maximum daily records were broken every day for three
consecutive days. The resulting heat even melted transit power
lines and halted public transit. In Washington State, extreme
temperatures featured--fractured roads and sidewalks. Regions
where daily June temperatures usually only reach 70 degrees saw
temperatures nearing 120 degrees.
Beyond the damage to infrastructure, this heat cost lives.
According to a State medical examiner, the extreme temperatures
since this June killed over 100 people in Oregon alone. Because
attributing fatalities to heat is so difficult, the actual
heat-related death toll is likely really much higher. With heat
stress often aggravating preexisting medical conditions, these
deaths will be concentrated among our elderly and the very
young.
Beyond events like the--like last month's heat dome,
dangerous temperatures are a constant concern for many
Americans. One year ago we held a hearing to discuss the
intersection of COVID-19, extreme heat, and environmental
justice, highlighting the unequal threat from urban heat
islands. Historically redlined neighborhoods are often home to
our most vulnerable communities. In these neighborhoods,
concrete is more abundant, trees are scarce, and air
conditioning is rare. This leads to urban heat islands that can
be as much as seven degrees warmer than any other part of a
city. The unequal exposure to extreme heat in urban heat
islands can cause harm beyond just public health. Extreme heat
has always been linked to worse educational outcomes for
children.
The prevalence of urban heat islands throughout the U.S.
is amplifying the heat stress from the uptick in the
unreasonable warmth in this country. The Northeast saw some of
its warmest June temperatures in almost a decade. Within a span
of five months, Texas went from experiencing some of its
coldest temperatures on record to bracing for an unusually
early heatwave. These temperature extremes have led to energy
grid failures, water shortages, imperiling the lives of
millions. We are seeing the climate crisis happen right before
us.
When addressing crisis of extreme heat, our Federal
science agencies have a critical role to play. I look forward
to the discussion with today's esteemed panel on how we can
better coordinate Federal resources to address the worsening
extreme heat in the country. I thank you and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning to our witnesses and thank you for joining us
here today. I'd like to welcome everyone to this hearing to
discuss the very pressing problem of extreme heat in this
country.
Being from Texas, my constituents and I can expect and
prepare for high summer temperatures. However, other parts of
the country do not have the infrastructure needed to handle
extremely high temperatures. Just last month, news reports
documented the record-breaking ``heat dome'' in the Pacific
Northwest. In Portland, maximum daily temperature records were
broken every day for three consecutive days. The resulting heat
even melted transit power lines and halted public transit.
In Washington state, extreme temperatures fractured roads
and sidewalks. Regions where daily June temperatures usually
only reach 70 degrees saw temperatures nearing 120. Beyond the
damage to infrastructure, this heat cost lives.
According to state medical examiner, the extreme
temperatures since this June killed over one hundred people in
Oregon alone. Because attributing fatalities to heat is so
difficult, the actual heat-related death toll is likely much
higher.
With heat stress often aggravating preexisting medical
conditions, these deaths will be concentrated among our elderly
and the very young.
Beyond events like last month's ``heat dome'', dangerous
temperatures are a constant concern for many Americans. One
year ago, we held a hearing to discuss the intersection of
COVID-19, extreme heat, and environmental justice, highlighting
the unequal threat from urban heat islands.
Historically redlined neighborhoods are often home to our
most vulnerable communities. In these neighborhoods, concrete
is more abundant, trees are scarce, and air conditioning is
rare. This leads to urban heat islands that can be as much as
seven degrees warmer than other parts of a city. The unequal
exposure to extreme heat in urban heat islands can cause harm
beyond just public health. Extreme heat has also been linked to
worse educational outcomes for children.
The prevalence of urban heat islands throughout the U.S. is
amplifying the heat stress from the uptick in unseasonable
warmth in this country. The Northeast saw some of its warmest
June temperatures in almost a decade. Within a span of five
months, Texas went from experiencing some of its coldest
temperatures on record to bracing for an unusually early
heatwave.
These temperature extremes have led to energy grid failures
and water shortages, imperiling the lives of millions. We are
seeing the climate crisis happen right before us.
When addressing crisis of extreme heat, our federal science
agencies have a critical role to play. I look forward to the
discussion with today's esteemed panel on how we can better
coordinate federal resources to address the worsening extreme
heat in this country.
Thank you and I yield back.

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. If there
are Members who wish to submit additional opening statements,
your statements will be added to the record at this point. At
this time I'd like to introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness is Dr. Vivek Shandas. Dr. Shandas is a
Professor in the Toulan School of Urban Studies and Planning.
He is also the Founder and Director of the Sustaining Urban
Places Research Lab at Portland State University. He is an
interdisciplinary scholar whose expertise is in climate change,
urban heat and health, environmental justice, air quality
management, green infrastructure, and spatial mapping. Dr.
Shandas spoke--Dr. Shandas's focus on climate equity involves
direct engagement with historically marginalized communities in
describing local stressors, and effective approaches to
improving accessibility to decisionmaking systems.
Next is Dr. Melissa Guardaro. Dr. Guardaro is an Assistant
Research Professor in the Julie Ann Wrigley Global Institute of
Sustainability and Innovation at Arizona State University, and
works for the Healthy Urban Environments Initiative and
Knowledge Exchange for Resilience. Her research focuses on
adaptation, equity, vulnerability, urban policy, and governance
for the mitigation and adaptation to extreme heat and urban
heat island effects. She's currently working to create
neighborhood heat solutions that improve thermal comfort and
public health outcomes with the cities of Phoenix, Tempe, and
Mesa, as well as the Nature Conservancy, the Maricopa County
Health Department, and community-based organizations.
Our third witness is Mr. Shimon Elkabetz. Mr. Elkabetz is
the CEO and Co-Founder of Tomorrow.io. He served in the Israeli
Air Force for 11 years. Multiple near-death weather-related
experiences during his service stoked a fascination with the
weather. Tomorrow.io was founded as a Boston-based weather
intelligence and climate security company to bridge the gap
between forecast and decisionmaking, working with customers,
including Federal agencies, utilities, airlines, on demand
services, and professional sports teams.
Our final witness is Dr. Aaron Bernstein. Dr. Bernstein is
the Interim Director of The Center for Climate, Health, and the
Global Environment at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, a pediatrician at Boston Children's Hospital, and an
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics at Harvard Medical School.
Dr. Bernstein focuses on the health impacts of the climate
crisis on children's health and advancing solutions.
As our witnesses should know, you will each have five
minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will
be included in the record of--for the hearing. When you all
have completed your spoken testimony, we will begin with
questions. Each Member will have five minutes to question the
panel. We will start with Dr. Shandas. Doctor?

TESTIMONY OF DR. VIVEK SHANDAS, PH.D.,

PROFESSOR, NOHAD A. TOULAN SCHOOL

OF URBAN STUDIES AND PLANNING,

FOUNDER AND DIRECTOR, SUSTAINING URBAN PLACES

RESEARCH LAB, PORTLAND STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Shandas. Thank you. I hope you can hear me OK. It's a
real honor to be able to testify here in front of you today.
Chairwoman Johnson, Chairwoman Sherrill, Members of the
Subcommittee on the Environment, I've been studying urban heat
for the greater part of about 20 years now, and admittedly it
started with a big grant from the National Science Foundation
to refine our measurement systems, advance geospatial mapping
technologies, and getting myself tenure, frankly, at my first
job. In that early work we relied heavily on satellite-derived
descriptions about how heat varied across the continental U.S.,
maintaining a rather technical approach to the field. Over the
past decade, however, we've relied more and more on hyperlocal
descriptions of what's happening in and around our urban areas.
And as if you--and as you've identified, these urban heat
islands have been directly attributable to differences in
temperature, many of which we've seen in larger parts of the
country. And this has been really underscored by the number of
deaths that have been happening due to heat waves, and the big
part of which I'm turning my attention now to engaging
community-based organizations in this work.
As you likely have already heard, heat waves kill more
people than any other natural disaster, and--yet FEMA (Federal
Emergency Management Agency) still doesn't recognize it as a
natural hazard. A lesser-known fact is that it is a
discriminating killer. We published work last year, and
continue to build on this work, that shows that historically--
that historical segregation policies such as redlining, racial
covenants, and exclusionary zoning that were promulgated in the
1930's have enduring effects that, to this day, isolate
communities of color, immigrants, and lower income folks into
areas of cities that are upwards, that we've measured, of 20
degrees Fahrenheit hotter than other parts of the city at the
same time of day.
Just this month we learned, as we were just hearing, that
human caused climate change was directly implicated in the heat
dome event in the Pacific Northwest, where, during that event,
I measured temperatures that were 25 degrees warmer than other
parts of the city. I've seen firsthand that, with increasingly
hot days, the temperature differential also increases across
the region. We can now say that those who died during the heat
dome event were arguably the first climate related deaths in
Oregon and Washington. Those who died lacked access to
financial capital, social networks, and had aging or injured
bodies. We knew who was going to die. I wrote a report in 2009
stating as much, and yet local agency had--agencies had little
capacity or understanding for taking swift action on this heat
wave.
These are--these, and most all other heat-related deaths,
are preventable, as I think you'll hear other testimonies
today, though we're not connecting the dots. I'd like to offer
you my opinion about the three things that are needed for
reducing excess mortality and morbidity from urban heat. First,
because we know that people die in their households, we need
hyperlocal data about where air temperatures vary at the scale
of the city block. We--we've already mapped, with unprecedented
detail, over 30 cities through a community-based civic science
heat campaign, and most cities are lacking that evidence to
take swift action. I'd like to propose supporting these cost-
effective and highly engaging campaigns so that communities can
socialize the concept of heat as a silent killer, collect to
necessary local data, and then bring--and then being able to
take immediate action to move forward on infrastructure and
social programs.
Second, we need to integrate our understanding of heat
with social and infrastructure vulnerabilities that urban
regions face. U.S. cities generally are not designed for the
kind of heat that we're starting to see. As our infrastructure
ages, we have an opportunity to upgrade the systems that we
depend on and make them more climate resilient, engaging
community-based organizations in the process. Finally, one of
the most important parts of addressing urban heat is a
coordinated response. Currently most municipalities do not have
a single office that coordinates heat action, when then falls
upon nobody, making our ability to stave off heat-related
mortality more challenging. The emerging evidence from the
Pacific Northwest heat wave is a case in point. The same is
true at the Federal level. While both NOAA and EPA have
extensive resource for communities to understand urban heat, we
still have very limited coordination across Federal bureaus. I
would encourage you, in my last statement, to really think
about connecting the dots across the Federal bureaus so that we
can support local municipalities in taking immediate action on
this silent killer. Thank you. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Shandas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. And next is Dr. Guardaro.

TESTIMONY OF DR. MELISSA GUARDARO, PH.D.,

ASSISTANT RESEARCH PROFESSOR,

HEALTHY URBAN ENVIRONMENTS

& KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE FOR RESILIENCE,

GLOBAL INSTITUTE OF SUSTAINABILITY AND INNOVATION,

ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Guardaro. Good morning, Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking
Member Lucas, and Members to the Science Committee--of Science,
Space, and Technology. Thank you inviting me today. My name is
Melissa Guardaro, and I'm bringing testimony deeply informed by
working in and learning from communities located in the
Nation's hottest large metropolitan area, Phoenix, Arizona,
where we are on the front lines for extreme heat.
First, I want to break down this concept of extreme heat
as two different yet similar issues, the urban heat island
effect and climate change. The urban heat island effect is a
result of urbanization, where the city retains heat during the
day, and is slowly released at night. There are many urban heat
islands within a city, with temperatures ranging as much as 13
degrees or more. Strategies for reducing the urban heat island
include increasing shading and implementing heat-smart urban
design principles.
Extreme heat is amplified by climate change. Average
temperatures have been increasing steadily, and summer heat
waves are predicted to be longer and hotter. Climate change
reduction strategies include greenhouse gas emission reductions
and energy efficiency measures, such as weatherization
programs. It is important to address both the urban heat island
effect and climate change together in a systematic manner. The
principal concern, however, is how people experience heat as
they move through their day. In other words, optimizing
people's thermal comfort.
Further, extreme heat needs to be addressed in two
different time scales, immediate emergency action, especially
during extreme heat events, to provide cooling for people, and
long-term programs that constrain a warming future. Long-term
strategies are meant to build a cooler environment, and
intervention points could include infrastructure, buildings,
urban forestry, regional collaborations, and city management,
as you see management devoted exclusively to managing extreme
heat in the cities of Phoenix and Miami.
Extreme heat is not experienced equally within cities.
Residents in low-income neighborhoods live in housing that is
often energy inefficient, with aging cooling systems, and are
challenged by energy insecurity as a greater proportion of
their incomes are spent on electricity. Mobile home residents
are especially heat vulnerable. A recent study by the Knowledge
Exchange for Resilience revealed that in Maricopa County,
Arizona mobile homes comprised 5 percent of the housing stock,
yet accounted for 28 percent of the heat deaths. Affordable,
livable housing is a critical factor for heat health safety.
While poor and marginalized groups historically have suffered
the most from climate impacts, they are often left out of the
climate planning process. The Nature's Cooling System Project
was implemented in three underserved neighborhoods to develop
hyperlocal community heat action plans. This inclusive,
storytelling-based planning process revealed different needs
and wants between communities, despite relatively similar
socioeconomic profiles.
Federal investments are needed to prepare urban
communities for extreme heat and to assist in the mitigation
and adaptation to a warmer future. Similar to the Storm
Prediction Center, a NOAA extreme heat center is needed to
coordinate national efforts to understand and respond to
impacts of extreme heat. Like the National Weather Service
storm ready communities, NOAA can support the scaling up of the
Healthy Urban Environments-funded Heat Ready Cities Program.
This program is being piloted right now, and provides an
evaluation tool to holistically manage how cities identify,
prepare for, mitigate, track, and respond to the dangers of
urban heat. There's a great need for coordination across
jurisdiction to ensure that a regional, not a competitive,
city-by-city approach is undertaken. Regional working groups
can be established not only to develop solutions, but to
develop critical social infrastructure, a necessary but often
overlooked component for building momentum for transformational
change.
It is difficult to understand the human cost of heat
emergencies without additional efforts toward tracking heat
deaths. There are differences in how heat deaths are counted
within the same period, resulting in the CDC reporting 618 heat
deaths nationally, NOAA reporting less than 150, meanwhile in
Arizona, where a more comprehensive heat health-health
surveillance is an established practice, 520 deaths were
reported in 2020. These discrepancies indicate that we are
underestimating the scale of suffering due to extreme heat, and
undercounting the cost to economic development, human health,
and quality of life at a national scale. A research program
that provides greater understanding of the economic impact of
extreme heat could help to build the business case for extreme
heat resilience investments. Coordination between EPA, NOAA,
and FEMA to recognize extreme heat as a disaster could provide
better prioritization both of emergency response and long-term
mitigation adaptation efforts.
We need to act now to provide more thermal comfort during
extreme heat for the most vulnerable populations, and to tackle
extreme heat in a systemic manner, acknowledging the internet-
connected nature of extreme heat contributing factors. Thank
you again for giving me the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Guardaro follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. Next we have Mr. Elkabetz.

TESTIMONY OF MR. SHIMON ELKABETZ,

CEO, CO-FOUNDER, TOMORROW.IO

Mr. Elkabetz. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman
Sherrill, Ranking Member Bice, Chairwoman Johnson, and Members
of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to testify before
you today. It is an honor to be here among such distinguished
panelists to discuss the rising problem of extreme heat in the
U.S.
So my name is Shimon Elkabetz. I was born and raised in
Israel, and served in the Israeli Air Force for over 11 years,
flying Apache helicopters. I've seen firsthand how weather
forecasts without context can negatively impact operations in
an elite military unit, and, in fact, I faced multiple near-
death experiences related to the weather. We founded
Tomorrow.io as a Boston-based weather intelligence and climate
security company because we wanted to improve forecasting, and
also to bridge that gap between forecast and decisionmaking.
We're working with customers ranging from Federal agencies,
utilities, airlines, supply chain, on demand services, and
professional sports teams.
Extreme heat made worse by climate change is a real
challenge that is impacting more people more frequently than
ever before. Businesses are feeling the impacts too. Rail
operators, for example, have to divert trains to avoid buckled
tracks. Electric utilities have to meet increased demand to
keep the lights and air conditioning on. Airlines, agriculture,
shipping, and numerous other industries are significantly
impacted by the heat. Improved weather forecasts and new tools
to support decisionmaking are critical to minimizing the
impacts of such events on people, infrastructure, and the
economy.
At Tomorrow.io we see three key components to improving
forecasts and response to extreme heat, and many other weather
and environmental hazards. First, I encourage the Committee's
continued support of critical weather forecasting
infrastructure, which means the observations, models, and
computing that underpin all weather forecasts. Today's global
weather enterprise is a great success story, also due to the
bipartisan support of this Committee, yet work remains to be
done.
Second, I encourage the Committee's continued support of
programs like NOAA's commercial weather data pilot, which has
been successful thanks to the leadership of Ranking Member
Lucas and the Members of this Committee, but also to broaden
the scope, and to take advantage of expanding commercial
capabilities. In our case, Tomorrow.io will be launching a
first of its kind global constellation of small satellites
equipped with precipitation radar. NOAA has indicated that one
of its greatest challenges is the need to improve precipitation
forecasts across timescales from weather to climate.
Third, I encourage the Committee to continue to explore
new ways the government can tap into private sector innovation.
This includes more open-ended solicitations that allow industry
to innovate the path to solving grand forecast challenges. This
also includes enabling government agencies to leverage private
sector technologies to increase their resilience to extreme
weather and climate. To that end, Tomorrow.io has developed a
unique platform that forecasts weather in high resolution, but
more importantly then transform that weather data into
actionable decisions for our customers.
Chairwoman Sherrill, at this time I would like to share my
screen to show the Committee how Tomorrow.io's weather
intelligence platform helps users adjust their operations to
deal with extreme heat and other weather phenomenon.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Without objection.
Mr. Elkabetz. Thank you. I need to be able to share, but
there are some technical difficulties. I will try again.
Unfortunately, we have technical difficulties, so we'll
continue. The Tomorrow.io weather intelligence platform
displays high resolution global weather data and provides
weather forecasts for all weather parameter, not just heat. And
while we're continually improving the accuracy of our forecasts
via innovative data sets and advanced modeling technology, what
we learned is that focusing exclusively on accuracy in raw
weather data is just not enough, since most individuals,
businesses or governmental agencies have trouble understanding
weather data and what it means. That's why we developed the
concept of weather intelligence.
So from our extensive experience helping customers, we've
translated their use-cases into actionable business insights
and best practices. We can help a trucking company on a route
from New Jersey to Oklahoma by telling them when to delay or
avoid portion of the route to avoid food from spoiling due to
excessive heat. We can help a city like Dallas with
precautionary measures specific to each city district, and even
to a street, to ensure worker safety during extreme temperature
event. So this is just a small example of how our capabilities
today work. This will become even more powerful as our
satellite constellation comes online.
In conclusion, I want to thank this Committee for the
time, and commend you for your leadership in addressing this
important issue. Thank you again, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Elkabetz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. And, finally, Dr.
Bernstein.

TESTIMONY OF DR. AARON BERNSTEIN, MD, MPH,

INTERIM DIRECTOR, THE CENTER FOR CLIMATE, HEALTH,

AND THE GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT,

HARVARD T.H. CHAN SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH,

PEDIATRICIAN, BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL,

FELLOW, ADRIENNE ARSHT--ROCKEFELLER

FOUNDATION RESILIENCE CENTER

Dr. Bernstein. Thank you, Chairwoman, and thank you,
Chairwoman Johnson, for your remarks, and Ranking Member Bice
for yours, and for the opportunity to testify before all the
Members of the Subcommittee today. I'd like to start my
testimony with an anecdote that occurred during the hottest
stretch of the hottest June in Boston's history, just this
year. A mom approached me with a question, a totally reasonable
question, which was, was it safe for her child to play outside?
Now, that's a question that I imagine many of you who are
parents had probably not thought twice about, unless perhaps
your children grew up in very hard--hot parts of the country.
But I'll tell you, from my experience, this is a question that
most parents, certainly in the northern part of the country,
have never really had to take seriously.
I know full well what heat can do to a child's body. It
can shut down any organ. Children with asthma will have a hard
time breathing. Children with kidney disease may have their
kidneys fail. Even children, adolescents in particular, who are
depressed may in fact take their lives because of the heat, and
there's evidence that suggests that heat may be stunting the
growth of fetal development. But none of that actually enabled
me to help this mother protect her child.
At this late date, when we can already plainly see how
human-caused climate change is influencing the severity of heat
in our country, we simply do not have the knowledge we need to
protect our most vulnerable citizens. Answers to questions like
this mother's are urgent for a number of reasons, many of which
my fellow panelists, as well as in the introductory remarks,
have made clear. We know heat is lethal, and we know that heat
waves are going to get more prevalent and severe in coming
decades.
Heat can harm us in surprising ways. We focus on
mortality, which is a very worthy endpoint, but it's critical
to recognize that heat has been associated with everything from
life-threatening bacterial bloodstream infections, infant
mortality, injuries not just in outdoor workers but in indoor
workers, harm to our soldiers, and a variety of other ailments.
The pace of warming is fast enough now that we can see
additional harms occurring within a generation. Warming across
the United States is happening such that, in a place like
Cleveland, where it has been above 90, maybe--it'll be above 90
as a heat index maybe a half dozen times this year, by 2050
it's expected to be 20 or more without rapid action to
decarbonize. In places like Houston, there are 10 days with a
heat index over 100 today. By 2050, again, without robust
action on climate, there may be 60.
The second cause for urgency is that, while we have seen a
tremendous improvement in heat-related mortality around the
country, over the past few decades there's evidence that
mortality trends are reversing, particularly in Southern and
Southeastern States. Chairwoman Johnson's comments about Texas
and people being prepared are absolutely true. We see a gross
differential across the Southern to Northern States, but we
also see alarming trends that, in some of the hottest parts of
our country, mortality rates are going up, and especially in
certain populations that are not typically thought to be at
risk, like men between the ages of 45 and 64.
Another knock-on effect of heat that needs to be watched
carefully is the effect on electricity prices. In Portland, and
other parts of the Northwest, prices went up by four-fold. That
is essentially a regressive tax on the poor from heat events.
We know that people who have air conditioning may not turn it
on when it gets hot out, and price spikes in electricity can
increase that. We've heard a great deal about the
disproportionate effects of heat on certain populations in the
country. We know that people of color, particularly Black
Americans, are exposed on average to 2 degrees Celsius of
temperature more heat than others, and that rates of mortality
among people of color are manyfold greater than others, with
Black Americans being three times more likely to die from the
heat, and particularly indigenous peoples in this country six
times more at risk.
So we have a tremendous amount of stake for health,
equity, and importantly our economy, and we can do much more.
And, to start with, I would love to be able to tell the
families I care for what temperatures warrant caution for their
children's health. We can do that with support through NIH
(National Institutes of Health), and support for NOAA, who can
provide more localized, as we've heard, predictions around
heat. We have to leverage the healthcare sector. We can use the
resources in Medicare and Medicaid to incentivize providers who
know the conditions that put people at risk for heat, have
direct lines of communication to them. We can mobilize those
resources to make sure that we get to our most vulnerable
citizens.
And, finally, I have to underscore that when we look in
the solution space, we're very quick to ask how much
implementation will cost, but we rarely take full accounting of
the benefits of our actions, and urban greening is a
particularly important example of this. Yes, urban greening can
cool down cities, which we've heard are critical, but it also
can improve air quality. It can reduce runoff that's associated
with water-borne diseases. It can even improve mental health,
and carry a host of other benefits. And so I urge you to
consider, as you think about the path forward, to take a more
full accounting of what's at stake for health and equity so
that we can provide for the healthiest and most just future
possible. Thanks.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bernstein follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Dr. Bernstein. At this
point we'll begin our first round of questions, and I'll
recognize myself for five minutes.
The record-shattering heat dome in the Pacific Northwest
revealed vulnerabilities in local infrastructure, with pavement
buckling and cables melting. In my district in New Jersey, and
neighboring districts, heat waves are usually accompanied by
power outages. With extreme heat worsening across the U.S., I'm
worried that Northeast infrastructure will suffer additional
consequences. Dr. Shandas, how well do we understand
infrastructure vulnerabilities in urban centers, and what kind
of evidence base do we need to build to inform climate-
resilient infrastructure decisions?
Dr. Shandas. Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill.
Infrastructure in our cities, as we well know, is designed with
a specific range of climate in mind. Infrastructures made, and
the HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) systems
that are in buildings, are made with this essentially boundary
condition that allows buildings to operate in specific ways,
roads, rail lines, et cetera. And when those boundary
conditions are extended, that's where we start seeing cascading
effects of infrastructure failure, like the heat dome, and the
examples that were just brought up.
And so often what we've done in our cities is build around
those conditions, and when we are seeing these aberrations to
that specific set of conditions, we are going to be seeing more
and intense shifts that happen. In the Pacific Northwest I can
say that many of us were holding onto--kind of holding on to
ourselves, thinking what else is about to break as--because we
all knew that the buildings, roads, cables, et cetera, were not
designed with that particular level of heat in mind.
And so our--generally speaking, our infrastructure is
woefully inadequate to be able to manage the level of heat that
we're seeing, and the concern that I have is the multiplicity
of factors that are at play here. Heat is one thing, but then
when, as some other panelists have identified, coupled with
other serious climate-induced threats, like wildfire, a family
will have to ask, do I open the windows at night, let the
polluted air in as I sleep, and--that cooler polluted air as I
sleep, or close those windows, and just really bake in my own
home?
Those are real big tradeoffs. Those are real tradeoffs
within the infrastructure system that we have right now in many
of our cities. And so the evidence base that we really need to
be thinking about here is to think--is to get down to the place
where individual households, businesses, municipal planners,
public health agencies, can identify specific places where it
might be very hazardous to be able to actually go during
specific times of the day. We don't have that kind of
granularity of information, where, if a parent is walking their
child to school on a hot day, do they take Road X or Road Y,
Road Y being 10, 15 degrees cooler for that asthmatic child,
who might run into some serious health-related impacts taking
Road X versus Road Y.
So that level of granularity is an evidence base that we
really need to get to, and groups like Tomorrow.io, groups like
ours, that have been trying to narrowly define and get to a
point where we can see that level of difference, will really
advance our ability to make informed decisions about where the
interventions will be most effective for the communities that
are hardest hit. And so I will----
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. I'm sorry, I have limited
time. I just want to get to one more question.
Dr. Shandas. Yeah.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Dr. Guardaro, in addition to making
built materials like rooftops and pavement more heat resilient,
how can green spaces or other natural solutions help lower
temperatures in urban areas?
Dr. Guardaro. Green infrastructure can certainly help
lower temperatures in areas, and you can have something like an
increase in your tree canopy, and planting the right tree in
the right place where people are to make this a people-centered
approach would be effective in not only lowering temperatures,
but also increasing people's thermal comfort. And then there
are added benefits too that it cleans the air, green
infrastructure helps with stormwater management, but we also
must take into account a systems view of this. Green
infrastructure needs to be balanced with water usage, and we
need to make sure that we are using these planting principles
in places where people are as they move through their day.
There's been an interesting study by a colleague of mine
that--it said regardless of whether or not the infrastructure
lowers temperature, if people see a tree or green
infrastructure, they actually feel cooler. So that's an area
that we really could use a lot more research into, moving--
taking the information that we have about the air temperature
and surface temperature, and turning that into how that impacts
people's perception, and their feeling of thermal comfort.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you so much, and my time has
run out, so I am going to now recognize the Ranking Member of
our Subcommittee, Mrs. Bice, for five minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. In my State of Oklahoma I know a
thing or two about extreme weather. In May of 1999 the
strongest tornado ever recorded developed in Moore, Oklahoma.
That said, technology has been developed as an early warning
system for tornadoes that have saved thousands of lives across
the country. Mr. Elkabetz, can you help us understand exactly
what kind of data and weather patterns you look for when
examining extreme heat predictions, and does the Federal
Government, whether it's NOAA, NASA (National Aeronautics and
Space Administration), or one of the service branches, have the
tools to provide such data?
Mr. Elkabetz. Thank you. So, from a technology and
scientific perspective, actually forecasting extreme heat is
less challenging. It is something that the agencies and the
community are doing quite well. We do not necessarily
differentiate, from a forecasting perspective, between
forecasting heat or forecasting any other weather phenomenon.
In that context, I do think that we need to think about the
problem in two dimensions, the long-term and the short-term. In
the long-term, yes, we need definitely to make sure our
infrastructure can sustain climate change, and we need to
improve the infrastructure to sense weather so we can predict
it better. That's why Tomorrow.io is launching its satellites
to cover the world with radars.
But what I want to highlight is that what we're focusing
on in the context of extreme heat and other phenomenon is the
intelligence element, the insight. We are already in the era of
consequences, and that takes us to the short-term. In the
short-term we can do a lot to prevent damages and casualties by
putting in place systems that translates the extreme heat into
actionable insights. Any city, any education institution, from
schools to universities, can have automation in place that
tells exactly, on a weekly calendar, on a daily, hourly
calendar, what to do, and what precautionary measures to take
in order to avoid the damages. Because the knowledge, as Mr.
Bernstein, and--has indicated is there. We already know the
connection between the weather and the impact. Now we need to
put the systems in place so we can be proactive, and this is
what we're looking for, in terms of the patterns.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. Mr. Shandas, you talked a little
earlier about the monitoring of temperatures in urban areas.
Can you talk--speak to how you would anticipate being able to
do that on a block-by-block basis? Although that could be
helpful, I think scalable would be the question that I would
have for you.
Dr. Shandas. Thank you for the question. There are really
two different ways, and complementary ways, to do block-by-
block measurements as we've done. One is something that we've
used for a very long time, and that's satellite-based
approaches. We have satellites already flying around the planet
that describe at relatively coarse scales what is happening at
a--within a city block. We can get 30 meter resolution, for
example, from satellite imagery to describe what the surface
temperature is in specific places.
The other is to actually monitor air temperature, and
that's the campaigns that we've been engaged at--engaged with,
and it really has two components. One is a community-based data
collection process, where we engage with environmental and
social justice organizations within cities who might not have a
direct interest or direct relevance to heat, and we work with
the communities and the municipality to be able to go out and
collect hundreds of thousands of measurements in one specific
hot--heat day in a place. And that really socializes the
concept, and yet gives us--and also really gives us very
granular data, data that we haven't been able to see. It's
unprecedented to this date.
And that, combined with stationary sensors, where we can
actually drive by and combine the both spatial and temporal
variability, we can see, when a heat wave's coming, how one
neighborhood or one city block is actually going to fare far
worse than another particular part of the city. So that
combination----
Mrs. Bice. Thank you for that answer. My time is short, so
I want to make sure I get one more quick question in. It's----
Dr. Shandas. Sure.
Mrs. Bice [continuing]. Interesting that you mention
satellites. Mr. Elkabetz is actually talking about that in
his--within his company. To you, Mr. Elkabetz, can you talk a
little bit about how renewable energy companies can use weather
data like Tomorrow.io offers to optimize operations, and how
this can protect lives and property during weather events?
Mr. Elkabetz. Definitely. The most--the biggest challenge
they have is actually predicting the output, what they can
generate on any given day, and that is directly correlated to
the weather. So by having more accurate weather forecast down
to the facility, they can better forecast that, and serve the
customers.
So when you think about extreme heat, if the supplier
finds itself without enough capacity to support a grid, it can
be a big challenge. We're supporting by providing more
granular, finely tuned weather forecast for the needs of that
renewable company, but moreover, we're providing them
historical data so they can train their models and understand
the relationship between the historical weather data and the
historical production, and then use regularly, using machine
learning, the forecast of the weather to understand the
forecast of the generation.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, and I'm afraid the
gentlewoman's time has expired, so I'm now going to recognize
the Chairwoman of the Full Committee, Ms. Johnson, for five
minutes.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. I'd like--I'd
like to start with Dr. Shandas. Dr. Shandas, can you discuss
how climate change will impact extreme heat events in the U.S.
moving forward? Because it seems to me that, though we have
looked at certain areas of the country, that it's getting to be
more commonplace around the country. Some of the extreme heat
has been affecting parts of the country where--such as Arizona,
Northwest recently, Texas. Can you elaborate on how heat-prone
parts of America already responding to heat stress, and how
these lessons that we learned can be used from one city to
another, municipality, through some way that the Federal
Government can spread this information, especially through
these communities?
Because I believe that we're about to embark upon a deadly
summer, and I realize that some areas of the country have not
been as accustomed to this heat, but I think this heat could
show up anywhere, frankly, with the global change that we're
experiencing.
Dr. Shandas. Thank you, Congresswoman Johnson. The
relationship between climate change and heat is really getting
far--getting more and more resolved, and what we're seeing is
that this heat dome that we experienced in the Pacific
Northwest not only broke records, but broke climate models. The
climate models are relatively conservative in being able to
look at the probabilities between what a greenhouse gas Earth--
greenhouse gas emitted Earth looks like versus one that's not,
and that difference of probability has now become unequivocally
clear about the role that climate change and greenhouse gases
have played in the heat dome that we just experienced, and also
for those other heat waves that we're likely to see coming this
summer.
In terms of the relationship between some parts of the
country having had a lot more experience than others, I would
really look to Dr. Guardaro for the work that's been going on
in Arizona, and other parts that are really hot, though I will
just quickly note that one of the challenges that we've noticed
in doing this work nationally of looking at high resolution
temperature is that regional coordination is very challenging
right now. Individual municipalities are working largely on
their own, often based on their own goodwill, and--to be able
to get ahead of this. And right now they really don't see a lot
of support coming from the Federal Government to be able to
create a regional entity that could help different
municipalities in a particular bioclimatic zone of the country
get ahead of this--get ahead of these heat waves that are
coming. And so part of what I would really underscore and
emphasize is a need for creating regional networks of municipal
heat planners that could learn from each other and share those
lessons to--across the country. Dr. Guardaro, did you want to
contribute to that question as well?
Dr. Guardaro. Yes, thank you Dr. Shandas. Certainly it's
very hot in Arizona, and we have been dealing with this for
quite a long time, and the weather that we experience in
Arizona is certainly going to be the normal for other regions
in the country, so I think there are some really great lessons
to be learned by how we approach heat.
So, first of all, our buildings are really built with the
idea that this is a hot climate. All housing is built with
central air conditioning. When we build parks, we understand
that we have to provide thermal comfort for people, and that
doesn't just mean trees as shade. It also means other
structures as well. When we look to have public transit, we
make sure that our public transit is shaded, or that we're
going to get shading in big public transit nodes.
So the infrastructure is already, to some extent, a
normal--the way that we approach it is just very normal. So
you--when you build playgrounds, you would have a covering over
it to shield the children from extreme heat. So my advice would
be that other municipalities learn from what we've done in the
region to address it. That said, I think that we still have a
long way to go in Arizona to make sure that we're keeping
people safe.
And the other area that I think that the Federal
Government could be really helpful is, as Dr. Shandas has said,
helping to formulate these regional working groups that could
help municipalities to not be in a competitive environment,
because if one municipality has an urban forestry program, and
the other one doesn't, and is rapidly paving over their city,
they're working at cross purposes. So we have to make sure that
we're not allowing for people to shop, if you will, areas
within one region that have lesser regulations, or lesser
political will to go and address increasing urban heat. Thank
you.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank--sorry.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Excuse me, Madam Chair?
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. I yield back. My
time is about to expire.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Madam Chair. And next the
Chair recognizes Mr. Gimenez for five minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Madam Chair. I have no questions
at this time. I yield my time back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Feenstra for five minutes.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Sherrill, and Ranking
Member Bice. Thank you to all our witnesses for the testimony,
and sharing your extensive research on these experiences, and
this important subject. The issue of severe weather is
important to my district. Farmers are highly attuned to the
seasonal weather changes and the weather patterns. The ability
to prepare for extreme weather is very important.
Mr. Elkabetz, just as elsewhere in the country, my
district in Iowa has been experiencing persistently higher than
average temperatures this summer, as well as moderate to severe
drought conditions. These conditions require advance
preparation for our farmers and our ranchers. You've described
how your weather intelligent platform can monitor and provide
operating recommendations for various sectors in your
testimony. What sort of capabilities could the platform provide
for our agricultural community, and specifically the supply
chain when it comes to transporting livestock and perishable
goods?
Mr. Elkabetz. Thank you. I'm actually coming from family
of farmers myself, so this topic is very dear to my heart as
well. We're doing two things. One is improving the accuracy of
weather forecasts in a way of basically creating more
observations, and running our own models on HPC in the cloud.
That enables us to fine tune the granularity of the forecast.
But, as you indicated, the data itself--the raw data itself is
not enough.
The insights that our platform provides relates to
planting, irrigation, fertilizing. For example--let's look at a
simple example of spraying, and after 3 hours you have rain
that washes the spray. That can be a significant damage. So the
platform provides a weekly calendar with recommendations for
the farmer about what to do, not necessarily what will be the
weather, so this is very helpful. You can even automate
agronomist algorithms into the software and get specific to
species type of recommendations.
In the context of supply chain, as you asked, we're
working with supply chain and intermodal companies, including
railways. We're helping with route efficiencies around when is
the best time to do a drive and to avoid excess heat, and avoid
the food spoilage, and areas of that kind.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you so much for that information. This
is very critical to agriculture and the supply chain. This is
for any one of the experts. My State is also a leader in wind
energy, and my district specifically has a large wind energy
footprint. In addition to precipitation droughts, heavy--or
heat waves are also known to cause wind droughts. They can
decrease wind and wind energy output. These type of droughts
have affected wind energy in recent years in both the United
States and Europe. With increased extreme heat, do we see these
wind droughts increasing in frequency? If anyone could take
that question, I would appreciate it. Anyone?
Chairwoman Sherrill. Mr. Feenstra, we can take that
question for the record and have our experts get you an answer.
Mr. Feenstra. I would greatly appreciate that. Thank you,
Chairwoman Sherrill. Finally, just one other question. Much of
the testimony today has focused on the impact of--high
temperatures have on urban populations, given that cities tend
to have higher temperatures as compared to the surrounding
rural areas. While I agree with the issues of urban heat, its
significance concerning my district, especially in Sioux City
and Ames, Iowa, I also worry about the unique challenges people
in rural areas face. For example, rural populations are more
spread out, meaning some are socially isolated, and have
barriers to travel, and--for communal centered cooling. Have
any of our witnesses given thought to this, and how we could
not only promote heat-ready cities, but also heat-ready
communities in my regions, in my rural areas?
Dr. Guardaro. Thank you for that question. I think that
while we are talking about urban heat, extreme heat is
everywhere, and it's certainly in the rural areas as well. And,
again, we need to look at that at two different time scales, so
you have an immediate emergency concern. So when there's an
extreme heat event, or if you have a period where it's
extraordinarily hot, you need to provide cooling for people.
And one of the ways to do that is to have a robust cooling
center network, and there are examples within Arizona.
Certainly the Heat Relief Network in Arizona is one such case,
where you could be able to provide cooling.
And even though people are spaced out, you could also have
a network of people who are helping. So, in our case, in the
Heat Relief Network, we've had all sort of community members
step up, including having a utility company pay for Lyft rides
to cooling centers. So that's a short-term solution. And long-
term solutions are also to provide cooling spaces for people
along the way. I see that I'm out of time, but to provide
cooling spaces for people, and handle long-term mitigation and
adaptation.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you. Thank you so much for your
comments, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes
Mr. Kildee for five minutes.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, for holding
this really important hearing. I've been sort of toggling back
and forth. I've got lots of things going on today, so if my
question is redundant, I apologize for that.
Over seven years ago, in my hometown, a water crisis
emerged. My hometown is Flint, Michigan. Children were affected
by this crisis, exposed to high levels of lead, which we know
poses really significant health risks to kids, particularly in
their development. What was not as well known during that water
crisis is that there was an outbreak of Legionnaire's Disease
in Flint as a result of the crisis.
Michigan again, sadly, is experiencing a surge in
Legionnaire's Disease. This week, in fact, the Michigan
Department of Health and Human Services announced that
Legionnaire's Disease cases during the first two weeks of July
were up 569 percent from the same period a year ago. Michigan
officials attribute this rise in cases to rain, flooding, and
warmer weather, warmer temperatures in particular having an
impact. Environmental health and climate experts in Michigan
have been warning that climate change, causing more extreme
weather, more volatile water cycles, allows for an environment
for water-borne bacteria, like legionella bacteria, to thrive.
And so, Dr. Bernstein, I wonder if you could speak to ways in
which climate change, particularly extreme heat, can provide a
breeding ground for bacteria and water-borne illnesses such as
Legionnaire's Disease?
Dr. Bernstein. Sure. Thank you for that question,
Representative Kildee. So, as you mentioned, extreme weather is
associated with water-borne diseases. That's particularly true
in places like Representative Feenstra's district in Iowa, and
particularly the Mississippi Watershed, where we see heavy--so
baked Earth, followed by heavy downpours, causing runoff that
causes bacteria and viruses to get in the water, that's
probably the clearest signal that we have in this country of
climate change effects on disease.
We also see in coastal areas, so in Congressman Gimenez's
district of Miami, the risks of harmful algal blooms, red
tides, brown tides, is affected by heat. Most of the heat of
climate change is going to the oceans. Those aren't just
problems for marine organisms. There are actually direct toxins
to people who may be in those waters, and importantly they
aerosolize, so people who have breathing problems breathe those
in, get sick. Heat is a major issue for wildfire smoke, we
know, but often through a pathway that involves diseases of
trees. So we see the movement of these pests on trees, bark
beetles in the West. They kill the trees, make them more
vulnerable. That air pollution is a major driver of respiratory
infections. This is a pathway of heat leading to deaths. We saw
a lot of evidence around the COVID pandemic that people had
been breathing polluted air were more likely to die. That's not
just true with COVID. That's true every winter with the flu,
and other respiratory conditions.
Heat, of course, makes it possible for other pests to
move, like the ticks that transmit diseases like Lyme Disease.
We've certainly seen that in this country already. And I think
critically, and one area I would underscore here, is heat is a
major threat to healthcare. We know that heat is driving power
outages, and hospitals and clinics, particularly clinics that
are in rural areas, and hospitals in rural areas, are not
equipped to deal with power outages very well, and that means
that people who have infections are more likely to have bad
outcomes. And I think we really need to get our heads around
what heat means to healthcare through research.
Mr. Kildee. I was going to ask that. Do you--have you come
up with, or can you suggest specific areas of research where we
could explore further the linkage between heat and disease
outbreaks?
Dr. Bernstein. Yes, it's a critical piece. I actually
wanted to pick up on something Representative Feenstra said.
You know, to be perfectly blunt, we don't know how to protect
rural Americans from the heat. Knowledge, folks, is not going
to save us. We can have all--and I'm a big proponent of
knowledge here. But we can have all the data we want about
heat, but if we don't know how to implement it, and whether
those strategies work, it ain't very helpful. So we have to get
information about what temperatures matter to health, but we
need much better understanding of what kinds of interventions
matter. So that means we've got to get CDC to work with NOAA to
implement and assess these things.
We need the healthcare system--we spent $4 trillion on
healthcare, by our own estimates. A quarter of that is on fully
preventable diseases. That means we've got a trillion bucks
we're throwing down the drain, folks. Can we please put some of
that to invest in protecting our citizens from heat, without
spending any more money? So there's a huge need to get a handle
on this. One last point here is heat's going up, and rates of
medication use in Americans are going through the roof, and you
know what? The evidence we have is that mediations may be
increasing heat risk. So, again, you can know a lot about heat
exposures, but a person on medication would be far more likely
to get sick. The health system knows that. Public health
agencies don't. We better understand whether people like me,
who are prescribing drugs to everybody else, are causing
unnecessary harm in heat events.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. I'm afraid the gentleman's
time has expired----
Mr. Kildee. Thank you.
Chairwoman Sherrill [continuing]. And so I next turn to
Mr.----
Mr. Gonzalez. I can go.
Chairwoman Sherrill. OK. The Chair now recognizes Mr.
Gonzalez for five minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, and Ranking
Member Bice, for holding this hearing today, and to our
witnesses for joining us.
It's clear extreme heat waves can have serious societal,
ecological, and economic impacts, and with the recent events in
the Pacific Northwest, it's essential that we think critically
about how we prepare for the future and mitigate these risks. I
think we--we're all seeing now fires every year. It's becoming
a routine part of life on the West Coast, and it's something
that I think we should all be very concerned with. Can't
imagine raising a young kid out there right now, and knowing
that, you know, you're going to have these wildfires, and all
the smoke risks that come with that.
Mr. Elkabetz, your company is at the center of this new
effort to aggregate data, model it, and ultimately relay it
clients in a user-friendly way. Have you faced any obstacles in
helping clients consume and respond to the information that
your company provides them?
Mr. Elkabetz. Thank you. So definitely part of our
innovation comes from things that were real challenges as we
engage with customers. So at the beginning of our way, we
innovated mostly around how to make weather and forecasts more
hyperlocal. Very fast, when we engage with customers, we
learned that about 90 percent of the businesses, based on our
estimation, are not really equipped to understand raw weather
data. Even if I give them the AQI (air quality index) for
tomorrow at 2 o'clock p.m., the most accurate way, they will
not necessarily be able to do that, and that has a few
components.
The first is, of course, the translation of the weather
data to actionable insights. We're working with football clubs,
and with leagues and such, around when to do the practice, when
is the best time to do that, what kind of recommendations to
give for the audience in the stadium, and such. But the more
interesting element is how do you automate it? How do you make
sure that you truly give the right information in the right
time to the relevant audience so they can make decisions?
Because, even if you have all the knowledge that Dr. Bernstein
indicated, there's still this gap between making sure that the
right individual gets the decision in the right time, and
that's what we're focused on.
And we developed that interface in two ways. One, for
visual, basically a person that looks at a screen and makes the
decision, but also via data feed, so we can integrate to other
systems. And other systems can be everything from street
lights, to sewage systems, to IoT (internet of things) devices.
So they can be proactive to the risks of weather, and we make
decisions ahead of what's coming. And that's how we're solving
this problem for our customers, and we can solve it for
municipalities, government agencies, and more.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. And then has your company
partnered with any local or State governments, and if so, are
there any issues that are limiting their ability to take action
on these warnings when they come through?
Mr. Elkabetz. Yeah. An example is the city of Quincy here
in Boston, where they suffer in the summer from heat events
like we're just talking about, in the winter from snow removal
challenges, or anything related to resource allocation during
storms. They've been finding the software pretty useful. And
we're working also with governmental agencies, like the U.S.
Air Force, and others. I don't see regulatory issues around
using those insights at the moment, and I'm glad that it is the
case, and we hope that it will continue in such a way.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. And then one of--one gap in our
understanding of extreme heat is your lack of ability to
predict what the maximum high temperature a region may
experience is, and how long that high temperature can persist.
What progress has Tomorrow.io made in addressing this issue,
and how, if at all, can Federal agencies help?
Mr. Elkabetz. So scientifically we do not have evidence
that we were able to improve that specific element. However, we
are working on technologies around sensing and around modern
modeling, and the modeling we're working on together with the
other partners. We're basically the architects of the EPIC
program, and we're hoping that by putting the models in modern
cloud it will help the community further innovate, and maybe
find the solutions to improving the modeling. On the----
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. Then----
Mr. Elkabetz [continuing]. Data, which is really the input
for those models--let's look at the West Coast, right? This is
where we're talking about, in terms of the wildfires. The
forecast for the West Coast is highly dependent on what's
happening in the Pacific 2 days ago, 3 days ago, and before
that. We know that the oceans are blind to active radars, and,
as a result, we do not have accurate monitoring of storms--
tropical storms from hurricanes, to cycles, and typhoons, and
others over the oceans. Without that, the forecast of any
weather parameter is highly limited. So by covering the entire
world with active radars, we're going to improve the
forecasting skills by a lot, including the problem you just
mentioned.
Mr. Gonzalez. Great. Well, I know we all wish you luck in
that endeavor, and I appreciate your testimony, and yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Elkabetz. Thank you so much.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes
Ms. Bonamici for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much, Chair Sherrill and
Ranking Member Bice, and thank you especially to our witnesses
for joining us for this very timely hearing.
The unprecedented heat wave in the Pacific Northwest last
month was a natural disaster that tragically claimed the lives
of 116 Oregonians, and many more across the region. My heart
goes out to their families and friends. Most heat related
deaths are preventable, and we owe it to their families and
friends to take action that will prevent further loss of life.
We must recognize that the devastating heat dome
disproportionately affected vulnerable communities, like the
low-income neighborhoods that became heat islands, surrounded
by concrete and excessive emissions from highways, seniors who
lacked air condition and fans to stay cool--not all houses in
the Pacific Northwest have air conditioning--and the
communities of color who lacked access to green spaces to
provide adequate shade because of racist historical redlining
policies.
State emergency management officials acknowledge that 750
people who called an information line during the heat wave were
unable to connect with an operator for assistance because of a
staffing shortage. Public transit was suspended because the
light rail couldn't withstand extreme temperatures, and that
prevented people from getting rides to cooling centers.
So, Dr. Shandas, I know you've been researching these
issues for decades, and really raising the alarm about urban
heat and its deadly consequences for vulnerable communities,
and I sincerely hope that my colleagues on this Committee will
join me in heeding your urgent call in committing to bold,
comprehensive, science-based climate action. And I'm grateful
for your work. I know you've collected local heat data to raise
awareness about the disparities for historically marginalized
communities, and in a recent report I saw that you and your son
measured an air temperature of 124 degrees in Southeast
Portland, I believe in the Lents neighborhood last month. That
was 25 degrees higher than the measurement around the same time
in more prosperous neighborhoods. How can this hyperlocal data
help to confirm investments that will improve the resilience of
our communities for future extreme heat events?
Dr. Shandas. Thank you, Representative Bonamici. It's
wonderful to see you. And this work has really about three
parallel lines, and I'll try to summarize them really briefly.
One is we have many different ways to measure heat. It might
seem really obvious in talking about heat, but as we continue
to unpack this, and think about the satellite approach, think
about the ground-based approach, community members, as well as
municipal planners and State agencies, are really grappling
with what is the ``best'' way to measure heat. And so we are
deep in this process of trying to reconcile a lot of the
different approaches that are currently being used, so that's a
scientific foundation upon which decisions can be really
promulgated.
And second is really to base these measurements and the
interpretation with the communities that are hardest hit with
this--with extreme heat. And often communities that are hardest
hit are often saying, I've weathered a heat event before, or,
it gets hot and I just, you know, deal with it, and that's
where we start seeing, particularly in areas like the Pacific
Northwest, communities just not well prepared, not really
socialized with the understanding of the implications of heat.
And so places where they can get this information, and also be
engaged in the interpretation of what's happening locally, is
essential. So really grounding this in the community and civic
science approach is something we've been--as a second parallel
track.
And then the third is to really think about, as I
mentioned a little bit earlier, a coordination network within
particular regions of the country. For example, the Pacific
Northwest, we've been talking to folks from Northern Washington
State, over to Idaho, down to southern parts of Oregon to
really get a handle on what does it mean to be embarking upon
the heat mitigation strategies, and understanding what's
effective in this region, which may be very different than
what's effective in the Southwest, in the Southeast, the
Northeast, the Midwest, et cetera. And so we really want to
create these regional hubs of heat practitioners, heat
planners, and public health agencies that can really bring all
of this kind of----
Ms. Bonamici. Dr. Shandas, I don't want to interrupt you,
but I have a few seconds left, and----
Dr. Shandas. Yeah.
Ms. Bonamici [continuing]. You've led me to my last
question, which is, where you--you emphasize that coordinated
response. What steps could this Committee and Congress take to
improve coordination at the Federal level, and what are the
current gaps in sharing Federal resources with local, State,
and tribal governments? How can we close those gaps?
Dr. Shandas. I would--there is already a mechanism in
place. I would really point us to the National Integrated Heat
Health Information System. That group is already bringing
together several different agencies, including FEMA, EPA, NOAA,
CDC to really address this coordinated approach. And if we see
the Federal Government really bringing their coordinated
attention to this, I think what local municipalities will start
to do is also reduce the silos that are currently in place in
different bureaus, and start to do more coordinated effort,
which is really at the core of a lot of developing preventable
approaches to heat deaths.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much, Dr. Shandas. I see my
time has expired. I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. And the Chair recognizes
Mr. Casten for five minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to our
witnesses. I must say, there's a part of this whole hearing
that makes me very sad, and it makes me sad because pre-COVID I
think the three biggest days for single day above-baseline
mortality events in the United States were 9/11, at nearly
3,000 people, Hurricane Katrina, at 1,800, and the No. 3 was
the 1995 Chicago heat wave that killed 700 people. And so much
of what Dr. Shandas was talking about--what makes me sad is
that this isn't new, right? In 1995 the people who died were
the least among us. The--it was the people who couldn't afford
air conditioning, people who didn't have social networks
checking in on them. Since that time inequality has increased.
Since 1991 we've emitted 50 percent of all the CO
2

we have ever emitted as a species, since we first learned how
to make a fire a million years ago. And, you know, we're
talking a good game, but at some point future generations are
going to watch our feet and ask if we moved. I'm sorry to be
sad and bring us down, but I'm sad.
Dr. Shandas, I want to maybe use that to riff a little bit
to you. There's--University of Chicago, the EPIC, Energy Policy
Institute, has done this really interesting work that I'm sure
you're familiar with on the social cost of carbon, and how
these things change regionally. And, as you have looked around
to see where these inequities exist, where the costs are, there
are some of the costs that are functions of social policy
questions, where do we plant trees, what do we do for building
codes, and we can fix those legislatively. There are some of
those costs that are just geographical. There's a reason we
don't build cities in Death Valley, there's a reason we don't
zone homes on flood plains. And as temperatures rise in areas
to Death Valley levels, as flooding gets more common, some of
these issues are only solved by relocation.
As you've looked at your data, you know, following up on
what Congresswoman Bonamici asked about, sort of the hyperlocal
questions, have you thought about how to quantify to what
degree are the solutions we should be thinking about social
questions, and to what degree do we need to be--is it more cost
effective to think about providing people with opportunities to
relocate?
Dr. Shandas. Yes. So the extent to which we've looked at
this, relocation has been really brought up a lot around sea
level rise and managed retreat discussions that are active in
the literature, and we have yet to see those implemented in any
substantial way in any parts of the country. We've heard
proposals with various indigenous tribes, for example, in the
Northwest, like the Quileutes community in Northwestern
Washington that are considering retreating from that particular
Pacific coastal zone.
But in terms of heat, the main discussions that have been
happening is really around the social policy, and around the
potential interventions that could be effective. Right now we
have a lot of modeling data about what specific interventions
might ameliorate temperatures at the city block level, or even
at the district level, neighborhood level, yet we don't have
very much empirical evidence on that right now. We are
embarking on a project with the Urban Land Institute to
actually look at, for example, buildings that are being
designed and developed, and monitoring those in such a way to
see whether there are specific things, like green roofs, green
walls, whether there's blue-green or water features, whether
there are specific geometries or configurations of that
building that could actually ameliorate temperatures and study
that empirically.
So we are embarking upon that right now. There are some
really off the shelf things, like we've already heard from Dr.
Guardaro and others, about green infrastructure as being a
really important first step to this--to achieving this. So the
social policy questions are really at the core of it, and
whether communities are really going--taking a step into this
will really depend on what Federal Government guidance is given
to----
Mr. Casten. I'm sorry, I want to just interrupt, because I
want to get one more question for Dr. Bernstein, but I do just
want point out that a lot of the areas that you see this are
areas where, because of redlining, it's concentrated, so there
is a reverse redlining question at some level.
Dr. Bernstein, you're--you mentioned some of the issues
around things less than death, increased workplace fatality. We
had Dr. Jisung Park testify exactly to this issue on the Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis earlier this week, and how
they're starting to see some evidence of increased, you know,
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) issues at
rising heat. Any quick comments in the little time we've got
left on areas for further research on that front?
Dr. Bernstein. Sure. We need to very much understand much
more so for rural areas than we do urban areas. Most of the
data we have is in urban areas. We need to focus on the ties
to--between the economic effects. So we see the impairments in
economic productivity, the losses in GDP, and--as a result of
heat, and those get compounded by individual effects from heat.
So the same places where the economy's getting hit by heat, we
see compounded effects upon individuals. But critically, again,
we need to focus on understanding what we can do to mitigate
heat. And, Representative Casten, I also would underscore that
it's hard to have this conversation, and talking about all we
can do to essentially adapt to heat, when it's very clear that
the single best thing we can do to address all of the above is
to prevent greenhouse gas emissions in the first place. That'll
be far more effective than hyper-localized data. That'll be far
more effective than me writing prescriptions, or telling people
how to stay out of the heat, from both a----
Chairwoman Sherrill. I'm afraid the gentleman's----
Dr. Bernstein [continuing]. Outcome standpoint----
Chairwoman Sherrill [continuing]. Time has expired.
Dr. Bernstein [continuing]. And a cost----
Mr. Casten. Hear hear, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, and next I'd like to
recognize Mr. Crist for five minutes.
Mr. Crist. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and thank to
the--thanks to all the witnesses for being with us today. In
cities across the country the summer of '21 is off to the
hottest start on record. Dangerously high temperatures have
hammered the West, worsening existing drought and wildlife
conditions, and leading to nearly 200 heat related deaths. In
my home State of Florida, our sunshine may bring welcome warmth
in the winter, but it can be pretty darn hot in the summer.
Just last month, as a matter of fact, the heat index in Miami
reached 108 degrees, prompting the National Weather Service to
issue a hazardous weather outlook. And a recent study from the
University of Florida found that heat related deaths occur
year-round in Florida.
This national problem requires a national response. That's
why I'm working with our colleague in the Senate, Senator
Markey of Massachusetts, to introduce the Preventing Heat
Illness and Deaths Act. This bill would formalize and expand
the National Integrated Heat Health Information System, as well
as establish an inter-agency committee to oversee Federal
efforts to address extreme heat. Dr. Shandas, could you please
speak to the importance of developing an integrated Federal
approach to reducing the impacts of extreme heat?
Dr. Shandas. Sure, and I'll be cautious, as I took up too
much time last time. The need for coordination has never been
greater in this particular realm. I have witnessed far too many
times a conversation with one Federal agency that then gets
replicated with a different Federal agency, and so I'm really
seeing the--kind of the split and differences across Federal
agencies, and the lack of conversation and coordinated approach
that's happening even within agencies that are down the street
from each other physically. And so part of what I think NIHHIS
can really bring to the table is connect the human health
component, which is CDC, bring together NOAA, which is the
climate science entity, EPA, which really can move on policy
and really support local communities in taking action, and, of
course, FEMA, who is there to be able to identify specific
hazards and bring resources to the table.
So the coordinated approach would really lead from a
research base into an understanding of what the potential
implications are for heat, and then leading to the policy and
the investments that could really safeguard a community. So
NIHHIS is established, it's in place, and it really is about
how do we move forward? And I really applaud your and Senator
Markey's bill for moving that particular entity forward. I
yield back.
Mr. Crist. Thank you. That's very kind of you, Doctor.
Also I'd like to know, how could the National Integrated
Health--Heat Health, rather, Information System be best
leveraged as a mechanism and entity for improving coordination?
Dr. Shandas. So in--specifically I think there are three
things that can--or two things that can happen that come to
mind. One is--we've talked about information. We're still--
NIHHIS can hold the information from a variety of different
sources. That's an essential component to this, is, while it's
not enough, it is important to be able to gather, synthesize,
and, as we've heard before, put the information in ways that
are really accessible, understandable, by local municipalities.
There's all kinds of techniques and ways in which we've
developed communication strategies for doing that kind of work.
Excuse me.
And second is the idea of being able to be a lot more
focused on the implementation side of it. What are the
strategies that are working in specific parts of the region?
How can NIHHIS take what we've learned from the Southwest, for
example, and help the Northwest better adapt to heat? How can
we find ways of what's working in the Southeast, in your part
of the country, and help the Mid-Atlantic better prepare for
heat? And so these are both the information, as well as the
implementation dimensions, I think, central to what NIHHIS is
going to be able to bring to the table.
Mr. Crist. Thank you very much. And then finally, Dr.
Bernstein, what kind of steps would you like to see the Federal
Government take to address the rising health risk of extreme
heat?
Dr. Bernstein. Thank you for that question. I would love
to see the Federal Government utilize the healthcare dollars
we're spending to incentivize healthcare systems to do more to
keep people safe. Through Medicare, for instance, there now are
incentives to provide high quality care for various conditions,
which are largely targeted at preventing readmissions. We know
that heat is a major driver of hospitalization emergency use,
but yet we don't incentivize providers to act. So we could use
this massive investment of taxpayer dollars in the healthcare
system, which is often used for preventable problems like heat,
to get the healthcare system engaged on this problem.
My big concern with our current response right now, which
involves heat alerts and cooling centers, is whether they
actually protect the most vulnerable. And the healthcare
system, while not perfect in getting to the most vulnerable,
between federally health--federally qualified health centers,
Medicare and Medicaid recipients, there are avenues to get to
the folks who are most likely to be harmed who may be least
likely to get heat alerts or information from other data
sources.
Mr. Crist. Thank you, Doctor, and thank you, Madam Chair.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. Before we bring the
hearing to a close, I want to thank our witnesses for
testifying before the Committee today. The record will remain
open for two weeks for additional statements from the Members
and for any additional questions the Committee may ask of the
witnesses. The witnesses are excused, and the hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the Subcommittee was
adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Vivek Shandas

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Melissa Guardaro

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Shimon Elkabetz

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Aaron Bernstein, MD, MPH

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
