- ADVANCING EARTH SYSTEM SCIENCE AND STEWARDSHIP AT NOAA

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING EARTH SYSTEM SCIENCE
AND STEWARDSHIP AT NOAA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 23, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-538PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                VACANCY
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Environment

HON. MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey, Chairwoman
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma,
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                     Ranking Member
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas               ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

September 23, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mikie Sherrill, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Stephanie I. Bice, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Chairwoman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    16
Written Statement............................................    17

Witnesses:

The Honorable Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Under Secretary of
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, and Administrator, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    21

Discussion.......................................................    33

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Under Secretary of
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, and Administrator, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.........................    54

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Opinion articles submitted by Representative Brian Babin,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
``NOAA is stalling U.S. space traffic management,'' Space
News.......................................................    66
``Getting Serious About the Office of Space Commerce,'' Space
News.......................................................    70

ADVANCING EARTH SYSTEM

SCIENCE AND STEWARDSHIP AT NOAA

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m.,
via Zoom, Hon. Mikie Sherrill [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Sherrill. The hearing will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at
any time. Pursuant to House Resolution 8, today the Committee
is meeting virtually. I want to announce a couple reminders to
the Members about the conduct of this remote hearing. First,
Members should keep their video feed on as long as they are
present in the hearing. Members are responsible for their own
microphones. Please also keep your microphones muted, unless
you are speaking. Finally, if Members have documents they wish
to submit for the record, please e-mail them to the Committee
Clerk, whose e-mail address was circulated prior to the
hearing.
Good morning. Welcome to today's Environment Subcommittee
hearing to discuss the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's (NOAA's) Earth System Science and Stewardship
policies. I'd like to thank Ranking Member Bice for her
bipartisan partnership at this hearing, as well as on recent
legislation we've partnered together on, including the NOAA
Weather Radio Modernization Act, which would expand and
modernize a key tool in providing warnings on impending weather
emergencies, as well as the VET RENT Act, which we'll be
introducing soon, to ensure veterans who were housed in
barracks-style housing have parity when competing for rental
housing as civilians. I'd like to welcome NOAA Administrator
Dr. Richard Spinrad to the Committee, and thank him for being
here to testify about the vital work of this agency.
The climate crisis, and its very real impacts that we're
facing today, underscores the importance of NOAA's mission to
``understand and predict changes in climate, weather, and
oceans, and coasts, to share that knowledge and information
with others, and to conserve and manage coastal and marine
ecosystems and resources.'' Extreme weather events and billion-
dollar disasters are on the rise, and NOAA's environmental
research, services, and stewardship activities are critical to
saving lives and safeguarding our economy.
Earlier this month, Hurricane Ida, which made landfall over
1,000 miles away, caused historic and deadly levels of rainfall
and flooding across my district and region in New Jersey. New
Jerseyans are unfortunately no strangers to flooding, but an
event of this magnitude shows us why we need to invest in
resilience, and not just recovery. Climate change is causing
storms like Ida to rapidly intensify and suck up more moisture,
increasing flood risk. Supporting the work of NOAA's dedicated
researchers and forecasters will help improve lead times for
extreme weather and evacuation alerts, and to better understand
how climate change impacts extreme events like Ida.
Many Americans utilize NOAA's data, products, and services
on a daily basis, often without even realizing it. The most
obvious examples are the weather apps on our phones. In
addition, brave firefighters rely on meteorological data to
predict where the latest catastrophic inferno would--will
spread. Farmers across the country use products like the U.S.
Drought Monitor to be strategic about their irrigation and crop
decisions. Local officials utilize NOAA's real-time ocean data
to know when to issue a harmful algal bloom (HAB) warning and
close beaches. NOAA's Regional Integrated Sciences and
Assessments Program provides crucial climate products and tools
for officials to make informed infrastructure planning
decisions that will withstand a changing climate, and so much
more.
NOAA's only able to provide this, and many more types of
useful information, because of its extensive network of Earth
systems observations. These observational systems collect data
from ships, aircraft, satellites, radar, and more. NOAA's
scientists then process and analyze the data to provide
forecasts and predictions in an accessible manner for all of us
to benefit from. That is why my colleagues and I on the Science
Committee must continue to support NOAA's work. That means
understanding what the Agency needs to expand their current
science and stewardship activities for future needs. It means
providing the necessary high performance computing capabilities
to both conduct research and run Earth systems models. It also
means supporting NOAA's work force by increasing both hiring
and diversity. And last, but most certainly not least, it means
upholding scientific integrity.
NOAA and the scientific enterprise overall took a beating
over the last several years when it came to upholding
scientific integrity. We must work collectively to restore
America's faith in science and our invaluable Federal
scientists. I am pleased that the Biden Administration and
Congress have taken steps to provide major investments for NOAA
in Fiscal Year 2022 and beyond. Passing these investments into
law will be critical to advancing the agency's life-saving
work, and help Americans across the country. I'm looking
forward to hearing Administrator Spinrad's vision for advancing
cutting edge science, and how we in Congress can support the
Agency's mission in tackling the challenges we face today, and
will face in the future.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Sherrill follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to today's Environment
Subcommittee hearing to discuss the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Earth System Science and
Stewardship priorities.
I'd like to thank Ranking Member Bice for her bipartisan
partnership at this hearing as well as on recent legislation
we've partnered together on, including the NOAA Weather Radio
Modernization Act, which would expand and modernize a key tool
in providing warnings on impending weather emergencies, as well
as the VET RENT Act, which I'll be introducing soon, to ensure
veterans who were housed in barracks-style housing have parity
when competing for rental housing as civilians.
I would like to welcome NOAA Administrator Dr. Richard
Spinrad to the Committee and thank him for being here to
testify about the vital work of this agency.
The climate crisis, and its very real impacts that we are
facing today, underscores the importance of NOAA's mission to
QUOTE ``understand and predict changes in climate, weather,
oceans, and coasts, to share that knowledge and information
with others, and to conserve and manage coastal and marine
ecosystems and resources.'' Extreme weather events and billion-
dollar disasters are on the rise, and NOAA's environmental
research, services, and stewardship activities are critical to
saving lives and safeguarding our economy.
Earlier this month, Hurricane Ida, which made landfall over
a thousand miles away, caused historic and deadly levels of
rainfall and flooding across my district and region in New
Jersey. New Jerseyans are unfortunately no strangers to
flooding, but an event of this magnitude shows us why we need
to invest in resilience, and not just recovery. Climate change
is causing storms like Ida to rapidly intensify and suck up
more moisture, increasing flood risk. Supporting the work of
NOAA's dedicated researchers and forecasters will help improve
lead times for extreme weather and evacuation alerts and to
better understand how climate change impacts extreme events
like Ida.
Many Americans utilize NOAA's data, products, and services
on a daily basis, often without even realizing it. The most
obvious examples are the weather apps on our phones. In
addition, brave firefighters rely on meteorological data to
predict where the latest catastrophic inferno will spread.
Farmers across the country use products like the U.S. Drought
Monitor to be strategic about their irrigation and crop
decisions. Local officials utilize NOAA's real-time ocean data
to know when to issue a harmful algae bloom warning and close
beaches. NOAA's Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments
Program provides crucial climate products and tools for
officials to make informed infrastructure planning decisions
that will withstand a changing climate. And so much more.
NOAA is only able to provide this, and many more types of
useful information, because of its extensive network of Earth
systems observations. These observational systems collect data
from ships, aircraft, satellites, radar, and more. NOAA's
scientists then process and analyze the data to provide
forecasts and predictions in an accessible manner for all of us
to benefit from.
That is why my colleagues and I on the Science Committee
must continue to support NOAA's work. That means understanding
what the agency needs to expand their current science and
stewardship activities for future needs. It means providing the
necessary high performance computing capabilities to both
conduct research and run Earth systems models. It also means
supporting NOAA's workforce by increasing both hiring and
diversity.
And last, but most certainly not least, it means upholding
scientific integrity. NOAA and the scientific enterprise
overall took a beating over the last several years when it came
to upholding scientific integrity. We must work collectively to
restore America's faith in science and our invaluable federal
scientists.
I am pleased that the Biden Administration and Congress
have taken steps to provide major investments for NOAA in
fiscal year 2022 and beyond. Passing these investments into law
will be critical to advancing the agency's life-saving work and
help Americans across the country.
I am looking forward to hearing Administrator Spinrad's
vision for advancing cutting edge science and how we, in
Congress, can support the agency's mission in tackling the
grand challenges we face today and will face in the future.

Chairwoman Sherrill. The Chair now recognizes Ranking
Member Bice for an opening statement.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, for holding this
hearing today. I also want to welcome Administrator Spinrad,
and thank him for his time today. Although we've had some great
acting NOAA Administrators, it's been a few years since we had
a confirmed administrator, so I want to congratulate you, Dr.
Spinrad, and I look forward to working together.
Last year there were 22 weather, water, and climate
disasters in the United States that exceeded $1 billion in
losses. Communities around the country have struggled through
the effects of extreme events, including hurricanes, floods,
droughts, wildfires, and the collapse of fisheries, and no one
knows the lasting consequences of severe weather better than my
constituents in Oklahoma, the very heart of Tornado Alley.
Violent tornadoes, as well as hailstorms and large
thunderstorms, can pop up quickly, leaving just minutes for
people to find safety.
While natural disasters can be devastating and life
altering, the data, tools, and services NOAA provides can equip
all Americans with better access to more timely warnings and
support. The never-ending goal is to protect all lives and
property. While weather forecasting and observations might be
the most widely known outfit, NOAA has a wide-ranging mission,
from fishery management to atmospheric observation. These
products and services have a tremendous economic impact, and
affect more than 1/3 of America's gross domestic product. The
President's Fiscal Year 2022 budget request for NOAA was 6.98
billion, a 22 percent increase from last year's enacted
funding. With such a large increase proposed, I look forward to
hearing from Administrator Spinrad on what his priorities are
for the agency.
While I am certainly not opposed to investing in NOAA's
life-saving products, we must ensure that the administration is
adequately preparing--prepared to handle an increased budget.
This includes expedited hiring, upgrading infrastructure,
ramping up new research projects, and a variety of other
issues. A lump sum of money with no strings attached can be a
curse before it is a blessing. Therefore, priorities must be
set, and decisions must be made.
When it comes to the specifics of the budget request, I was
disappointed to see it did not include any details regarding
the Earth Prediction Innovation Center, or EPIC. This Committee
has had multiple hearings on EPIC, and its timely
implementation has been a priority for Members on both sides of
the aisle. It's a project that is absolutely critical to
reclaiming and maintaining international leadership in
numerical weather prediction.
However, I was pleased to see NOAA's focus on increasing
their higher-performance computing capabilities. Last year one
of NOAA's systems, Hera, was ranked number 88 on the top 500
list of fastest supercomputers in the world. A continued
emphasis on computing will accelerate the development of
weather modeling across NOAA and the National Weather Service.
This, in turn, will improve the prediction of high impact
weather events, and evaluate the potential future directions
for models and data assimilation.
I hope to hear more on how NOAA can collaborate with other
agencies, including the Department of Energy, which houses
three of the top five fastest supercomputers in the world.
Cross-agency collaboration, especially with an agency that is
the clear subject matter expert, is the most efficient use of
taxpayer money, and we should encourage it as much as possible.
Lastly, I look forward to discussing how NOAA will leverage
existing centers, and scientific expertise, to inspire and
support the next generation of STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) students. Oklahoma is proud to
house a key component of NOAA's infrastructure, the National
Weather Center. The work conducted in this center provides
property and life-saving services for the entire country. But
in order to attract and keep the next generation of talent
filling that center, we must ensure that our buildings,
instruments, and the entire infrastructure are world-class. The
meteorologists, oceanographers, biologists, and other
researchers shouldn't have to settle for outdated buildings, or
cramped laboratories. Every Member of this Committee has
priorities for their district, and I'm sure Administrator
Spinrad has priorities of his own. I am excited to hear how
NOAA plans to balance these, and how we in Congress can help
maximize our return on investment. And, again, I want to thank
Administrator Spinrad for testifying before the Committee
today, and I look forward to engage--the engaging discussion.
Madam Chair, I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bice follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, for holding this hearing
today. I also want to welcome Administrator Spinrad and thank
him for his time today. Although we've had some great Acting
Administrators at NOAA, it's been a few years since we've had a
confirmed Administrator. So I want to congratulate you, Dr.
Spinrad, and I look forward to working together.
Last year, there were twenty-two weather, water, and
climatic disasters in the United States that exceeded $1
billion in losses. Communities around the country have
struggled through the effects of extreme events, including
hurricanes, floods, droughts, and wildfires.
And no one knows the lasting consequences of severe weather
better than my constituents in Oklahoma, the very heart of
Tornado Alley. Violent tornados, as well as hailstorms and
large thunderstorms, can pop up quickly, leaving just minutes
for people to find safety. While natural disasters can be
devastating and life altering, the data, tools, and services
NOAA provides can equip all Americans with better access to
more timely warnings and support. The never-ending goal is to
protect all lives and property.
While weather forecasting and observations might be the
most widely known output, NOAA has a wide-ranging mission, from
fisheries management to atmospheric observation. These products
and services have a tremendous economic impact and affect more
than one-third of America's gross domestic product. The
President's Fiscal Year 2022 budget request for NOAA was $6.98
billion, a 28 percent increase from last year's enacted
funding. With such a large increase proposed, I look forward to
hearing from Administrator Spinrad on what his priorities are
for the agency.
While I'm certainly not opposed to investing in NOAA's
life-saving products, we must ensure that the Administration is
adequately prepared to handle an increased budget. This
includes expedited hiring, upgrading infrastructure, ramping up
new research projects, and a variety of other issue. A lump sum
of money with no strings attached can be a curse before it is a
blessing. Therefore, priorities must be set, and decisions must
be made.

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. And we're pleased to have
the Full Committee Chairwoman, Ms. Johnson, with us today. The
Chair now recognizes the Chairwoman for an opening statement.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much, and good morning.
I'd like to give a warm welcome to our witness, NOAA
Administrator Dr. Richard Spinrad. He is testifying before the
Committee for the first time since he officially took the helm
of the agency. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration plays a critical role in protecting American
lives, property, and economic prosperity. NOAA is a unique
agency that performs cutting edge science, but also provides
critical environmental service and stewardship. By looking at
the Earth as a system, we are better able to understand how the
weather, ocean, climate, and atmosphere interact. Based on that
understanding, NOAA provides essential services and products
that serve us all.
Recently Americans have experienced an unprecedented string
of natural disasters made worse by climate change. We've seen
extreme heat and drought conditions out West that set the stage
for this record-breaking wildfire season, and last month,
Hurricane Ida rapidly intensified in the Gulf of Mexico before
making landfall due to warmer water temperatures. In addition,
warmer atmospheric conditions brought heavy precipitation
leading to extraordinary flooding along the Gulf Coast, and all
the way up to New England. This one devastating storm killed
dozens and left countless others with property destroyed. Each
year seems to have more multi-billion-dollar weather and
climate disasters than the previous.
NOAA's scientific observations, predictions, and warnings
have always been vital to Americans across the country, but
they're becoming increasingly important for helping Americans
prepare for extreme events exacerbated by climate change. This
Committee is steadfast in supporting NOAA as the authoritative
source for weather and climate information, so I am glad that
Chairwoman Sherrill spoke to the importance of this in her
remarks. This Committee has worked in a bipartisan fashion to
authorize R&D (research and development) activities that help
reduce our emissions and mitigate climate change. NOAA's
weather and climate programs also play an important role in
addressing the climate crisis. NOAA data can be used to inform
adaptation and resilience decisions at a community level.
NOAA's scientists contribute to major climate reports that
influence policy around the world, including the National
Climate Assessments and the IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change) assessment reports.
It is reassuring to see that the President has elevated the
importance of NOAA within his administration. We have the first
Senate-confirmed Administrator in over four years, who is also
eminently qualified. The Administration has significantly
increased its budget request for NOAA. NOAA also has a seat on
multiple White House-level interagency working groups tackling
our most pressing climate issues. I look forward to this
hearing from my administrator about his goals to advance NOAA's
mission of science, service, and stewardship. NOAA has an
important role to play in addressing the climate crisis, and we
are fortunate to have an experienced leader like this
administrator to guide the agency.
In closing, I again want to welcome you, Administrator, and
this will be our first--many positive interactions we have with
this Committee. With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning. I would like to give a warm welcome to our
witness, NOAA Administrator Dr. Richard Spinrad. He is
testifying before the Committee for the first time since he
officially took the helm of the agency.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration plays a
critical role in protecting American lives, property, and
economic prosperity. NOAA is a unique agency that performs
cutting edge science, but also provides critical environmental
service and stewardship. By looking at the Earth as a system,
we are better able to understand how the weather, ocean,
climate, and atmosphere interact. Based on that understanding,
NOAA provides essential services and products that serve us
all.
Recently, Americans have experienced an unprecedented
string of natural disasters made worse by climate change. We've
seen extreme heat and drought conditions out West that set the
stage for this record-breaking wildfire season.
Last month, Hurricane Ida rapidly intensified in the Gulf
of Mexico before making landfall, due to warmer water
temperatures.
In addition, warmer atmospheric conditions brought heavy
precipitation leading to extraordinary flooding along the Gulf
Coast and all the way up to New England. This one devastating
storm killed dozens and left countless others with their
property destroyed. Each year seems to have more multi-billion-
dollar weather and climate disasters than the previous.
NOAA's scientific observations, predictions, and warnings
have always been vital to Americans across the country. But
they are becoming increasingly important for helping Americans
prepare for extreme events exacerbated by climate change. This
Committee is steadfast in supporting NOAA as the authoritative
source for weather and climate information. I am glad
Chairwoman Sherrill spoke to the importance of this in her
remarks.
This Committee has worked in a bipartisan fashion to
authorize R&D activities that help reduce our emissions and
mitigate climate change. NOAA's weather and climate programs
also play an important role in addressing the climate crisis.
NOAA data can be used to inform adaptation and resilience
decisions at a community level. NOAA's scientists contribute to
major climate reports that influence policy around the world,
including the National Climate Assessments and the IPCC
assessment reports.
It is reassuring to see the President elevate the
importance of NOAA within his Administration. We have the first
Senate-confirmed Administrator in over four years, who is also
eminently qualified. The Administration has significantly
increased its budget request for NOAA. NOAA also has a seat on
multiple White House-level interagency working groups tackling
our most pressing climate issues.
I look forward to hearing from Administrator Spinrad today
about his goals to advance NOAA's mission of science, service,
and stewardship. NOAA has an important role to play in
addressing the climate crisis, and we are fortunate to have an
experienced leader like Administrator Spinrad to guide the
agency.
In closing, I again want to welcome you to the Committee,
Administrator Spinrad.
I hope this will be the first of many positive interactions
you have with this Committee. With that, I yield back the
balance of my time.

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. We're
also pleased to have the Full Committee Ranking Member, Mr.
Lucas, with us today, so the Chair now recognizes Ranking
Member Lucas for an opening statement.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill, and I echo my
colleagues, welcome to Administrator Spinrad. It's great to
have you here today. NOAA has a broad array of
responsibilities, ranging from weather forecasting and climate
prediction to ocean and atmospheric observation. NOAA's work
benefits America's farmers and ranchers. Coastal communities,
disaster personnel, land use planners, weather forecasters, and
everyday citizens rely on NOAA's daily work. NOAA's in-house
research is groundbreaking, and the publicly available
environmental data they collect has an immense economic impact.
That's why I'm eager to hear from Administrator Dr. Rick
Spinrad today.
As NOAA's former Chief Scientist, and head of the Office of
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), I know that the
administrator is very familiar with this Committee, and the
work we do. In fact, to give you a sense of how intertwined our
paths have been, Administrator Spinrad was present in his
official OAR capacity at the 2006 dedication of the National
Weather Center in Norman, Oklahoma. There's a great picture of
him right next to Jim Cantore that I'll have to share someday
with everyone. All of this is to say I believe the
administrator speaks the Science Committee's language.
While we might not agree on the exact way to do certain
things, I think we can engage in a meaningful discussion where
both sides are heard and valued. At the end of the day, weather
is non-partisan. Severe events don't travel along party lines.
That's why I will remind my colleagues, just I have done in
years past when Republicans were in control, the
administration's top priority should be aligned with NOAA's
core priority, protecting life and property. So today I look
forward to hearing from the administrator on how he envisions
advancing NOAA's mission, and improving its ability to save
lives.
One issue I'd like to address today is commercial data
supply. NOAA provides tools, data, and operations that are
capable to--literally--applicable to literally every single
district in the country. Whether it's a rancher in Oklahoma,
fishing captain in Florida, a firefighter in Oregon, they all
depend on information NOAA provides. But as more private sector
companies enter the picture, with the ability to gather their
own environmental and weather data, NOAA must seek to balance
its capacities with supplemental commercial data. Simply put,
NOAA's no longer the only provider in the market, and
oftentimes NOAA's collection of data costs more than that
acquired of the same quantity of data from a private sector
company.
I can't assume--I literally say that we can't assume an
endless increasing budget. At some point the balloon will pop.
Believe me, I want NOAA to be successful across its mission
areas. We can best ensure that by prioritizing funding, and
standing up programs to acquire data that private industry
cannot collect, while preparing for a commercially competitive
future. Again, I want to thank Administrator Spinrad for being
here today, Chairman Sherrill for having this hearing, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Sherrill. And I echo my colleagues'
welcome to Administrator Spinrad. It's great to have you here
today.
NOAA has a broad array of responsibilities ranging from
weather forecasting and climate prediction, to ocean and
atmospheric observation. NOAA's work benefits America's farmers
and ranchers, coastal communities, and disaster personnel. Land
use planners, weather forecasters, and everyday citizens rely
on NOAA's work daily. NOAA's in-house research is
groundbreaking and the publicly available environmental data
they collect has an immense economic impact.
That is why I am eager to hear from NOAA Administrator Dr.
Rick Spinrad today. As NOAA's former Chief Scientist and head
of the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), I know
that the Administrator is very familiar with this Committee and
the work we do. In fact, to give you a sense of how intertwined
our paths have been, Administrator Spinrad was present in his
official OAR capacity at the 2006 dedication of the National
Weather Center in Norman, Oklahoma. There's a great picture of
him right next to Jim Cantore that I'll have to share with
everyone some time.
All of this is to say I believe that the Administrator
speaks the Science Committee's language. While we might not
agree on the exact way to do certain things, I think we can
engage in a meaningful discussion where both sides are heard
and valued. At the end of the day, weather is nonpartisan.
Severe events don't travel along party lines.
That is why I will remind my colleagues--just as I have
done in years past when Republicans were in control--that the
Administration's top priority should be aligned with NOAA's
core priority: protecting life and property. So today, I look
forward to hearing from the Administrator on how he envisions
advancing NOAA's mission and improving its ability to save
lives.
One issue I'd like to address today is commercial data
supply. NOAA provides tools, data, and operations that are
applicable to every single district in the country. Whether
it's a rancher in Oklahoma, a fishing captain in Florida, or a
firefighter in Oregon, they are all dependent on information
NOAA provides.
But as more private sector companies enter the picture with
the ability to gather their own environmental and weather data,
NOAA must seek to balance its capabilities with supplemental
commercial data. Simply put, NOAA is no longer the only
provider in the market. And, often times, NOAA's collection of
data costs more than acquiring the same quality of data from a
private sector company.
We can't assume an endlessly increasing budget. At some
point, the balloon will pop. Believe me, I want NOAA to be
successful across its mission areas. We can best ensure that by
prioritizing funding and standing up programs to acquire data
that private industry cannot yet collect while preparing for a
commercially competitive future.
Again, I want to thank Administrator Spinrad for being here
today and Chairwoman Sherrill for having this hearing. I yield
back the balance of my time.

Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Ranking Member Lucas. At
this time I'd like to give the opportunity for Representative
Bonamici to introduce her fellow Oregonian, and I yield to Ms.
Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you Chairwomen and Ranking Members. It
is really a pleasure to introduce Dr. Richard Spinrad, the
current Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and a fellow Oregonian. Dr. Spinrad is an
internationally renowned scientist and leader, with more than
35 years' experience. In 2014 then-President Obama nominated
Dr. Spinrad as NOAA's Chief Scientist. From 2003 until 2010 he
served as the head of NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
Research and the National Ocean Service. Dr. Spinrad has also
held leadership positions at the U.S. Office of Naval Research
and Oceanographer of the Navy, and was awarded Distinguished
Civilian Service Award, the Navy's highest award for civilians.
Throughout his career Dr. Spinrad has held multiple faculty
positions, including most recently as a Professor of
Oceanography at Oregon State University. Earlier this year I
had the honor of introducing Dr. Spinrad at his confirmation
hearing in front of the Senate Commerce, Science, and
Transportation Committee. Dr. Spinrad's successful confirmation
makes him the 11th NOAA Administrator, the first Senate-
confirmed leader, as Ranking Member Bice mentioned, since
January of 2017, and the third from Oregon State. Now, as
Members of this Committee, especially Representative Gonzalez,
know, my alma mater is the University of Oregon, and yet I am
extremely proud of Oregon State University here.
Since assuming the position of NOAA Administrator in June,
Dr. Spinrad has been a force, preserving and strengthening
NOAA's core mission of science, service, and stewardship. In
July NOAA established a climate council, which will be
comprised of senior leaders across the agency and entrusted
with coordinating climate work across NOAA. The council is also
tasked with advancing equitable delivery of NOAA's science to
all communities, and especially those most severely affected by
climate change. Additionally, last week NOAA announced $41
million in grants for Coastal, Oceanic, and Great Lakes
Observation Program, and that's going to help the scientific
community and others better stand--better understand our
invaluable coasts and respond to climate change.
I want to thank Dr. Spinrad for spending time with this
Committee this morning. I look forward to hearing more about
the important work NOAA is--as our Nation's premier climate
science agency. Thank you again, Chair Sherrill, and I yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you. As our witness should know,
you will have five minutes for your spoken testimony. Your
written testimony will be included in the record for the
hearing. When you've completed your spoken testimony, we will
begin with questions. Each Member will have five minutes to
question the witness. With that, I'm pleased to turn it over to
Administrator Spinrad.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE RICHARD W. SPINRAD,

PH.D., UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE

FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE, AND ADMINISTRATOR,

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Spinrad. Chair Sherrill, Ranking Member Bice, Members
of the Subcommittee, as well as Chair Johnson and Ranking
Member Lucas, thank you for the opportunity to testify today
regarding my priorities for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. Special thanks also to
Representative Bonamici for that very kind introduction. Thank
you.
One week from today marks my 100th day as Administrator of
NOAA. This is my third tour of duty at NOAA. Previously I
served as Chief Scientist during the Obama Administration, and
before that I led our Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
Research in the National Ocean Service. The urgency with which
NOAA's working to address our Nation's most pressing challenges
is like never before. From combatting the climate crisis, and
bolstering the equitable delivery of climate science and
services, reinforcing scientific integrity, and rebuilding our
scientific work force, ensuring our agency is diverse,
equitable, inclusive, and accessible, to promoting economic
development, while maintaining environmental stewardship, the
NOAA work force has been firing on all cylinders to meet the
increasing demands of our Nation.
That mission is science, service, and stewardship, to
understand and predict changes in climate, weather, oceans, and
coasts, to share that knowledge with others, and to conserve
and manage coastal and marine ecosystems and resources. As NOAA
Administrator, I'd like to share with you my main priorities in
pursuit of this mission, and in alignment with the goals of the
Biden/Harris Administration.
The first pillar of that mission, our science, is at the
core of our agency, and is the foundation for smart policy and
decisionmaking. From the depths of the ocean to the surface of
the Sun, we are observing and collecting data, and turning
those data into Earth system models, information, tools, and
forecasts. NOAA's trusted data are the basis for your weekend
weather forecasts, provide our constituents with harmful algal
bloom warnings, and feed into our models that predict wildlife
and wildfire smoke movement in real time. It is essential that
NOAA's data and information adhere to the principles of
scientific integrity to maintain our trusted status, and issue
life-saving weather forecasts and warnings, as well as our
climate predictions and projections. The Biden/Harris
Administration has made upholding scientific integrity a main
priority, and I've already taken steps to ensure NOAA not only
meets but exceeds those expectations, including by requiring
all NOAA political appointees to complete scientific integrity
training.
The second pillar of our mission is service, and I have
made it one of my top priorities to expand NOAA's role as the
primary authoritative provider of Federal climate products and
services that can be applied to a diverse range of missions.
Just as NOAA is the authoritative provider of weather
forecasts, navigational charts, and fishery stock assessments,
we play a unique role in that not only do we collect data and
conduct research, but we are mandated to make it operational.
This means we must provide the public and our Federal,
State, tribal, and industry partners with actionable
environmental information to make decisions in the face of
climate change. These decisions can range from municipalities
looking to ensure new construction will be resilient to sea
level rise, flooding, and heavy precipitation, large insurance
companies seeking to incorporate climate risk into their
insurance policies, or a resident of New Orleans wondering if
they should rebuild or relocate after the latest hurricane. My
vision is that, no matter the need, people will know they can
turn to NOAA for reliable, easy to use climate information. We
are seeing increasing demands for this kind of information. As
demonstrated by the record-setting summer of extreme heat,
drought, wildfires, floods, hurricanes, and other extreme
events, the climate crisis is upon us, and requires a whole of
government response.
The third pillar of our mission is stewardship. Stewardship
means that we conserve our lands, waters, and natural
resources, protecting people and the environment now, and for
generations to come. As an agency under the Department of
Commerce, NOAA is dedicated to promoting economic development,
while maintaining environmental stewardship. The two can go
hand in hand. We create opportunities for sustainable economic
growth across the country, including by providing training for
the next generation of climate-ready workers. This aligns with
another of my top priorities, to advance the new blue economy,
which means looking to the ocean for data and information that
can be applied to sustainable business development in new and
traditional ocean-based sectors. The new blue economy offers
opportunities for climate-smart innovation and economic growth.
To fully realize NOAA's mission, I've made equity a central
focus to ensure that equity is not something that we do, but
rather everything we do. This will better position NOAA to help
tackle the climate crisis, produce better science, deliver
better services, be better stewards of the environment and the
economy, and build a more inclusive work force. Thank you all
for again inviting me here today, and I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Spinrad follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Sherrill. Well, thank you. At this point we will
begin our first round of questions. The Chair recognizes
herself for five minutes.
Dr. Spinrad, flooding is the most common and widespread of
all weather-related natural disasters in the United States, and
in North Jersey we've seen the devastating effects of repeat
flooding events for business owners and community members.
Earlier this month we saw devastating and deadly flooding
brought by the remnants of Hurricane Ida. Unfortunately, our
forecasts were not as accurate as they can be, and that's due
in large part to outdated precipitation data. In fact, one
woman in my district, whose house flooded, and who had to be
rescued by boat, along with her young children during the
storm, said to me, you know, at five o'clock I heard that we
were going to be fine, that the storm was going to pass to the
west. So that's why I introduced a package of bipartisan bills
to address flooding called the FLOODS Act and the PRECIP Act.
Dr. Spinrad, can you speak to the importance of having long
term, accurate, and complete weather data and climate data?
What's NOAA doing to ensure communities get the information
they need to improve safety and resilience?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Chair Sherrill. And I concur
completely with the premise that you've stated in your question
with regard to the need for improved forecasts. You know, when
we look at what happened in the northeast with both Hurricanes
Henri and Ida, we saw, for example, in Central Park a 100 year
old record for rain rate, rainfall rate, broken twice, one with
Hurricane Henri, where we saw 1.3 inches per hour, and then
just a few days later--a week--two weeks later we saw Hurricane
Ida come through, where we got over 3 inches of rain in the New
York/New Jersey area in an hour. So we certainly recognize that
this is a critical area that we need to focus on.
We've made a lot of improvement in forecasts--overall
forecasts for severe storms. With respect to floods
specifically--and I should point out this is all based on our
concept of impact-based decision support, so we want to make
sure where we make the improvements in flood forecasts, for
example, they are specific to where the impacts are greatest in
lives and property. Part of this is going to be about
increasing the resolution of forecasts.
So what we have recognized is that, especially with
flooding, how fine a grid one has in the models that are used
by forecasters to predict where flooding is going to occur is
critical. Perhaps more critical than many other environmental
phenomena. To do that means advanced capabilities in high
performance computing, it means taking advantage of newer kinds
of observations, more sophisticated radars, and doing research
on high resolution processes. I'd also point out it means,
especially in the case of flooding, probably upping our game,
with respect to working with our sister agencies. Part of the
flooding equation, if you will, is a really good understanding
of the topography and the landscape, which makes close
coordination with our colleagues and agencies like the U.S.
Geological Survey.
And then the last piece, I think, to do this fine tuning,
the higher resolution that's required, for example, to provide
the accurate forecast for the constituent that you just
described, is making sure that the great research that we're
doing in our laboratories, and with our colleagues in academia,
is effectively transition. We can't afford to say, yes, 20
years from now we're going to have a great research product for
you. And so I'm moving that aggressively to try to institute
processes that allow us to test beds evaluations, get that
product, if you will, out of the laboratory, into the weather
forecast office much sooner than we might have done in the
past.
Chairwoman Sherrill. I applaud you for those efforts.
They're incredibly necessary, certainly in Northern Jersey, and
other areas across the country. So in April we held a hearing
on the importance of working toward climate equity, and the
need for improved climate services provided by the Federal
Government. We heard from witnesses about the growing need for
authoritative, actionable climate information delivered in an
accessible manner. This is critical to helping communities
across America make informed decisions, and you sort of, I
think, alluded to this in your discussion about getting that
information out.
So I have just a few seconds, and we can come back,
depending on the length of the hearing, but I'd love to
understand your vision for expanding NOAA's delivery of climate
services to ensure that every American business and
organization has equitable access to information, tools,
services they need to adapt to the changing climate, and what
additional mandates would NOAA need to achieve this vision? And
I'll take my answer for the record at this point. I may come
back to you after others have had time to ask a question. Thank
you so much for your testimony.
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Now I'd like to recognize our Ranking
Member, Mrs. Bice.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Chairwoman. Dr. Spinrad, earlier this
week I introduced legislation, co-sponsored by Congresswoman
Sherrill, that focuses on the NOAA weather radio. Many people
don't know this alert system exists, but in Oklahoma we are all
too familiar with the life-saving capabilities these small
radios have. Also, many of us are very familiar with the
beeping it makes, maybe in the middle of the night, to make
sure you're aware that there are thunderstorms headed your way.
While maintaining the existing system is certainly a priority,
I worry about the ever-digitized future, where a handheld radio
is viewed as obsolete. Can you talk about the future of NOAA
weather radio, and the potential for upgrades? Specifically,
can you touch on transitioning to IP (Internet Protocol)-based
communications, backup continuity options like satellites, and
alternative options to reach the most remote areas of the
country?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you, Ranking Member Bice. This is a
critical capability that NOAA brought to the fore a couple of
decades ago. And I would make one quick point with respect to
NOAA weather radio, it had started as NOAA Weather Radio, that
it was going to provide weather information. It has been such a
success that, as I think you know, it's now expanded to a vast
array of warning capabilities, including being used for Amber
Alerts for lost children, for example. So the tool has proven
its worth extraordinarily. It reaches 95 percent of the
American population right now, which is terrific, but it's not
good enough. And, in fact, that last mile, and, if you will, to
some extent, the digital gap that a lot of the population
faces, is what we are trying to address.
You talked about the modernization, and brought up the--
what I would say are two of the main components that we are
working on right now. One is the incorporation through internet
providers so that we do, in fact, expand the capability. We
also are looking at the increased number of transmitters out
there. It turns out we can get from 95 to 97 percent of the
American population with somewhere between about 50 and 100 new
transmitters out there. So we know there are certain things we
can do with current technology. And then, finally, yes,
absolutely, we are looking at the expanded capabilities for
satellite-based backup for NOAA weather radio. This is where
the commercial sector is going. It makes perfect sense. It's
part of our current thinking about moving forward.
And I would simply close by adding that it's my
expectation, as Administrator, that, just as we have seen NOAA
weather radio going from, if you will, just weather forecasts
to a broader array of capabilities, I foresee NOAA weather
radio in the future to be, effectively, NOAA Environmental
Radio, that it'll be providing all range of environmental
forecasts and predictions for the full spectrum of hazards and
other natural events that we have to be warning people about.
So there is a lot of opportunity for expanded capability and
modernization of NOAA weather radio.
Mrs. Bice. Perfect. Well, speaking of modernization, as
both Ranking Member Lucas and myself mentioned in our opening
statements, which should tell you about the importance of it,
Oklahoma is the home to the National Weather Center. It houses
NOAA's National Severe Storms Laboratory and the Storm
Prediction Center. The work being done there is absolutely
essential to predicting and alerting the public of severe
weather, but also understanding the root causes of severe
weather, and exploring innovative ways to use that knowledge to
improve forecasts and warnings.
But as these extreme events become more common, the need
for more equipment, more full-time employees, and more space to
operate is becoming urgent. Do you believe the National Weather
Center is in need of expansion and upgrades, and what would an
investment in the Center do for training the next generation of
meteorologists?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for that question. And I would point
out that, as Ranking Member Lucas brought up in his opening
statement, I am very proud of the fact that my name is on that
building. I was the head of the Office of Oceanic and
Atmospheric Research when the building was put up, and have
followed its progress ever since. I've been there many, many
times. And in the spirit of your question, just this past week
I had a long conversation with Dr. Berrien Moore, whom I think
you probably know from the university. I've known Berrien for
years and years, and he brought up the issue of potential
expansion. I shared with him that I think the model that was
originally invoked to establish the National Weather Center is
just as valid now as it was then.
What I would like to do is undertake the effort to try to
figure out what are the expansion requirements and
opportunities for NOAA'S facilities. And NOAA has both research
and operational facilities at the Weather Center, so I am fully
prepared to pursue that question in close conjunction with our
colleagues at the university, and also, interestingly, with
some of the private sector inhabitants, if you will, occupants
of some of the facilities right near the Center. So I look
forward to having that discussion, and I do think there is
opportunity for consideration of expansion potential.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Dr. Spinrad, and Congresswoman
Sherrill. I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Representative Bice. I now
recognize the Chairwoman of the Full Committee, Ms. Johnson,
for five minutes.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Doctor, a March
report by this Committee's majority staff found that NOAA's
overall work force declined by almost nine percent over the
last decade. And, further, the report found that NOAA,
particularly in its STEM work force, suffers from gender and
racial minority staffing disparities. These findings are deeply
concerning to me, and I'm committed to working with my
colleagues to ensure that NOAA's work force, and the rest of
the Federal science enterprise, reflects the diversity of
America. Can you please discuss how NOAA is working to address
the staffing declines and staff diversity issues identified in
this report? And what is the Agency doing to attract and retain
more minority scientists and staff, and in particular African-
American scientists for staff, or how would you--how are you
working to create a culture of inclusion? And is there anything
Congress can do to help to move these efforts along?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for that question, Chair Johnson. I
share all of the concerns you have described. To state quite
bluntly, too much of NOAA's work force looks like me. And in
the past the answer has been, well, we'll fix that over the
next several generations. No, that's not good enough. 80
percent of our work force is White, 67 percent is male. Those
numbers are changing slightly, and there are specific things
that we are doing.
With respect to the hiring process, I can tell you we have
staffed more aggressively to bring in human capital experts to
help move the process of hiring, accelerate it, if you will,
and we've seen dramatic improvement, in terms of the time it
takes to get somebody into the Federal Government. We're also
looking aggressively at direct hire authorities. I would point
out NOAA has one of the strongest educational programs with
historically Black colleges and universities and minority
serving institutions. We are not taking enough advantage of
that direct connection, if you will. So, through education
partnership programs, we're looking at how we can expand direct
hire authority, give some of the graduates of some of these
minority serving institutions opportunities to come on board
more quickly.
I would also point out that we have dramatically enhanced
the visibility and engagement with our employee resource
groups. We now have a dozen of these for targeted areas of
underrepresented communities within the work force. I've begun
a dialog with them. We are working aggressively with our Office
of Inclusion and Civil Rights to identify where the specific
areas are that we can enhance the hiring activity. So there's a
number of ``programmatic'', and systemic, and, if you will,
policy areas where I'm moving to try to make very clear that we
cannot wait for a generational change. There are things that we
need to do right now. The other part, of course, is ensuring
that in the hiring process we make sure we have diverse
selection panels, and that we make a specific emphasis on
recruitment of under-represented populations within the work
force.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Scientific
integrity is at the heart of NOAA's work, and is vital to
ensuring the public's trust in Federal science and scientists.
However, some deficiencies in NOAA's scientific integrity
policy were exposed in a June 2020 report by the National
Academy of Public Administration (NAPA) following Hurricane
Dorian and the Sharpiegate incident. I understand that NOAA's
scientific integrity police was updated in January, but it
remains unclear what specific steps NOAA is taking to implement
the recommendations from the NAPA report. Can you explain that
briefly?
Dr. Spinrad. Absolutely. I take scientific integrity very
seriously. I was, in fact, the co-author of NOAA's original
scientific integrity policy some 12 years ago, when we had
serious concerns about political influence on the science. That
policy was held up as one of the examples of one of the better
policies among Federal agencies for many years. I was not with
the government back when that policy was tested a few years
ago, in the incident that you described, but I will share with
you that I was an outside complainant, referencing that
particular activity, and I saw where the scientific integrity
policy had some flaws. And so, coming in as NOAA Administrator,
I am making sure that we are actively participating in the
effort being led by the President's science advisor, Eric
Lander, to take best practices among all the Federal agency
scientific integrity policies, establish them as the norm, and
develop a governmentwide approach to scientific integrity. So
that's one thing, taking the best of class programs, if you
will.
The other is one of the things we learned was that, within
NOAA, and specifically the Department of Commerce, our parent
department, we needed to see bolstering of department policies
as well. So I have been in discussion with our Deputy Secretary
Graves about how NOAA can work with the ensure the department's
policies are strong and effective as well. The third thing I
would bring up is that, from the day I arrived, I insisted that
we make all political appointees at NOAA take the scientific
integrity training, and demonstrate an awareness of, and
familiarity of, and respect for NOAA's scientific integrity
policy. And I can tell you that, as of today, every one of our
appointees has taken that scientific integrity training,
including myself.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much, and thank you, Ms.
Sherrill. I yield.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I now
recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Lucas,
for five minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you. Administrator Spinrad, my bill, the
Weather Research and Forecasting Innovation Act of 2017, is the
birthplace of NOAA's Commercial Weather Data Program, so, as
you might imagine, I'm quite invested in its success. So can
you--as you can imagine, I was thrilled when NOAA ordered its
third delivery order in August, but I'm concerned that we could
be leaving valuable data on the table. As I understand it,
companies that were not in orbit at the time NOAA initiated its
Commercial Data Buy Program are not eligible to participate
until a new proposal is initiated, potentially a year from now.
So, after successfully testing and verification by NOAA, what
recourse does a commercial company have to immediately engage
with NOAA to provide this life-saving data for weather
forecasts?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for that question, Ranking Member
Lucas. I would point out that I do share your appreciation for
and desire to see a more strong exploitation of commercial
data. There's a cautionary note, of course, with regard to the
use of commercial data, and that is we need to make sure that
it meets the standards that are applied, and also that it's--
it--sustainable. The--in the worst case scenario, we end up
developing products and services that are critically dependent
on the provision of commercial data, and then, for a variety of
economic or business reasons, those data are not available
downstream.
So part of the exercise, part of what we do in the
evaluation process that we are now undertaking, with respect,
for example, to the data you alluded to, which is actually data
looking at something called radio occultation, how satellite
data changes as it goes through the atmosphere, we're getting
3,000 profiles a day. It's really exciting to see how we're
going to use that data, how it will improve the forecast. Once
those assessments are made--and it will take a little bit of
time for the research to be done, for the demonstration of the
efficacy and impact of those data, we're going to want to make
sure that we have established processes and mechanisms to
ensure the data quality, the data accuracy, and the sustained
availability of those data.
All of that is fully consistent with the Weather Act, and
everything that you've built into the Weather Act. And I am
eager, in the spirit of being in the Department of Commerce, to
bolster economic development, to see that we can come to a
place where there is a clear enterprise approach to acquiring
commercial data, ensuring its accuracy, and its--ensuring its
sustainability.
Mr. Lucas. I appreciate that, and as long as it's an
ongoing process, I--that--I think that's--on a similar note I
want to talk about space weather data. This Committee passed
the PROSWIFT Act last Congress, and I was keen to include an
amendment allowing NOAA to enter into contracts to acquire
commercial space weather data. In a meeting with my staff, NOAA
informed us that space weather data capacities were included in
the Commercial Weather Data Program's most recent request for
information (RFI). A number of companies responded, but none
met NOAA's mission need. The RFI was sent out in September,
before the PROSWIFT Act, and it wasn't signed into the law
until October. So, while NOAA may have been proactive, I don't
believe their updated responsibilities for space weather-
related research forecasting and capacity perhaps were fully
considered in the RFI. So, Administrator, can you comment on--
or can you commit to publish another RFI or request proposals
that would be related to this space weather commercial data?
Dr. Spinrad. So, Ranking Member Lucas, what I would like to
do is get back to you on the specifics of how that played out,
but you have my commitment to look into that and see what the
appropriate next step would be.
Mr. Lucas. That's all I can ask. Thank you, Mr.
Administrator. Yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Thank you, Ranking Member Lucas. And
now I'm going to defer to Committee Counsel for the order of
recognition.
Staff. Ms. Bonamici is recognized.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. Dr. Spinrad, I want to
talk about hypoxia. For many years now hypoxic zones have been
observed in the coastal waters off the Pacific Northwest. The
location of these hypoxic zones changes on a yearly basis, so
predicting them could be challenging. Ocean temperatures are
warming, there could be a decrease in the water's ability to
retain oxygen, and that makes it worse. So this year Oregon
grappled with one of the most intense and prolonged hypoxic
seasons to date. These episodes not only disrupt ecosystems by
killing off marine species, they also disrupt, as you are well
aware, the coastal economies. Escalating episodes of hypoxia
are threatening Oregon's prized Dungeness crabs, for example.
That--they--that industry has been responsible for an average
of $39-1/2 million in--of annual value over the past couple of
decades.
So, Dr. Spinrad, what are some of the biggest challenges
NOAA faces right now in monitoring, predicting, and preventing
hypoxia, and what can Congress do? And in addition to providing
sufficient appropriations in the Fiscal Year 2022 cycle, what
can Congress do to address these challenges?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman Bonamici. And I am very familiar with the issues,
as I think many Oregonians are, and many folks in the U.S. are
as well, because it affects seafood prices and availability.
Ms. Bonamici. Right.
Dr. Spinrad. The quick--or I shouldn't say quick, but the
fundamental issue here is observational capability, that we are
building out capabilities for measuring hypoxia. This is one of
those phenomena for which the observational capability was
needed many years ago, but it's now only currently really
getting hardened and firmed up. And, in fact, we're working
with fishing communities due to--you may be aware that some of
the crabbers off the Oregon coast now include dissolved oxygen
sensors on their crab pots----
Ms. Bonamici. Right, right.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. As a device for making these
observations. So we're incorporating that within the Integrated
Ocean Observing System, IOOS, as one of the many parameters
that are being observed. Research investments into the
predictability is the--one of the tough nuts to crack. It's one
thing to say this is what happened yesterday in the ocean, and
it's another thing to say, be prepared, this is going to happen
next week. So we're doing extensive research through our
cooperative institutes, with the fishery science centers, with
the universities in the Pacific Northwest. And, I should point
out, we also have the authority for developing the harmful
algal blooms and hypoxia events of national significance----
Ms. Bonamici. Right, right.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Strategy. And that--thank you for
the support on that. We will be putting out the Federal
Register notice on that draft policy very soon. And so I think,
once we see what kind of comments we get back, and what kind of
input we get back, and people understand what is NOAA's
responsibility, what is EPA's (Environmental Protection
Agency's) responsibility, I think we will have a better handle
on specifically how we want to address this, both from a
policy----
Ms. Bonamici. Yes.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Appropriations, and
programmatic----
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Dr. Spinrad. That's really
helpful. I want to ask you to--I really appreciate that NOAA's
engaged in the extensive efforts to prepare, adapt to, and
mitigate the worst effects of climate--the climate crisis,
particularly on oceans, coasts, fisheries, estuaries. So I want
to ask you about the Climate Council. The council reflects, of
course, as you mentioned, the Biden Administration's whole of
government approach. So I want to ask, how are things going, is
the council fully formed and operating, and what are its
priorities?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, thank you for that. So the NOAA Climate
Council is the only council that reports directly to me. We
have a lot of councils for facilities, for human resources, for
many things. This council was set up shortly after I arrived as
administrator, and it is the leader career folks from the
agency, the people in charge of the weather service, the ocean
service, the satellites, the assistant administrators. Already
we have used this council to establish priorities as we
formulate our Fiscal Year '23 budget form--and has helped build
the equity framework for climate products and services. So I
now have in front of me, if you will, a guidance document that
this council has developed.
We're also using this council to engage the rest of
government. So we invited the Special Envoy for Climate, John
Kerry, his office, to come talk with our----
Ms. Bonamici. Great.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. NOAA Climate Council as well, and
we're doing the same thing within the Department of Commerce.
So it serves as a two-way communication mechanism, and a
strategic body to define policies and priorities for the
agency.
Ms. Bonamici. That's very encouraging. And in my remaining
time, I want to follow up on Chairwoman Johnson's question. We
had many conversations in this--in the Subcommittee, but also
in the Full Committee, over the years on diversifying the work
force in the sciences, and one of the things in particular is--
that I've been aware of is the lack of women in jobs,
particularly at NOAA, and of getting women in the field, but
also keeping them there. So I want to ask you, Dr. Spinrad,
will you commit to carrying on the policies and practices that
Dr. Sullivan, when she was NOAA Administrator, put in place to
help address sexual harassment, which has been a problem
particularly on research vessels?
Dr. Spinrad. Absolutely, is my short answer. I'll go one
further than my good colleague, and mentor in many respects,
Kathy Sullivan. We've already set up a SASH, Sexual Assault/
Sexual Harassment, Council. We have built in many processes,
especially with the NOAA corps and our ships, to make sure that
we have prevented that. We have established an office for
workplace violence prevention and response, so we have done--
we've taken a lot of actions in setting up facilities and
mechanisms. I am going to make a very strong message--have made
a very strong message in that regard.
And I've got to point out that for, I'm pretty sure it's
the first time in NOAA history, half of assistant
administrators are women right now, and we will have an
opportunity shortly, because the head of the National Weather
Service, Lou Uccellini, a national icon in weather, has
announced his retirement. We may have an----
Ms. Bonamici. Wow.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Opportunity to have a woman in
that position as well. So we are moving on aggressively, and
doing things, and setting policy----
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you for that commitment. And my time
has expired. I yield back. Thank you.
Staff. Mr. Feenstra is recognized.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chair Sherrill, and Ranking Member
Bice. Mr. Spinrad, thank you for taking the time to speak with
us today. My office has had the pleasure of working with your
staff at NOAA on ideas for potential legislation, and are
excited to continue these conversations with you. Administrator
Spinrad, I've been working on legislation to establish research
and testing programs to mitigate the impact of radar
obstructions on detection and prediction capabilities. These
obstructions were addressed in a fall 2019 joint study on the
impact of wind farms on weather radar. As you know, radar
forecasting and detection can be affected by nearby buildings,
terrain, and wind turbines. That said, it is crucial that we do
not restrict the growth of clean wind energy by putting
excessive red tape on wind farm construction.
Administrator Spinrad, my potential legislation would focus
on researching and testing options, like new processing
algorithms, phased array radar, commercial data, and other
technologies. It would involve consultation with private
industry, academia, NOAA, the FAA (Federal Aviation
Administration), and the DOD (Department of Defense), among
other groups. Has NOAA or other national weather services
conducted research on specific technology-based options to
reduce obstruction issues when developing NEXRAD (Next-
Generation Radar), or other systems?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you for that question, and I
especially appreciate your invoking the issues with our
colleagues at DOD and FAA, who share similar concerns. And, as
a consequence, we have a wind turbine radar interference
working group that is addressing those issues that's chaired by
the Department of Energy. I would say that there are a couple
of potential approaches. You alluded to one, that is beam-
forming using the current NEXRAD systems in slightly different
manners. We are researching that. I would also point out, as a
bit of an aside, I worked for Navy many years, and I became
fascinated with the use of phased array radar by the Navy as a
potential weather radar for many years. Going on 20 years now
I've been a strong advocate of the potential application of
phased array radar as a potential replacement for NEXRAD. So,
in conjunction with your question, it's not just how do we use
NEXRAD, what are the approaches we might take, but can we use
the next generation of radars, liked phased array, as a
solution, while balancing the growth of the renewable energy
industry.
Mr. Feenstra. Thanks for those comments, Mr. Spinrad. I
greatly appreciate that type of collaboration. And, you know,
we need to all work together on this. And I would just simply
ask, would you and other members of your team at NOAA be open
to joining with my office, and other representatives from the
wind energy industry, to have a fruitful discussion on
potential legislative solutions for mitigating the effects of
radar obstructions?
Dr. Spinrad. Of course. We'd be more than happy to
cooperate.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, I'm very grateful for that, and thank
you. This is such a big topic. My district is No. 1
agriculture--or No. 1 wind producer in the country, so thank
you for that.
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you.
Mr. Feenstra. And I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Kildee is recognized.
Mr. Kildee. I guess I needed to unmute. Thank you very
much, Chairwoman Sherrill, for hosting this hearing, and, Dr.
Spinrad, thank you so much for your presence and your
testimony. I come from Michigan, where the Great Lakes are
quite literally our lifeblood. The lakes outline our
boundaries, they define who we are as a state, and we have
10,000 miles of Great Lake shoreline in this region. They're
central to our livelihood, they're central to our economy. Part
of my district that I represent includes the Lake Huron
shoreline, which is a part of this really vibrant coastal
economy.
According to NOAA, Michigan's coastal economy employs 1.75
million people each year, $92 billion in wages, and the Great
Lakes fishing industry is critical to the health of these
communities across the region. According to the Great Lakes
Fishery Commission, commercial, recreational, tribal fisheries
generate $7 billion in economic activity annually, and support
75,000 jobs throughout the region. So we look to strengthen and
bolster our coastal communities. As we do that, one of the
things that has evolved is fish farming, aquaculture.
Now, when done correctly, this is important, when done
properly, aquaculture can create a high-quality food source
that's abundant and affordable. However, and importantly, when
done improperly, it can do much more harm than good. And we've
seen in Michigan proposals for net pen aquaculture in the Great
Lakes. There's even one aquaculture operation on the Au Sable
River, which, if you know, it contains the so-called holy
waters of trout fishing, a very sensitive ecosystem that
supports trout. These operations can create massive pollution,
they can spread disease, they can spawn invasive species. They
can threaten this multi-billion fishery in the Great Lakes.
At one time NOAA--the NOAA Sea Grant Program was
encouraging aquaculture operations in the Great Lakes, and
that's why, here in Congress, I have introduced legislation to
ban harmful aquaculture practices in both the Great Lakes and
in federally designated wild and scenic rivers, which would
include the Au Sable, in my district. So, Dr. Spinrad, if you
could discuss the role of aquaculture in NOAA's concept of a
new blue economy, and commit to us that ensuring that
aquaculture is not used directly within the Great Lakes, or in
the wild and scenic rivers, like the Au Sable? Could you
comment on that?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you, Representative Kildee. And I
think--I was listening very carefully to the way you asked your
question, and you used one phrase--you said when aquaculture is
done properly it may have benefits, and I think that's really
the sweet spot for what NOAA can bring to the table. And, by
the way, as you well know, we're very proud of our resources,
the Sea Grant Program, but also the Great Lakes Environmental
Research Lab, which provides our main access for research
activity in all of the Great Lakes.
Properly, in my opinion, means that the science has been
done in a credible, peer-reviewed, valuable manner to assess
what is the real impact, what are the real environmental or
ecological consequences of any particular approach. That is our
responsibility, to drive what States and other local
authorities may do then to interpret that science with
establishing policies associated with aquaculture. It's the
same argument that I would make with respect to offshore
aquaculture in the open ocean, that we have a responsibility
for ensuring that the determination of what is proper is based
on the best possible scientific information we can collect.
And that's where I'm confident that, between Sea Grant, our
Great Lakes Environmental Research Lab, we have the horsepower
and the intellectual capacity to do those kinds of studies,
that will provide the answers that policymakers like yourself
will need to make the right decisions.
Mr. Kildee. Well, I appreciate that very much, Dr. Spinrad.
And I wonder if you--in the few remaining seconds we have, if
you might comment on other ways we can improve the blue economy
in these coastal communities within the Great Lakes?
Dr. Spinrad. Well, my short answer, sir, is to listen. We,
the feds, are doing that right now. We're doing a number of
regional climate equity roundtables to hear what are the
answers to exactly the question you raised specific to the
Great Lakes. I'll be in Detroit in I think the second week in
October to do exactly that. And I don't want to presume or
predesignate what we think the answer is for building out the
blue economy in the Great Lakes. I've got my own personal
views, based on my experience, but I really want to listen to
the municipalities, the industries, the local communities, the
stakeholders, your constituents, and hear what they think they
need in order to build out the blue economy on the coasts of
the--on the shores of the Great Lakes.
Mr. Kildee. Well, again, thank you so much, I appreciate
this. I appreciate the hearing, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Casten is recognized.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. Mr. Spinrad, thank you so much for
coming, and thanks to the Committee. I want to chat a little
bit about methane monitoring. As you know, I see you nodding
your head, you know, depending on the timeframe, we're talking
about 30 to 80 times as potent a greenhouse gas as
CO
2
. I'm sure you're aware we are currently debating
some rules about possibly putting a fee on the release of
methane. And the nature of that fee is outside the jurisdiction
of this Committee. The way we calculate the methane emissions
are potentially outside the jurisdiction of this Committee, if
we're talking about using, you know, company meters, and meting
those out at production, collection, distribution, and
consumption facilities. But it's my understanding, and please
correct me if I'm wrong, that there's potentially as much as a
60 percent gap between the amount of methane we calculate from
bottom-up analyses of meters to top-down analyses from the
satellites under your control, and therefore, to some degree,
our jurisdiction.
And, you know, some of that is because of malfunctions in
the meter, some of that's malfunctions and burps that come out.
And what I'm wondering is if you could educate us a little bit,
first on the degree to which, you know, either ground or
satellite-based systems you have contract methane, and
specifically to what degree you have the granularity to
actually get down and locate the point of methane release. And
let me stop there, I'll have some follow up questions, but I
see you nodding your head, and welcome your general thoughts on
that question.
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you so much, Congressman Casten.
The first thing I'd like to do is commit to get a technical
briefing to your staff on exactly that. We've got some
wonderful scientists working, especially in our laboratory in
Boulder, on observational technologies, and I'd like to have
them talk specifically about what I know to be some of the
highly geographically variable--variations in that difference
that you described. So maybe 60 percent in one place, and,
like, ten in another, what are the reasons for that? Part of it
also is the dynamics of what's driving the distribution of the
methane so that you may not be able to observe it with one
particular technology or another.
You already started to go down the answer that I was going
to bring up, and that is the bottom-up, top-down approach. So
we interpreter bottom-up, effectively, to mean, give me a list
of all the sources. You've got, you know, so many cattle
operations, you've got so many big buildings, you've got so
many sources in a particular area. Do the math, that means you
should have so many tons of methane emitted per day. The top-
down is that you are using atmospheric observations to actually
make these measurements and try to conclude what the total
emission is in a particular area. The gap between that bottom-
up and top-down is highly variable as well, and so that's where
our research is our trying to figure out how to close the gap.
A lot of it depends on understanding the chemical dynamics and
the physical dynamics of how the methane moves around, and how
it changes.
You are absolutely right, it's a very potent greenhouse
gas, but it has a much, much shorter half-life, if you will,
than carbon dioxide, which is why it's--some of those
variations are dependent on the times on observations were
made. So it's a rich area for research, and I'd love to make
sure we've got your staff access to our capabilities.
Mr. Casten. Well, let's definitely do that. And I want to
just--not to pick on the point, but I understand that, you
know, the methane is going to move through the atmosphere, and
you're going to try to figure it out, but is--with the data you
have, or, if you'd prefer, with the data you could have,
subject to future technologies and future funding--do you have
the technical ability, at least in theory, in a fiscally
uncapped world, to go down and identify the specific location
of a methane release, or is that an insoluble problem? Are we
always going to be stuck depending on these bottoms-up meters
that don't quite tie out?
Dr. Spinrad. It--my impression is that we have the
technical capability, it's a pragmatic question of can you
deploy that number of sensors to make the kinds of observations
you're talking about? I could characterize, for example, to the
millidegree what the difference in temperature is between my
home in Falls Church and Capitol Hill, but to do so I'd want to
have many, many different temperature sensors between Falls
Church and Capitol Hill. Similarly, with methane, our ability
to pinpoint is going to depend on the intensity of
observational systems that we've got in place.
Mr. Casten. OK. Well, I appreciate that, and let's follow
up. I'll find, as I'm sure you can appreciate--I want to make
sure that if we're going to go through and, you know, and
create these monetization of pollution externalities, which I
think is a good, market-focused thing to do, that we're
including everybody in that mix. And as long as there's a gap,
we have a problem, and I don't know at this point whether
that's a science problem or an algebra problem, but look
forward to the continued conversations----
Dr. Spinrad. Very good.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Crist is recognized.
Mr. Crist. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thank you, Dr.
Spinrad, for being with us today. I represent Pinellas County
in Florida, which is located in the Tampa Bay area. Pinellas is
surrounded on three sides by water, so literally it's a
peninsula on the peninsula of Florida. So, as you can imagine,
I've worked a lot with NOAA. It is critical to my district, and
Florida as a whole. For that reason, I've been a longtime
supporter of the agency, have worked closely with NOAA on a
number of issues, including addressing red tide. You may be
aware of a bill I introduced last Congress that focused on the
prevention and control of harmful algae blooms, so I was
pleased to see NOAA's recent announcement of a new funding
opportunity to create Harmful Algae Bloom Control Technologies
Incubator. Can you tell me more about this new opportunity, and
what NOAA is seeking to accomplish by it?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you, Congressman Crist. Thank you
for your support over the years, really appreciate that. This
is an exciting opportunity. It's reflected in a $7-1/2 million
Federal funding opportunity that we put out for Harmful Algal
Bloom Control Technology Incubator. And, as the name suggests,
we're going to solicit the best ideas for controlling
technologies. What does best mean? What we're going to look
for, obviously, is technical feasibility. Is it a sound
scientific concept? We also want to look for environmental
acceptability. There may be solutions to mitigate harmful algal
blooms that add more damage to the environment than the blooms
themselves, so we want to look for that environmental
acceptability. And then, of course, the feasibility, if you
will, in terms of scalability. What works in a laboratory may
not necessarily work in a larger scale environment. So the
technical feasibility, the environmental reliability, if you
will, and then the scalability are the three main things that
we're going to look for in the proposals that we get. And I'm
hoping we get overwhelmed with proposals.
Mr. Crist. Well, as you know, this summer's red tide
outbreak in Tampa Bay, and along Florida's Gulf Coast, has been
the worst algae bloom observed in years, and I just read news
accounts this morning it's returning again off Anna Maria
Island. That's why I wrote to Governor DeSantis, urging him to
request that NOAA determine the outbreak as a ``harmful algae
bloom event of national significance'', which would then unlock
Federal funds for assessment and mitigation. Congress gave
NOAA--I'm sorry? Excuse me. Congress gave NOAA and the EPA this
authority in 2019, but, despite the growing problem of harmful
algae blooms, NOAA and the EPA have yet to utilize this
authority. Why hasn't NOAA used this authority yet, if you're
aware?
Dr. Spinrad. So the short answer is that we are moving out
on that. We have developed or are developing the draft policy
for HABs and hypoxia, that's of national significance, and a
Federal Register notice inviting comments from the public on
that policy should be coming out very soon. So we have moved
out on that, and we are working closely with our partners at
EPA, who share some responsibilities, especially on freshwater,
on that. So we have moved out, sir.
Mr. Crist. Thank you, sir. As you know, Florida is home to
several NOAA facilities. Unfortunately, many of the facilities
are in dire need of repairs and upgrades, including the
following, Southeast Fisheries Science Center, National
Hurricane Center, Atlanta Oceanographic and Meteorological
Laboratory in Miami. The impacts of climate change on these
facilities makes the situation even more urgent. Can you
provide me with an update on NOAA's plans for facility repairs
and relocations, particularly in the southeast?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, thank you. I would like a bit of a
placeholder, because I think we would probably want to spend a
little bit more time with you and your staff to get some
detailed responses to that, but I can tell you, as somebody
who's worked for NOAA for, gosh, almost 20 years now, I've been
to almost every NOAA facility, including those in Southeast
Florida, over many, many years, and I share concerns about
sustaining capabilities. We can't be asking our scientists to
doing work in facilities where their safety, and their ability
to get clean power and clean water is compromised. So we have
undertaken a number of regional assessments of our facilities
to see where are the priorities for investment. We have a $400
million deferred maintenance bill at NOAA, and we're just
having a hard time just keeping up.
We are hoping something--some of the moves on the Hill,
with respect to infrastructure, will help resolve that, but
specifically what facilities, and what priority, and where to
spend are part of this comprehensive study. We've done four of
the regional studies, we've got two more that we will do as
tabletop exercises in the next several months.
Mr. Crist. Great. Thank you very much, Doctor. I see I'm
running out of time, so I will yield back. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Staff. Mr. Babin is recognized.
Mr. Babin. Yes. Thank you very much. Thank you Madam Chair,
Ranking Member, and Dr. Spinrad, thank you for appearing today
as well. I'm the Ranking Member on the Space and Aeronautics
Subcommittee of this same Full Committee. While most of NOAA
falls under the Environment Subcommittee's jurisdiction, the
Office of Space Commerce, or OSC, falls under the Space
Subcommittee's jurisdiction. The Committee has a long history
of oversight legislation related to space situational
awareness, or SSA. Last year the National Academy of Public
Administration issued an independent report that concluded, No.
1, the Department of Commerce is best suited to perform SSA
tasks within the Federal Government, and that OSC views STM,
space traffic management, as predominantly a data management
function, rather than as a prescriptive regulatory role. And
three, the Department of Commerce, with its proven ability to
effectively manage large, diverse, and complex data sets,
provides essential technical expertise and other support to the
Office of Space Commerce for space situational awareness and
traffic management tasks.
As a result of the NAPA report's findings, the
Appropriations Act of Fiscal Year 2021 approved the merger of
the Office of Space Commerce with the Office of Commercial
Remote Sensing Regulatory Affairs, and also provided $10
million to initiate a pilot program and initiate an open data
architecture for space situational awareness. Rather than using
these funds to carry out the law, it appears that NOAA, that's
you all, is using these Fiscal Year 2021 funds to pay for more
studies to revisit the topics of the NAPA study. These funding
cuts come on top of personnel changes that threaten the
Department of Commerce's ability to meet its space situational
awareness responsibilities. So, Madam Chairwoman, I would like
to add two op-eds from the Space News to the record, if you
don't mind, please. Two op-eds, Madam Chair, I'd like to have
entered into the record.
Chairwoman Sherrill. Without objection.
Mr. Babin. All right. Thank you. One is by Brian Weeden
from the Secure World Foundation, titled ``Getting Serious
About the Office of Space Commerce'', and the other is by Dr.
Scott Pace, the director of G.W. Space Policy Institute, and a
former Executive Director of the National Space Council, titled
``NOAA Is Stalling U.S. Space Traffic Management''. Dr.
Spinrad, will you commit to implementing United States
executive branch policy in carrying out the laws related to
space situational awareness?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Ranking Member, and I really
appreciate you raising this issue. I will tell you, this is a
subject that I have embraced since I was confirmed at the end
of June, and I'm having regular meetings with the Deputy
Secretary of Commerce to address all of the issues you've
identified. I want to point out that we are taking some very
specific actions. I would note, for example, that the data
repository associated with space situational awareness that you
alluded to, there will be an interagency--or a demonstration
conducted here very shortly, within the next several weeks, for
our agency partners, and it's our intent then to, based on that
demonstration, bring it up to Congress so that you can observe
what we've done consistent with the law itself.
We're also looking, based on the NAPA report, at a number
of alternatives for the organizational design. The merger that
you alluded to is one that requires careful consideration of
the operational responsibilities and regulatory
responsibilities. Now, we do that at NOAA. We do that in
fisheries, we do that in coastal zone management. We just want
to make sure we're--we get it right. So we're looking at
alternatives. We'll have that analysis of alternatives ready
very shortly. And I would point out that the space traffic
management is a little bit of a different animal, in terms of
need for authorities, do we have the authorities for actually
engaging in space traffic management, and we are looking at
that as well.
I would close by simply saying that there's another op-ed
that you may to take a look at that Deputy Secretary Don Graves
and I wrote to Space News subsequent to the two that you've----
Mr. Babin. OK.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Identified, where we tried to
clarify what we are doing, consistent with the law.
Mr. Babin. Well, before I run out of time, I asked this
question because the authority of the Office of Space Commerce
resides with the Secretary of Commerce, not with NOAA, and
certainly not NESDIS (National Environmental Satellite, Data,
and Information Service), it is long past time to return that
office to the Department of Commerce so that they can leverage
all of the expertise in that department, and coordinate with
other agencies and nations on a level playing field. So I hope
we can see some expedition happening there. Thank you, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
Staff. Mr. McNerney is recognized.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair, and, Dr. Spinrad,
thank you for appearing today, and for your dedication to the
scientific enterprise. It's really inspiring to see someone
that's so long in the business and still enthusiastic. See, a
much better understanding is needed of the stratospheric
composition and chemistry for more accurate modeling of the
climate system dynamics. The GeoXO Satellite Constellation is
scheduled to launch in the early 2030's, including the GeoXO
Central, which has an atmospheric composition sensor. Dr.
Spinrad, will this satellite, as currently planned, help build
a baseline understanding of the stratospheric aerosols?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. And how would the resulting data contribute
to climate science?
Dr. Spinrad. So part of climate science--a lot of people
tend to think of climate science as purely a physical
phenomenon, it's about temperature, or winds, or water. But a
lot of the initial conditions, if you will, that set off what's
going to happen are driven by atmospheric chemistry in the most
fundamental manner. Depending on what the particulates are that
are in the atmosphere, they either reflect sunlight, resulting
in local cooling, or they may absorb sunlight, which will
result in local heating. So having a good understanding of the
chemical construct of the particulates in the makeup of the
atmosphere is a critical initial component to understanding
climate.
Mr. McNerney. Very good. Well, unfortunately, the GeoXO
Constellation Satellite launch is still a decade away, but
there's an urgent need for actionable data right now. How can
NOAA improve its monitoring and modeling of the atmospheric
composition in the short term with the tools and equipment that
are currently available?
Dr. Spinrad. So we have a couple capabilities, one of
which, of course, is--thank you to the Hill's support for
acquisition of another--or of a Gulfstream 550--G-550. We will
be putting in for an additional G-550. These aircraft, of
course, allow us to do relatively high-altitude stratospheric
observations, so having that platform alone will be a major
improvement in our observational capabilities.
Mr. McNerney. Very good. What additional resources and
police changes does NOAA need to advance its Earth systems
science and stewardship mission?
Dr. Spinrad. I think we actually have a lot of authority.
We have 200 different authorities to conduct a lot of these
activities, which in itself is an issue we could talk about at
some point. But I believe part of this also boils down to
understanding what the nature of the inter-agency dynamic is,
which is why I've been rather vocal about NOAA having a lead as
the primary authoritative source for climate products and
services, just as we are for weather, navigational charts,
fishery stock assessments. I think that's a required
capability.
Mr. McNerney. Well, good, so jurisdictional battles that
aren't restricted to Congress. So major advances have been made
in our ability to monitor air quality from satellites, and this
is of particular importance to my district, which has among the
worst air quality in the Nation. I'm excited to see NOAA
partnering on the launch of the TEMPO (Tropospheric Emissions:
Monitoring Pollution) satellite instrument, which will monitor
air quality during daylight hours at a much higher spatial
resolution. Can you describe how NOAA is contributing to this
mission, and how advanced tropospheric air quality monitoring
will contribute to the agency's decisionmaking?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. I would like to get back to you on that,
please, Congressman, because I think that requires a detailed
technical element, and I'd like to be able to make sure we get
that right.
Mr. McNerney. OK, very good. Well, you know, I spent my
career developing wind energy technology, and I'm excited to
see that offshore wind is being considered in the West Coast,
but, because of the deeper waters, we require new technology.
Is NOAA preparing for upcoming lease sales on offshore West
Coast projects, which could come as early as next year?
Dr. Spinrad. It--we're working very closely with our
colleagues at Interior, specifically the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management, on exactly those issues, and we have ongoing
discussions with respect to some of the leases on the West
Coast right now, yes.
Mr. McNerney. Very good, exciting. Well, with that, I'm
going to yield back. Thank you.
Staff. Ms. Lofgren is recognized.
Ms. Lofgren. First, thank you for letting me pop on, even
though I'm not a Member of this Subcommittee, to ask just a few
questions about the wildfire situation. This has been just a
catastrophe in the West, and in our home State of California,
and certainly Federal resources are needed to address the risk.
I think sometimes we underestimate how improving modeling data
could actually help in this situation, so I have just a couple
questions. First, how will the next generation of NOAA
satellites improve wildfire detection and monitoring? Also,
what other spaced-based observation capabilities for near-real
time detection has NOAA explored? Have we thought about small
satellite constellations? And then, finally, what is NOAA doing
on interagency collaboration when it comes to wildfire modeling
and detection, as--not just, you know, with other agencies, but
also with non-Federal partners to improve prevention and
response?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman Lofgren. I hail from Oregon. My home in Central
Oregon was within just a few miles of some of the biggest fires
this year, so this, for me, is a very personal issue. And, by
the way, if I can briefly state, I used NOAA information to
make a decision to spend money to do a fuel abatement effort on
my property, so this touches people at the very personal level,
right in their pocketbook. So I resonate very much with the
tone of your question.
At NOAA we are responsible, as you indicated, for the
detection side, using our satellites, and also aircraft
capability, and one of the dramatic improvements, noted, in
fact, by the President just a few months ago, is our lightning
mapper. A relatively new capability, but now that we've got
higher and higher resolution for detecting lightning, we can,
to a certain extent, predict where the fires are going to
initiate. Then, of course, comes the human element, where our
incident meteorologists are on scene with the firefighters. We
need to continue training those incident meteorologists.
A lot of people believe forecasts are mechanical, done by
machines or done by computers, and then spit out. It's actually
the people that make the difference. And the last part of our
responsibility is in the--if you will, the effects of the fire,
the smoke. We have new products that we're developing that will
allow high resolution accurate forecasts of where the smoke is
going to go. You had asked about the research component. We are
excited about a Fiscal Year 2022 element that we've got to
establish a fire weather test bed, so it'll be a $15 million
investment to conduct the kind of research you're talking
about, but also operationalize it for those incident
meteorologists. And the last comment I'll make is this--is that
the highest level of concern at the White House, in the
administration, which is why we have the interagency working
group on fire that's looking at the best processes to develop
for research and operations, to mitigate and protect the public
from these--what are going to be in increased frequency and
intensity of these events in the future.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much for that insight. I'm
wondering, in addition to the high-level interagency work, what
capacity do you have to work with other actors? For example,
you know, in the State of California we have OES (Office of
Emergency Services), and we have--and Oregon does as well, and
even private sector individuals are getting involved. Do you
have the legal authority, do you have the resources, to do all
of that, and what's the status?
Dr. Spinrad. It--we do have a lot of authorities. We have a
lot of capability. In fact, in the President's summit on fire
back a couple of months ago, I made the personal commitment to
the Governors that if they need embedded fire meteorologists,
we're ready to provide that. We also have people embedded in
the Interagency Fire Center up in Boise. So we do have that
capability, where there--there are no constraints with respect
to our work with the private sector. And I would say engagement
has not been an issue for us, with respect to fires.
Ms. Lofgren. OK. I thank you so very much. Unfortunately,
we used to have a fire season. It's now virtually year-round
because of climate change, and not only does it affect, you
know, California, and the wildlife, and the loss of property
and life, but the smoke comes all the way to the East Coast, so
it's an issue for the whole country. And I thank you for your
information. I yield back.
Chairwoman Sherrill [continuing]. Was our last Member. So,
before bringing the hearing to a close, I want to thank the
Administrator for testifying before our Committee today. The
record will remain open for two weeks for additional statements
from the Members, and for any additional questions the
Committee may ask of the witnesses. The witness is excused, and
the hearing is now adjourned. Thank you so much.
[Whereupon, at 11:29 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by the Honorable Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
[

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Opinion articles submitted by Representative Brian Babin

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
