- NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION: ADVANCING RESEARCH FOR THE FUTURE OF U.S. INNOVATION, PART II

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION:
ADVANCING RESEARCH FOR THE FUTURE
OF U.S. INNOVATION, PART II

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 6, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-718 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
JERRY McNERNEY, California           PETE SESSIONS, Texas
PAUL TONKO, New York                 DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                MIKE GARCIA, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
DON BEYER, Virginia                  YOUNG KIM, California
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAY OBERNOLTE, California
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                 VACANCY
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. HALEY STEVENS, Michigan, Chairwoman
PAUL TONKO, New York                 MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida,
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                    Ranking Member
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
DON BEYER, Virginia                  PETE SESSIONS, Texas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         PETER MEIJER, Michigan

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

May 6, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Haley Stevens, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Michael Waltz, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    15
Written Statement............................................    17

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Chairwoman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    18
Written Statement............................................    19

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

Witnesses:

Dr. Roger M. Wakimoto, Vice Chancellor for Research and Creative
Activities, University of California, Los Angeles
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Ms. Gabriela Cruz Thompson, Director, University Research and
Collaboration, Intel Labs, Intel Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Mahmud Farooque, Associate Director, Consortium for Science,
Policy and Outcomes, DC and Clinical Associate Professor,
School for the Future of Innovation in Society, Arizona State
University
Oral Statement...............................................    42
Written Statement............................................    44

Dr. Gerald Blazey, Vice President for Research and Innovation
Partnerships, Northern Illinois University
Oral Statement...............................................    55
Written Statement............................................    57

Dr. P. Barry Butler, President, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University
Oral Statement...............................................    66
Written Statement............................................    68

Discussion.......................................................    72

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Roger M. Wakimoto, Vice Chancellor for Research and Creative
Activities, University of California, Los Angeles..............    94

Dr. Gerald Blazey, Vice President for Research and Innovation
Partnerships, Northern Illinois University.....................    95

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Report submitted by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives
``Public Impact Research: Engaged Universities Making the
Difference,'' Association of Public & Land-Grant
Universities, November 2019................................    98

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION:
ADVANCING RESEARCH FOR THE FUTURE
OF U.S. INNOVATION, PART II

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 6, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 o'clock
a.m., via Zoom, Hon. Haley Stevens [Chairwoman of the
Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. This hearing will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at
any time.
Pursuant to House Resolution 8, today, the Committee will
meet virtually. I just want to announce a couple of reminders
to the Members about the conduct of this remote hearing. First,
Members should keep their video feed on as long as they are
present in the hearing. Members are also responsible for their
own microphones. That's an important one to remember. Please
also keep your microphones muted unless you're speaking. That's
a big part of that responsibility. Finally, if Members have
documents they wish to submit for the record, please email them
to the Committee Clerk, whose email address was circulated
prior to the hearing.
So good morning, and welcome to today's hearing. Thank you
to our distinguished panelists for joining us and bringing your
expertise for our discussion today. We are here today to
continue our discussion about the National Science Foundation
(NSF) and what is needed to propel the agency and the U.S.
research enterprise into the future. In carrying out its
mission to support research across all science and engineering
disciplines and advance innovation in STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) education. NSF has
delivered enormous benefits to society over the past 70 years.
Even during the long stretches of flat funding, NSF continued
to experiment with its processes and diversify its portfolio of
investments to maximize impact.
Over the past decade, NSF's budget has hovered around $8
billion. In that time, NSF launched ambitious new initiatives,
including I-Corps, NSF INCLUDES (Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science), the 10 Big Ideas, and the Convergence
Accelerators, all while remaining focused and committed to its
core research mission in equity and inclusion for all.
NSF has more than demonstrated its capacity to not only
survive but to continue to strive in an austere budget
environment. Just imagine what could be achieved if we let this
agency and the thousands of researchers and students it
supports out of the box that has penned them for a long time.
As a proud cosponsor of the National Science Foundation
for the Future Act, I am excited about the opportunity to think
big for a change. This bill is a comprehensive authorization
that proposes doubling the agency's budget in 5 years. The bill
pushes NSF to address long-standing challenges in scaling up
effective K-12 STEM education innovations, educating workforce-
ready STEM graduates, and training the next generation of
researchers and innovators.
This bill is also introduced alongside Chairwoman Eddie
Bernice Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and Ranking Member Mike
Waltz.
A major focus of this legislation is also accountability
to the public. New requirements in the bill would address
threats to research security and ensure researchers are
thinking through the societal impacts of their work.
Finally, there is the issue of expanding NSF's mission.
While the NSF has supported use-inspired and translational
research for decades, it has not been a strategic priority. The
NSF for the Future Act establishes a Directorate for Science
and Engineering Solutions to empower the agency to take risks,
forge new partnerships, and pursue research-driven solutions to
a wide range of societal problems and applications that are
needed for our innovation engine and activities throughout the
United States of America.
It's also a two-way street. With researchers advancing
solutions for the benefit of communities and those
collaborations inspiring researchers to ask questions and try
approaches they may have never otherwise considered, curiosity
abounds.
While I'm enthusiastic about the need for the NSF to take
on these new challenges, we must take our time to get this
right. We are certainly off to a great start with a bill that
has been developed over a year of extensive vetting with a wide
range of stakeholders, policy experts, and thought leaders.
This is part of the series that we are having in this
Committee. The Committee is telling me it's the third hearing.
It's the second one I've chaired. I know our other
Subcommittees are digging in as well that we've held on this
topic. And you can also see from the Members who comprise this
hearing the dedication and the want and desire to make sure
that we get this right. And that is part of what we're going to
be hearing from our phenomenal experts and witnesses here
today.
The last month, the Committee has also met to discuss
opportunities for reimagining the U.S. innovation ecosystem as
a whole. It's obviously not all done through the NSF and this
exclusive agency. It is an interagency effort as we think
through the bounty of our innovation ecosystem.
Last week, the Subcommittee heard from the NSF Director
and National Science Board Chair. Today, we are hearing from
stakeholders, those on the frontlines who know intimately what
the challenges are and what is needed to overcome them. We are
experiencing a rare moment, an exciting moment of bipartisan
enthusiasm for correcting course and significantly increasing
Federal support for U.S. research and development, particularly
at the National Science Foundation. Many point to the dramatic
increase in Chinese R&D (research and development) investments
as a strategic imperative. I for one am focused on solving
problems here at home and investing and supporting American
research and innovation that has continued to lead us through
the 21st century.
So whatever the motivation, we must seize this opportunity
to set NSF on a sustainable path to achieving its full
potential to advance research, drive innovation that will spawn
new industries, secure our national defense and economic
leadership, and improve the lives of the American people.
I certainly look forward to today's discussion.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Stevens follows:]

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing. Thank you to
our distinguished panelists for joining us today.We are here
today to continue our discussion about the National Science
Foundation and what is needed to propel the agency, and the
U.S. research enterprise, into the future. In carrying out its
mission to support research across all science and engineering
disciplines and advance innovation in STEM education, NSF has
delivered enormous benefits to society over the past 70 years.
Even during long stretches of flat funding, NSF continued
to experiment with its processes and diversify its portfolio of
investments to maximize its impact. Over the past decade, NSF's
budget has hovered around $8 billion dollars. In that time, NSF
launched ambitious new initiatives including I-Corps, NSF
INCLUDES, the 10 Big Ideas, and the Convergence Accelerators.
All the while remaining focused and committed to its core
research mission.
NSF has more than demonstrated its capacity to not only
survive, but to continue to strive in an austere budget
environment. Just imagine what could be achieved if we let this
agency, and the thousands of researchers and students it
supports, out of the box that has penned them in for all this
time.
As a proud co-sponsor of the National Science Foundation
for the Future Act, I am excited about the opportunity to think
big for a change. This bill is a comprehensive authorization
that proposes a doubling of the agency's budget in five years.
The bill pushes NSF to address longstanding challenges in
scaling up effective K-12 STEM education innovations, educating
workforce-ready STEM graduates, and training the next
generation of researchers and innovators. A major focus of this
bill is accountability to the public. New requirements in the
bill would address threats to research security and ensure
researchers are thinking through the societal impacts of their
work.
Finally, there is the issue of expanding NSF's mission.
While NSF has supported use-inspired and translational research
for decades, it has not been a strategic priority. The NSF for
the Future Act establishes a Directorate for Science and
Engineering Solutions to empower the agency to take risks,
forge new partnerships, and pursue research-driven solutions to
a wide range of societal problems. This is a two-way street,
with researchers advancing solutions for the benefit of
communities and those collaborations inspiring researchers to
ask questions and try approaches they may never have otherwise
considered.
While I am enthusiastic about the need for NSF to take on
these new challenges, we must take our time to make sure we get
this right. We're off to a good start, with a bill that has
been developed over a year of extensive vetting with a wide
range of stakeholders, policy experts, and thought leaders.
This is the third in a series of hearings this Committee has
held on this topic. Last month, the full Committee met to
discuss opportunities for reimagining the U.S. innovation
ecosystem as a whole. Last week, this Subcommittee heard from
the NSF Director and National Science Board Chair. Today we are
going to hear from stakeholders, those on the front lines who
know intimately what the challenges are and what is needed to
overcome them.
We are experiencing a rare moment of bipartisan enthusiasm
for correcting course and significantly increasing federal
support for U.S. research and development, particularly at NSF.
Many point to the dramatic increase in Chinese R&D investments
as a strategic imperative. I, for one, am focused on solving
problems here at home. Whatever the motivation, we must seize
this opportunity to set NSF on a sustainable path to achieving
its full potential to advance research and drive innovation
that will spawn new industries, secure our national defense and
economic leadership, and improve the lives of the American
people.
I look forward to today's discussion.

Chairwoman Stevens. And with that, the Chair now
recognizes the dedicated Ranking Member from the State of
Florida, Mr. Mike Waltz, for an opening statement.
Mr. Waltz. Hey, thank you, Chairwoman Stevens. And thank
you for holding today's hearing, the second legislative hearing
this Subcommittee is having on NSF for the Future. I'm excited
about this hearing. I think it will provide an important
opportunity to hear from a variety of stakeholders on how
Congress can best leverage and expand the mission of the NSF
and ensure we maintain our edge against the rising global
competition that we've all discussed.
It's always worth remembering that in its 71-year history
the NSF has played a vital role in advancing basic scientific
knowledge across the spectrum of disciplines from engineering
to biology, has become the gold standard for basic research
around the world. And in that time, in that 7 decades, NSF has
funded 236 Nobel Prize winners.
The NSF has also played a critical role in supporting
America's colleges and universities, accounting for
approximately 25 percent, 1/4 of all federally funded basic
research. America's universities have long been regarded as the
best in the world, and I think that that designation is largely
due to the support of the National Science Foundation.
I'm grateful today that we will be hearing from a number
of these institutions. I'm especially pleased to welcome Dr.
Butler, President of Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University,
which calls the great 6th District of Florida home. Embry-
Riddle leads the world in training premier aviation and
aerospace talent. Many of you that fly back and forth to D.C.,
you are probably being flown by an Embry-Riddle grad. I'm
especially proud of their partnership with the State of
Florida, that they engage thousands of high school students by
providing precollege STEM education programming focused on
aerospace applications.
So as the Members of this Committee know, actively
engaging students pre-K, very early on through 12 in STEM and
connecting it to their community truly plays a critical role in
sparking students' interest in STEM. We have to spark those
students before they divert.
We also have in north central Florida a Burns Science and
Technology STEM Elementary School. Every time I visit this
school, I feel a little dumber as we have elementary school
students designing robots, participating in CAD (Computer Aided
Design), additive manufacturing, 3-D manufacturing. It's really
incredible. And I think we all know that the sooner that we
grab these and spark these students' interest, the more likely
they are to support STEM majors in college. So we're lucky to
have institutions like Embry-Riddle and Burns who are working
in their communities to train our next generation of STEM
experts.
Look, the bottom line is an investment in research and
STEM education is an investment in our future and in our
national security. That's just one of the reasons why the NSF
for the Future Act is so important. It increases funding for
fundamental research, improves STEM education, and it increases
research training.
So as we invest in STEM in education programs with proven
track records like Embry-Riddle's, NSF must also be able to
scale up in a sustainable way. And I emphasize the word
sustainable. And as Chair Stevens mentioned, the NSF for the
Future Act also creates a new directorate, accelerating
solutions to many of our Nation's and the world's major
challenges.
So while making these investments, we must focus on
protecting taxpayer-funded research and technologies from our
adversaries like the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) especially.
I look forward to strengthening safeguards throughout this
process to improve best practices and prevent research theft.
And we are hearing repeatedly that there is at least a 1,000
percent increase in referral from the FBI on this research
theft.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how
they're addressing the challenges of research security, how we
can build on previous successes to safeguard America's
intellectual property, and confront our adversaries, especially
the CCP's wholesale theft. We cannot make these major
investments just to see it flow out the back door to our
adversaries.
So while the Chinese are leapfrogging the United States
technologically, we are at an inflection point. It's critical
for the United States to scale up our enterprise. There is
momentum, as Chair Stevens mentioned, on both sides of the
aisle to make these investments, but it must be done in a
realistic and sustainable way.
So while investing in NSF and basic research, American
technology, American innovations, and the American workforce
will continue to lead the world. I look forward to working with
the Chairwoman and Ranking Member Lucas, both Chairwomen and
Ranking Member Lucas to move the NSF for the Future Act through
the Committee in a bipartisan process, and let's get it to the
House floor for consideration. I truly thank our witnesses for
their time to join us, share their expertise. I look forward to
your testimony, and I yield the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waltz follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for holding today's hearing,
the second legislative hearing this subcommittee is having on
the ``NSF for the Future Act.'' This hearing will provide an
important opportunity to hear from a variety of stakeholders on
how Congress can best leverage and expand the mission of the
National Science Foundation to ensure we maintain our edge
against rising global competition.
Over its 71 year history, the National Science Foundation
(NSF) has played a vital role in advancing basic scientific
knowledge across the spectrum of disciplines - from engineering
to biology - and has become the gold-standard for basic
research across the world. In that time, the NSF has funded 236
Nobel Prize winners.
NSF also plays a critical role in supporting America's
colleges and universities, accounting for approximately 25
percent of all federally-funded basic research. America's
universities have long been regarded as the best in the world,
largely due to the support of the NSF.
I am grateful that today we will be hearing from a number
of these institutions. I'm especially pleased to welcome Dr.
Butler, President of Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University,
which calls Florida's 6th District home. Embry-Riddle leads the
world in training premier aviation and aerospace talent.
Through a partnership with the State of Florida, they are also
engaging thousands of high school students by providing pre-
college STEM education programming focused on aerospace
applications.
As the Members of this Committee know, actively engaging
students in grades PreK through 12 in STEM and connecting it to
their community plays a critical role in sparking students'
interest in STEM. It greatly increases the likelihood they will
pursue STEM majors in college. The 6th District and the state
of Florida are lucky to have institutions like Embry-Riddle,
who are working with their communities to train our next
generation of STEM experts. An investment in research and STEM
education is an investment in our future.
That's one reason why the ``NSF For the Future Act,'' is so
important, it increases funding for fundamental research and
improves STEM education and research training. As we invest in
STEM education programs with proven track records like Embry-
Riddle's, NSF must be able to scale-up in a sustainable way.
The NSF For the Future Act also creates a new directorate,
accelerating solutions to major challenges.
While making these investments, we must focus on protecting
taxpayer funded research and technologies from adversaries like
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). I look forward to
strengthening safeguards throughout the legislative process to
improve best practices and prevent research theft.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how they
are addressing the challenges of research security and how we
can build on previous successes to safeguard America's
intellectual property and confront the CCP's wholesale theft.
With the CCP leapfrogging the United States
technologically, we are at an inflection point and it is
critical for the U.S. to scale up our R&D enterprise. There is
momentum on both sides of the aisle to make these investments,
but it must be done in a realistic and sustainable way. By
investing in NSF and basic research, American technology,
American innovations, and the American workforce will continue
to lead the world. I look forward to working with Chairwoman
and Ranking Member Lucas, to move the NSF for the Future Act
through the Committee in a bipartisan process and to the House
Floor for consideration.
I'd like to thank our witnesses for taking the time to join
us today their share their expertise. I look forward to your
testimonies.
And I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Waltz.
And with that, the Chair now recognizes our fearless
leader, a legend in her own right, the Chairwoman of the Full
Committee, Chairwoman Johnson, for an opening statement.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much, and good morning
to all. I am so grateful to Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking
Member Waltz for holding this second hearing on the NSF for the
Future Act. And thank you to our esteemed witnesses for joining
us this morning.
Our U.S. universities continue to lead the world in
cutting-edge fundamental research. While universities rely on
several sources of funding for research, the largest single
source is the Federal Government, including the National
Science Foundation. NSF grants allow researchers to pursue
their own best ideas across all fields of science and
engineering without regard to anyone else's short-term
practical goals. Such fundamental research continues to be the
foundation of our entire innovation enterprise.
At the same time, I recognize that such research is not
sufficient to achieve NSF's broader mission to advance science
toward solutions to our Nation's challenges. That long-standing
broad mission for NSF was written into its 1950 founding
document by this very Committee. Indeed, NSF has long supported
both use-inspired research and efforts to translate the
research into practice.
NSF pioneered the Small Business Innovation Research or
SBIR program in the 1970's. Nearly 10 years ago, NSF launched
the Innovation Corps program to educate a new generation of
scientists, entrepreneurs. But those efforts have largely been
around the edges and not on a large scale. We are at an
inflection point for U.S. research and innovation leadership.
The international leadership that we long took for granted is
rapidly slipping through our fingers. In this new global
context, the Science, Space, and Technology Committee is
looking to reauthorize the National Science Foundation for the
future, not just relying on what we've done in the past.
There is much to discuss in the NSF for the Future Act
from the creation of a new directorate to STEM education and
broadening participation at all levels to increased
accountability and security in our research enterprise. One
particular aspect of our legislation that I want to highlight
is public engagement in research. The stakes are high for many
areas of science and technology (S&T) just not in terms of
economic competitiveness and national security but in terms of
the benefits and the risks to individuals, to communities, and
to workers. To maximize the benefits and minimize potential
harm of technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI) and
synthetic biology, we must engage nontraditional stakeholders
and diverse voices in NSF research, including civic
organizations, labor, local and tribal governments, farmers,
and even the public at large. And public engagement should not
just be for technology. It matters for climate change, water
quality, social inequity, and other challenges for which
technology is only part of the solution.
As we identify the types of problems we're trying to
solve, as we scope our research agendas, and as we pull
together research partnerships, we must think more broadly
about who needs to have a seat at the table. Engagement beyond
the usual suspects will also spark new lines of inquiry and
attract a more diverse group of researchers themselves. These
are central goals of the NSF for the Future Act.
I again want to thank our expert witnesses for taking time
to appear before the Committee this morning and share your
insights for recommendations. I look forward to the discussion,
and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Thank you Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking Member Waltz for
holding this second hearing on the NSF for the Future Act. And
thank you to our esteemed witnesses for joining us this
morning.
U.S. universities continue to lead the world in cutting
edge fundamental research. While universities rely on several
sources of funding for research, the largest single source is
the Federal government, including the National Science
Foundation. NSF grants allow researchers to pursue their own
best ideas across all fields of science and engineering,
without regard to anyone else's short-term practical goals.
Such fundamental research continues to be the foundation of our
entire innovation enterprise.
At the same time, I recognize that such research is not
sufficient to achieve NSF's broader mission to advance science
toward solutions to our nation's challenges. That long standing
broader mission for NSF was written into its 1950 founding
document by this very Committee. Indeed, NSF has long supported
both use-inspired research and efforts to translate the
research into practice. NSF pioneered the Small Business
Innovation Research--or SBIR--program in the 1970s. Nearly 10
years ago, NSF launched the Innovation Corps program to educate
a new generation of scientist-entrepreneurs. But those efforts
have largely been around the edges, and not on a large scale.
We are at an inflection point in U.S. research and
innovation leadership. The international leadership that we
long took for granted is rapidly slipping through our fingers.
In this new global context, the Science, Space, and Technology
committee is looking to reauthorize the National Science
Foundation for the future, not just relying on what we've done
in the past.
There is much to discuss in the NSF for the Future Act,
from the creation of a new directorate, to STEM education and
broadening participation at all levels, to increased
accountability and security in our research enterprise.
One particular aspect of our legislation that I want to
highlight is public engagement in research. The stakes are high
for many areas of science and technology--not just in terms of
our economic competitiveness and national security--but in
terms of the benefits and risks to individuals, to communities,
and to workers. To maximize the benefits and minimize the
potential harm of technologies such as artificial intelligence
and synthetic biology, we must engage nontraditional
stakeholders and diverse voices in NSF research, including
civic organizations, labor, local and tribal governments,
farmers, and even the public at large. And public engagement
should not just be for technology. It matters for climate
change, water quality, social inequity, and other challenges
for which technology is only part of the solution. As we
identify the types of problems we are trying to solve, as we
scope our research agendas, and as we pull together research
partnerships, we must think more broadly about who needs to
have a seat at the table. Engagement beyond the usual suspects
will also spark new lines of inquiry and attract a more diverse
group of researchers themselves. These are central goals of the
NSF for the Future Act.
I again want to thank the expert witnesses for taking the
time to appear before the committee this morning and share your
insights and recommendations. I look forward to the
discussion.I yield back.

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you, Chairwoman Johnson. And the
Chair now recognizes our fearless Ranking Member of the
Committee, Mr. Lucas, for an opening statement.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking
Member Waltz, for holding today's hearing on the future of the
National Science Foundation. And thank you to our witnesses for
being here. The input of experts like you in this process is
essential as we determine the future of the American research
enterprise.
We're at a critical point in our Nation's history. The
world is facing a new technological revolution. Advances in
artificial intelligence, quantum technology, biotechnology, and
space exploration are quickly creating the industries and jobs
of the future. The United States led the way in technological
development for the last century, but our continued global
leadership is not assured. I believe that the Nation that leads
in science and technology will shape the world order for the
next century. I'd like that nation to be ours. I'd like for
emerging technologies to be developed with our values of
transparency and fairness.
The question we face is how we grow our Nation's research
enterprise to meet those challenges. I would argue there's a
right way and a wrong way to invest in American
competitiveness. The Chinese Community Party has been working
to steal, literally, figuratively, the U.S. playbook for
innovation for years. We don't need to steal theirs. China has
been dumping billions of dollars into applied R&D but has not
yet achieved the breakthrough innovations and commercial
applications you would expect from all of that investment.
Simply put, they're demonstrating that centralized, top-down
technology spending does not work.
That's why last year I introduced the Securing American
Leadership in Science and Technology Act, or SALSTA. SALSTA
doubled down on what has proven to work over the last 40 years
in making the United States the global leader in innovation.
And it sets us up for success through a national S&T Strategy
and improved technology transfer from Federal labs to the
commercial sector.
Each player in Federal R&D, from the basic research funded
by NSF to DOD (Department of Defense) and NIST's (National
Institute of Standards and Technology's) work with industry,
has an important role in advancing innovation. SALSTA
recognizes the strength of the U.S. innovation ecosystem and
doesn't break it apart by creating something shiny and new like
other proposals being considered in the Senate.
For the last year, the Committee has worked on a
bipartisan basis to look at how we can grow and evolve NSF and
to meet the national and societal challenges of the 21st
century. After many discussions with stakeholders and experts,
I was proud to join Chairwoman Johnson, Chairwoman Stevens, and
Ranking Member Waltz in introducing the NSF for the Future Act.
Our bill doubles basic research funding at the NSF over the
next 5 years and preserves what makes NSF great, while
enhancing NSF's role in moving research from lab to market. Our
bill takes a comprehensive approach to reauthorizing NSF,
including building a domestic STEM workforce and investing in
research infrastructure. The bill also creates a new
directorate of NSF that will be focused on science and
engineering solutions. The new directorate aims to make the
fundamental research funded by NSF and help apply those
discoveries to solving national challenges from cybersecurity
to climate change. The new proposed directorate does not
duplicate or seek to replace the missions of other research
agencies, but instead accelerates the development of NSF-funded
research for private sector development and commercialization.
As I've said before, we have a unique window of
opportunity before us. There is broad, bipartisan agreement
that we need to prioritize research and investment in American
research. I believe--and I say this with the most sincerity--
that if House and Senate leadership, both sides of the
building, both sides of the chambers, gives the Committees of
jurisdiction the opportunity, we can seize this momentum and
pass meaningful legislation that will meet the moment.
Some have called this a new Sputnik moment. As we consider
legislation, we must consider the lessons of the space race.
That period saw tremendous growth in science and technology and
created a generation of scientists and engineers. But when the
cold war was over, research funding stagnated. We must avoid
creating a situation of feast and famine for our research
enterprise. Whatever shape our final legislation takes, when
the package comes together, it should be comprehensive,
strategic, and sustainable.
I look forward to working with my colleagues through this
process to ensure that we achieve those goals. Again, I want to
thank our witnesses for their input today, and I look forward
to your testimony and yield back, Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking Member Waltz, for
holding today's hearing on the future of the National Science
Foundation. And thank you to our witnesses for being here. The
input of experts like you in this process is essential as we
determine the future of the American research enterprise.
We are at a critical moment in our nation's history. The
world is facing a new technological revolution. Advances in
artificial intelligence, quantum technology, biotechnology, and
space exploration are quickly creating the industries and jobs
of the future.
The United States led the way in technological development
last century, but our continued global leadership is not
assured. I believe that the nation that leads in science and
technology will shape the world order for the next century. I'd
like that nation to be ours, and I'd like for emerging
technologies to be developed with our values of transparency
and fairness.
The question we face is how we grow our nation's research
enterprise to meet these challenges. I would argue there is a
right way and a wrong way to invest in American
competitiveness. The Chinese Community Party has been working
to steal--literally and figuratively--the U.S. playbook for
innovation for years. We don't need to steal theirs. China has
been dumping billions of dollars into applied R&D, but has not
yet achieved the breakthrough innovations and commercial
applications you would expect from all of that investment.
Simply put, they've demonstrated that centralized, top-down
technology spending does not work.
That's why last year I first introduced the Securing
American Leadership in Science and Technology Act, or SALSTA.
SALSTA doubles down on what has proven to work over the last 40
years in making the U.S. the global leader in innovation. And
it sets us up for success through a National S&T Strategy and
improved technology transfer from federal labs to the
commercial sector.
Each player in federal R&D, from the basic research funded
by NSF to DOE and NIST's work with industry, has an important
role in advancing innovation. SALSTA recognizes the strength of
the U.S. innovation ecosystem and doesn't break it apart by
creating something shiny and new like other proposals being
considered in the Senate.
For the last year, our Committee has been working on a
bipartisan basis to look at how we can grow and evolve NSF to
meet the national and societal challenges of the 21st Century.
After many discussions with stakeholders and experts, I was
proud to join Chairwoman Johnson, Chairwoman Stevens, and
Ranking Member Waltz in introducing the NSF for the Future Act.
Our bill doubles basic research funding at NSF over the
next 5 years and preserves what makes NSF great, while also
enhancing NSF's role in moving research from lab to market. Our
bill takes a comprehensive approach to reauthorizing NSF,
including building a domestic STEM workforce and investing in
research infrastructure. The bill also creates a new
directorate of NSF that will be focused on science and
engineering solutions. The new directorate aims to take the
fundamental research funded by NSF and help apply those
discoveries to solving national challenges from cybersecurity
to climate change.
The new proposed directorate does not duplicate or seek to
replace the missions of other research agencies, but instead
accelerates the development of NSF funded research for private
sector development and commercialization.
As I have said before, we have a unique window of
opportunity before us. There is broad, bipartisan agreement
that we need to prioritize investment in American research. I
believe that if House and Senate leadership give the Committees
of jurisdiction the opportunity, we can seize this momentum and
pass meaningful legislation that will meet the moment.
Some have called this a new Sputnik moment. As we consider
legislation, we must consider the lessons of the space race.
That period saw tremendous growth in science and technology and
created a generation of scientists and engineers. But when the
Cold War was over, research funding stagnated. We must avoid
creating a situation of feast and famine for our research
enterprise. Whatever shape our final legislative package takes,
it should be comprehensive, strategic, and sustainable. I look
forward to working with my colleagues through this process to
ensure we achieve those goals.
Again, I want to thank our witnesses for their input today.
I look forward to your testimony.

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. And at this time I'd like
to introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness is Dr. Roger Wakimoto. Dr. Wakimoto is
currently the Vice Chancellor for Research and Creative
Activities at the University of California Los Angeles,
otherwise known as UCLA, a position that he has held since
2017. Dr. Wakimoto previously served as the Director of the
National Center for Atmosphere Research, Earth Observing
Laboratory from 2005 to 2010 and subsequently as the Director
of the National Center for Atmospheric Research from 2010 to
2013. Dr. Wakimoto also served as the Assistant Director of
NSF's Directorate for Geosciences for about 5 years where he
led a division that supported the atmospheric, geospace, polar,
Earth, and ocean sciences with a $1.3 billion annual budget.
Our next witness is Ms. Gabriela Cruz Thompson. Ms.
Thompson is currently the Director of University Research and
Collaboration at Intel Corporation's research arm Intel Labs.
In this role she and her team identify and fund critical large-
and medium-scale research at leading universities worldwide.
She also currently serves as a member of the Advisory Committee
to the Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorate at the National Science Foundation. Ms. Thompson
previously served as the Chief of Staff at Intel Labs and as a
Technical Assistant to Intel's Chief Technology Officer.
Our third witness is Dr. Mahmud Farooque. Dr. Farooque is
the Associate Director of the Consortium for Science Policy and
Outcomes, CSPO, and a Clinical Associate Professor in the
School for the Future of Innovation and Society at Arizona
State University. In this role, he co-leads the consortium's
long-term efforts to build a community of practice among
innovative R&D program managers in the government,
nongovernment, and private sectors. His expertise focuses on
innovation systems, research management, knowledge
coproduction, policy entrepreneurship, and participatory
technology assessment.
Our next witness, our final witness is Dr. Gerald Blazey.
Dr.--oh, no, sorry, not our final witness but our second to
final witness. Dr. Blazey is currently the Vice President for
Research and Innovation Partnerships at Northern Illinois
University (NIU), a position that he has held since 2015. Prior
to his position at NIU, Dr. Blazey served as the Assistant
Director for Physical Sciences in the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP) in the Executive Office of the
President from 2011 to 2014. Dr. Blazey has also served as a
Program Manager at the Department of Energy (DOE) and
participated in the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
collider program, where he served as a co-spokesperson of the
DZero collaboration. I'd love to hear more about that, Dr.
Blazey.
Our final witness is Dr. P. Barry Butler. Dr. Butler is
currently the sixth President of Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University, a position he has held since 2017. During his time
as President, Dr. Butler has encouraged collaboration with
industry and is expanding the university's interest in aviation
cybersecurity, aviation data analytics, and autonomous
vehicles. Prior to his position at Embry-Riddle, Dr. Butler was
Executive Vice President and Provost of the University of Iowa
where he was also Dean of the College of Engineering for 10
years.
So we will now move into 5 minutes of written testimony
from this incredible group of witnesses. We will start with Dr.
Wakimoto, and then I will move on to the--our next witness.
With that, Dr. Wakimoto.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ROGER M. WAKIMOTO,

VICE CHANCELLOR FOR RESEARCH

AND CREATIVE ACTIVITIES,

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES

Dr. Wakimoto. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking
Member Waltz, Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and
Members of the Committee. I'm Roger Wakimoto. I'm the Vice
Chancellor for Research and Creative Activities at UCLA. UCLA
has been named the No. 1 public university for several years
running and ranks among the world's top research universities,
successfully competing for significant Federal research
funding, including from the National Science Foundation. The
support helps UCLA advance knowledge, build technical
expertise, drive innovation, create new businesses, and train
tomorrow's workforce, thus contributing to our Nation's ability
to solve pressing societal challenge and remaining globally
competitive.
It is really an honor and a pleasure to join you today to
discuss the NSF for the Future Act and possibilities for how
major research institutions can make headway in addressing
challenges related to diversity and inclusion in research in
partnership with smaller research institutions to advance
knowledge. I thank the Committee for considering these issues
and for inviting me here as a witness today.
As Congress has been contemplating a new authorization for
NSF over the past couple of years, I too have been
contemplating what a bright future for the Foundation would
look like. To begin with, such legislation should abide by the
Hippocratic oath's dictum to, quote, ``First, do no harm,''
unquote.
NSF support of curiosity-driven research across a wide
variety of fields is a mainstay of U.S. scientific strength
that must remain the primary mission of the agency and its
guiding light. That does not mean, however, that NSF cannot
take on new responsibilities consistent with its primary
mission to strengthen our Nation.
Given the long-standing importance of basic research for
the U.S. scientific enterprise, I appreciate that the NSF for
the Future Act aims to maintain the core mission of the
Foundation while also creating a new directorate to support
use-inspired research and translation and to drive and propel
technological innovation in our country. I'm a believer that
research in the public interest, research that can demonstrate
a societal purpose is a worthy pursuit and is an appropriate
use of public funds.
The solutions directorate would take on many issues which
NSF already addresses but within even more interdisciplinary
and goal-oriented approach. Ideally, the new directorate would
be a crosscutting entity in order to maximize its success. I
appreciate that the NSF for the Future Act proposes that the
head of the new solutions directorate be someone of the same
stature as the leaders of NSF's other directorates. I also
appreciate that the bill authorizes the transfer of funds from
the new directorate, the NSF's traditional programs, and not
the other way around. These steps help ensure an appropriate
balance between basic and applied research.
The NSF for the Future bill aims to poise the Foundation
to deliberately tackle some significant societal concerns, and
I applaud that. These challenges include climate change and
environmental sustainability, which are topics close to my own
scientific background and research expertise. I believe that
climate change is one of the greatest technological challenges
facing our world, and I strongly support a focus on this matter
in the legislation.
Another important and persistent challenge the bill seeks
to address is the need to increase diversity of those involved
in research. It is especially critical to encourage and develop
a diverse pipeline of scientists and researchers. The bill
provides some helpful incentives, but I believe it could do
even more. Codification of the INCLUDES program, the pilot to
foster partnership with emerging research institutions, and
other provisions in the NSF for the Future Act to broaden
participation and are welcome steps.
Additionally, the bill could explicitly include MSIs
(minority-serving institutions) and HBCUs (historically Black
colleges and universities) among the emerging research
institutions and include best practices learned from NSF-
supported centers such as STCs (Science and Technology Centers)
and ERCs (Engineering Research Centers), which partner with
local universities and industries. UCLA supports additional
criteria be adopted for multi-institutional awards with annual
reporting.
Given large societal challenges that need to be addressed
at a national level, it is critical that we support graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers in our institutions and
provide them with professional development opportunities.
Supporting training grants is a promising mechanism for this
purpose, as the NSF for the Future Act indicates. Developing
innovative approaches for training and career development for
our early career researchers, including the necessary
administrative supplements, would also help.
In conclusion, thank you for proposing a solid bipartisan
NSF authorization bill and for eliciting input to help further
strengthen the legislation. I really look forward to the Q&A
(question and answer) and discussion.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wakimoto follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. And with that, Ms. Cruz
Thompson.

TESTIMONY OF MS. GABRIELA CRUZ THOMPSON,

DIRECTOR, UNIVERSITY RESEARCH AND COLLABORATION,

INTEL LABS, INTEL CORPORATION

Ms. Thompson. Good morning. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens,
Ranking Member Waltz, and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me. It is a great honor to
testify today about Intel's partnership with NSF and to comment
on the NSF for the Future Act.
I am the Director of University Research Collaborations at
Intel Labs. This is a division of Intel Corporation dedicated
purely to research. Intel is the world's largest manufacturer
of semiconductors, or chips, and the only American manufacturer
of state-of-the-art semiconductors. Intel is investing $27
billion in R&D between 2019 and 2021 with the--most of it is
conducted here in the United States. We also recently announced
new investments totaling $24 billion to construct chip
manufacturing facilities or fabs in Arizona and New Mexico.
The semiconductor products that Intel manufactures
provides the foundation for transformational technologies and
innovations, including artificial intelligence, Internet of
Things (IOT), 5G, quantum computing, and many others. Intel
researchers actively collaborate with academic teams and
government agencies, including NSF, NIST, DOE, and DARPA
(Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) to advance
technology and design for our products and our chip
manufacturing processes. We partner with Federal agencies and
academia because we--they open the doors to unparalleled skill
and diversity of curiosity-driven research. Intel's partnership
with NSF extend the--extend back many decades as cofounder of
the Semiconductor Research Corporation, which is the world's
leading nonprofit microelectronics research consortia.
In recent years, Intel's relationship with NSF has
expanded into a bilateral collaboration and granting a number
of programs ranging from machine learning for wireless
networking to foundational microarchitecture. We also join new
programs involved in multiple institutions such as the
Convergence Accelerator and recently announced RINGs, the
Resilient and Intelligent Next-G Communication Initiative,
which was announced just last week.
Intel is donating over $40 million toward these programs
for a total value of over $150 million when combined with
funding from NSF and other members. We also provide in-kind
contributions to students and faculty that are awarded by those
NSF programs. We provide access to the latest industrial
technologies to manufacture chips, and we also provide access
to the latest products and research prototypes available on the
cloud. These public-private partnerships have yielded important
commercialization of research results, and we look forward to
strengthening them.
I commend the Committee for its leadership in crafting
bipartisan legislation to advocate for the future of U.S.
innovation, and I am delighted to offer support for the efforts
to strengthen the NSF, particularly, and first, the creation of
a new directorate for science and engineering solutions would
focus on societal challenges like global competitiveness of
critical technologies. It will also provide us with the
opportunity to interact with a broader community of scientists
and industry representatives so that we can address wider-
ranging research questions and improve research outcomes.
Second, the sustainable increase in overall funding for
the Foundation in the bill would enable NSF to support the
``highly competitive'' and ``competitive'' proposals that today
go unfunded and would increase the impact to STEM teaching and
student programs, as well as broadening the workforce needs
today and for the future.
Third, I believe the bill could further enable
partnerships with private industry by expanding industry
eligibility to participate in consortia alongside academic
researchers. This collaboration would ultimately accelerate
technology transfers and open up innovation ecosystems.
Fourth, the bill could also prioritize long-term funding
for major research equipment and facility construction focused
on semiconductor manufacturing, which is in alignment with the
recently recognized CHIPS for America Act.
And fifth, finally, I would further suggest that the bill
defines NSF's role in the National Semiconductor Technology
Center (NSTC) required under the CHIPS for America Act. Intel
greatly appreciates the bipartisan support for the law, and we
look forward to congressional appropriations to implement it.
I welcome the opportunity to answer your questions, and I
thank you for holding this important stakeholder hearing to
advance U.S. innovation.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Thompson follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you, Ms. Cruz Thompson.
And with that, Dr. Mahmud Farooque.

TESTIMONY OF DR. MAHMUD FAROOQUE,

ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, CONSORTIUM FOR

SCIENCE, POLICY AND OUTCOMES,

DC AND CLINICAL ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,

SCHOOL FOR THE FUTURE OF INNOVATION IN SOCIETY,

ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Farooque. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member,
Members of the Committee. It's a privilege to testify today. I
come before you to express my personal views about the
challenges and opportunities before our Nation and the role of
the National Science Foundation in meeting them.
First, I find the NSF for the Future Act a bold step in
the right direction that meets our current technological,
economic, social, and political moment. Across its history, NSF
has funded research that addresses societal needs, many of
which continue to create beneficial impacts and outcomes. The
bill provides these portfolios the same support and
infrastructure that it provides to research oriented toward
scientific and market outcomes.
The bill's provisions are additive and not substituted and
are informed by the most pressing societal challenges from
climate change to socioeconomic inequity that require different
and dedicated infrastructure. The facts that we face today
mirror ones we faced in the 1970's and 1980's after two oil
shocks, the end of prolonged foreign conflict, distrust of
government, and continued loss of leadership in industries
critical to our economy and national security. Our response was
strategic and sustained. The United States increased funding
for basic research in NSF and DOD, set up NSF Engineering
Research Centers, passed Bayh-Dole, created Sematech, the
Critical Technologies Institute, Advanced Technology Program,
and developed technology and industry roadmaps.
Collectively, these measures marked a shift in science
policy, one that prioritizes science for science's sake to use-
inspired science. They underwrote productivity gains and helped
the United States to recapture leadership in key industries.
What this response did not do was change the fundamental
distribution of labor among our public R&D institutions, which
continued to enjoy robust capacity for orchestrating a similar
and effective strategic response.
Despite these economic successes, the U.S. innovation
systems still lacked the capacity to address societal
challenges. With a few substitutions, the question that
Economist Nelson asked over 50 years ago can still be posed
today: Why was it that a country that recently landed a fifth
rover on Mars, developed three effective vaccines for a runaway
global pandemic in record time, and more generally has led the
world in R&D funding for 70 years seems unable to avert the
untimely death of a half a million of its citizens, unable to
provide equity, justice, and basic standards of living for its
citizens living in poverty and facing discrimination, unable to
keep the air and water clean and our neighborhood safe, and
struggling to protect our democracy from falling victim to
misinformation and manipulation.
If we are to address these kind of challenges, first, we
need to start with the most pressing problems, not the most
interesting research questions. Second, we need a broad-based
capacity for considering the societal impacts of R&D across the
system. And third, we need new evaluation criteria because
attributes required to maximize our scientific market and
societal values are not the same.
This may appear daunting, but NSF can build on the
sponsorship of socially relevant research, education, and
outreach like research supported at my own institution. What is
required is an infrastructure that allows for scaling and
sharing of actionable and socially relevant research. It can
only come from a directorate exclusively organized around
addressing our most pressing problems.
But on what challenges should we focus our attention?
Science can inform solutions but it is up to society to choose
and act. Increased funding and strategic spend will ensure
competitive leverage over our R&D essence. A solutions
directorate might still determine priorities.
This brings me to my last point, the role of the public in
our innovation system. Myself and my colleagues across
universities, museums, civic organizations, citizens, and
community science platforms, science advisory boards, and even
some industries have been grappling with this question for the
last decade. How can we make decisionmaking about science more
democratic and reflective of the Nation's shared values? Here,
too, NSF has supported many public engagement activities that
are bearing fruit, and hearing that informs these--and research
that informs these activities. The path ahead then should be to
take a holistic approach to integrate public engagement,
research, education, and decisionmaking.
To close, the NSF for the Future Act has the potential to
accelerate societal benefits through R&D as a part of a well-
coordinated national strategy. Through the solutions
directorate, it also has the potential to help organize our R&D
efforts in solving society's most pressing and emergent
challenges. What remains an open question is who will help
shape all of these pressing problems, experts acting alone or
experts engaging with the public?
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Farooque follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. And with that, we'll move
to Dr. Blazey.

TESTIMONY OF DR. GERALD BLAZEY, VICE PRESIDENT

FOR RESEARCH AND INNOVATION PARTNERSHIPS,

NORTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY

Dr. Blazey. OK. Good morning, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking
Member Waltz, Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Gerry Blazey, Vice
President for Research and Innovation Partnerships at Northern
Illinois University. I'm honored to discuss the importance of
the NSF and the NSF for the Future Act to institutions like
NIU.
NIU is located just west of Chicago. The 17,000 student
campus serves both urban and rural students and is very
diverse. Collectively, students from underserved populations
are about 3/4 of the student body, including a majority 53
percent students of color, 43 percent Pell grant recipients,
and 52 percent first-generation college. We are very mindful of
our mission to provide life-changing education to a diverse
student body and do so by offering programs in more than 100
areas while integrating research and scholarship into their
experience.
NIU is a Carnegie-classified doctoral university with high
research activity, averaging about $34 million per year in
externally funded programs, of which $13 million supports a
robust and efficient research enterprise. In fact, a 2020
report titled, ``The Innovation Impact of U.S. Universities''
ranked NIU third nationally for innovation impact productivity.
The NIU research vision is to prepare northern Illinois
for a century of change. Our newest initiative, the Center for
Community Sustainability, part of the Illinois Innovation
Network, addresses a pressing issue of our time, sustainability
and rapidly changing physical, technological, and demographic
environments. Institutions like NIU can do research on very
important societal issues. And NSF is consistently one of our
top sponsors with every directorate contributing. NSF helps
address the resource challenges institutions with smaller
research footprints face by providing external funding to
initiate and maintain programs and infrastructure for those
programs.
Unfortunately, the impact of emerging research
institutions like NIU is blunted by a long-standing impediment,
which contributes to the missing millions described in the
Vision 2030 report by the National Science Board. The figure
you should see before you is from the American Physical
Society's report ``Building America's STEM Workforce,'' and it
starkly illustrates an inequity. As written at the top of the
figure, in 2018, nearly 640 institutions received Federal
research funding for science and engineering. The orange color
represents the top 22 percent of research institutions as
ranked by funding, and the long orange arc in the upper left
image shows that the top institutions received 90 percent of
that funding. In the lower left image, the shorter arc, orange
arc, shows the same institutions serve only 1/3 of the
underrepresented minority college students served by these
institutions. So said in another way, 2/3 of our Nation's
students of color at research institutions see only 1/10 of
federally funded research opportunities. And geographic
distribution is also uneven with 96 percent of the top 22
institutions in urban or suburban areas.
Now, the National Academies observes that participation in
research is extremely effective for retention and graduation of
students and diversification of the STEM fields. The long-
standing inequity in research opportunity limits the ability of
emerging research institutes to diversify the STEM workforce.
Programs increasing diversity at the top research institutions,
although very worthy, are not enough to reach the missing
millions because the majority of underrepresented students are
at institutions like NIU.
By promoting partnerships, the NSF for the Future Act
offers up a remedy for what I call the missing millions in the
middle. These partnerships direct at least 25 percent of any
consortium award over $1 million to emerging research
institutions, which maintains the excellence of the large
research institutions while building research capacity and
broadening opportunity on the campus where the students are.
I'll conclude with a few comments on the act. I agree new
structures are essential to prepare the United States for the
next 70 years of the endless frontier, and the directorate for
science and engineering solutions will support the
translational research necessary to address societal issues and
to compete with directed economies. Care must be taken to
ensure both demographic and geographic opportunity are
broadened. For example, institutions with large research
footprints already have a deep portfolio from which to draw
translational research. And, as stated earlier, we have to get
it right and we can do no harm and must protect investment and
curiosity-driven research and otherwise--otherwise, we risk the
development of future technologies from which we innovate.
I commend the Committee for your work on this forward-
looking legislation and look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Blazey follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you, Dr. Blazey.
And with that, our final witness, Dr. Butler.

TESTIMONY OF DR. P. BARRY BUTLER,

PRESIDENT, EMBRY-RIDDLE AERONAUTICAL UNIVERSITY

Dr. Butler. Thank you very much. Good morning Chairwoman
Stevens, Ranking Member Waltz, Chairwoman Johnson, and Ranking
Member Lucas, and the rest of the Committee Members. Thank you
for this opportunity to address how the NSF for the Future Act
can help America be more technologically competitive and more
specifically benefit from the talents and resources of highly
specialized institutions such as mine.
After almost 4 decades in higher education, I'm a firm
believer that universities that align their mission with the
industries they serve are valuable pipelines to a globally
competitive, more diverse workforce, a continuing source of
innovation and research, and partners with industries who share
a responsibility for security. With additional support from
NSF, universities can more effectively support our Nation's
technological superiority and prepare a future workforce
capable of competing for generations to come.
I'll focus on opportunities for NSF through the lens of
four questions. No. 1, how can we work together to, one,
develop a workforce that maintains our Nation's competitive
edge in key technologies; No. 2, diversify the workforce to
attract the best and brightest from populations traditionally
underrepresented in those areas; No. 3, optimize a return on
research investment; and No. 4, protect intellectual property?
Building a globally competitive workforce in
technologically focused industries starts years before those
individuals enroll at our universities. It starts with an early
introduction to STEM, specifically, lessons and experiences
that spark creativity and inspire young minds to want to learn
more. And more importantly, lessons and experiences that are
available to all Americans regardless of their ZIP Code.
Our Nation's many STEM-focused universities, both public
and private, already deliver a significant amount of these
enrichment opportunities, often with the support from NSF and
other government agencies, but also private industry and
foundations. For example, with funding from the State of
Florida Embry-Riddle supports Americans' global leadership in
the aerospace sector by delivering precollege science,
technology, and math education focused on aerospace
applications. This program annually touches approximately 7,000
Florida high school students who, upon graduation from high
school, pursue college STEM majors at a statistically higher
rate than their classmates. With aerospace being a key sector
of the Florida economy, this is the type of program that fills
that talent pipeline.
Similar to many STEM universities, we also host summer
programs and online programs geared specifically at K-12
students. They master and apply STEM skills ranging from
robotics to coding to additive manufacturing and much more.
Additional NSF support could help schools launch or expand
real-world or very hands-on outreach experiences to spark
science and math-based skills early. It will also permit the
agency to identify successful programs with proven track
records and expand them nationally.
We at Embry-Riddle work on a daily basis with our Nation's
aerospace industry and can attest to the industry's
extraordinary effort to build a more diverse workforce. They
show it with their words, actions, and investments. Many
collaborate with us through industry-sponsored scholarships,
mentorships, internship programs, and career acceleration
programs. We target recruiting to underrepresented groups and
first-generation college students. Once these students are on
campus, we support their success by involving them in career
development and research programs. Data shows that students
involved in undergraduate research opportunities have a much
higher retention rate.
And as part of our commitment to diversity, we use our
resources and apply to federally available programs to
contribute to involvement of underrepresented groups. A key
point I want to make is that expanded undergraduate research
through NSF is a very low-cost investment in retention and,
hence, filling the pipeline. This experience in our classrooms
and labs and through internships pays off by inspiring the next
generation of graduate students and tech entrepreneurs, so
smaller schools would welcome funding and opportunities
relevant to their career areas of specialization.
But how can working with a smaller specialized institution
rival the buying power of working with a brand-name powerhouse
comprehensive university? You can think of this as another
dimension of diversity. Economically, there's inherent value in
building capacity in small to medium universities throughout
the country and capitalizing on the progress they're making in
tackling the research priorities identified by industries.
These initiatives tend to be highly focused, problem-solving
for outcomes that are specific and quantifiable. Unlike
comprehensive research universities that are active in many
different areas of research, it is not in common for smaller
institutions to have very qualified areas of research in
critical areas.
Let me give a practical example to finish. Numerous
investigators at large, comprehensive universities focus on the
challenges of cybersecurity as it applies to protecting the
transmission of endless amounts of sensitive information. At
Embry-Riddle we focus specifically on cybersecurity to
aircraft, spacecraft, and autonomous vehicles. This is a
challenge that you might describe as basic computational
science. However, it applies to all of us in society as we
travel.
By partnering with the University of Florida, we're
combining the talents of our respective institutions and
creating a center of excellence in aerospace resiliency. With
new funding sources, we have the potential to apply lessons to
other critical areas.
With that, I'll finish since my time is up.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Butler follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. Thank you. No, we're glad
to get you over the finish line there, Dr. Butler.
And at this point what we're going to do is we're going to
begin our first round of questions. The Chair is going to
recognize herself for 5 minutes, and then we'll pass the buck
over to the other side.
Look, I want to start with Gerry Blazey and your
testimony, which was--all the testimonies were really great,
and I deeply appreciate your mentioning of the NSB report on
the missing millions. And citing from your testimony, you had
said 2/3 of our Nation's students of color attending STEM
research-active institutions see only about 10 percent of
Federal research dollars on their campus. And, you know, the
slide that you shared as well I think was particularly
alarming.
I've actually--believe it or not, Gerry, I've had the
privilege of working with NIU. I'm from Michigan. I represent,
you know, some incredible research assets here in southeastern
Michigan, including Oakland University. But I was involved a
long time ago with an NSF application that we--a grant that we
were trying to get in partnership with NIU for STEM research
and diversity that we didn't get, and that was a long time ago,
but it--you know, knowing your university and also talking
about, you know, the role that the NSF plays, can we just
talk--can you give me some more thoughts, particularly from
your perch on exactly where the NSF dollars are useful?
Because--and maybe if you're at all able to do, just talk to us
a little bit about the basic research, you know, the original
curiosity lightbulb idea, tinkering around in the lab, and then
these phases to application if at all because a lot of times--
and for those of us who are funding, you know, we feel the
ferocity around--and the energy around, hey, obviously we like
basic research and, you know, you take a biology class or
chemistry and you can see all that, but, you know, we want the
innovations. We want the dominance in, you know, what goes to
market. And I think we tend to rush those things. I mean, even
with TRL, you know, technology readiness levels and things
along those lines, but can you--if you're able to--and I know
I'm not asking a super direct question, but I just want to get
this defined. And I asked this of our National Science
Foundation Director last week, Dr. Panchanathan. Define--if you
can, define for us basic research and then, you know, what
percentage or how that leads to the application.
Dr. Blazey. For me--thank you for the question,
Congresswoman Stevens, and interesting to hear that you
collaborated with NIU. So that's a great question. To me, basic
research is really curiosity-driven research where you're just
trying to understand new principles or new phenomena without
really a specific application. But they always lead to--they
almost always lead to important innovation and applications.
And a great example that you heard at the last testimony from
the Chair of the Board was studying microbes in the Yellowstone
thermal pools led to the test for coronavirus. Another great
example is studying bees and their behavior led to the bee
algorithm that is used in modern computing. So you have to be
sure you have that basic curiosity-driven research because it
inevitably leads to the innovation that we depend on decades
later, sometimes quicker.
What's most important for the students to feel like they
are participating in science or discovery because that's what
really jazzes them when they were involved in creating new
knowledge. And the best way to do that is to ensure that there
are cutting-edge programs in as many locations as you can. For
instance, we're standing up AI efforts all over the country.
It's really interesting to students. There's still a lot of a
lot of basic research involved, and providing those
opportunities at the locations the students live will really
get them involved and make a difference in their lives and in
our innovation ecosystem. I hope that----
Chairwoman Stevens. I've only got about 30 seconds left,
and it was--Gerry, it was Lori Clark who I worked with and Norm
Peterson, who's over at Argonne, so----
Dr. Blazey. OK.
Chairwoman Stevens [continuing]. I know that you know
those guys.
But could I just bring in Gabriela to this because what
side does Intel then end up grabbing on to any sort of basic
research endeavor that's taking place at the university?
Because you're a major--and thanks for talking about the IOT
and Industry 4.0 because leadership has been phenomenal and
we're really grateful for Intel.
Ms. Thompson. Thank you very much for your question. We
have about 1,000 people at Intel that are dedicated fundamental
researchers, and those are the researchers that are day-to-day
working with academics alongside those students that get the
lightbulb ideas. And then we try to test with them and explore
with them the possibilities of how it can be applied into our
manufacturing process technology or our new features in our new
products. It's an effort of thousands of students, thousands of
researchers at Intel. And then the great ideas, the good
results get turned into the development product teams. And it
might take 6 months to implement it in a product or it might
take a few years to implement it in a manufacturing process. So
some ideas might be cutting-edge and need a lot of time. Some
ideas are relatively easy and fast to implement and not only at
Intel but also in the ecosystem and other companies.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great, thank you. Thank you. That
was--and I know we got a bunch of talented Members here, and
we're going to go to Mr. Waltz for 5 minutes of questions now.
Thank you.
Mr. Waltz. Hey, thank you, Chairwoman.
Dr. Butler, can you spend a moment talking about how
Embry-Riddle works with the industry and particularly how they
work with industry partners to ensure students are trained in
the skills that are actually needed? I'd really like to hear
about your role in mentorships, internship programs, career
acceleration programs that really keep students focused. So if
you could talk to that.
And then if you could also give any recommendations on how
NSF can encourage institutions like yours to establish these
undergraduate research opportunities with industry?
Dr. Butler. Thank you, sir. Yes, I mean it really starts
with listening. And given the discipline that we're in,
principally aerospace technology, it's very fast-changing just
like the others on the Zoom today with--whether it's computing
or whatever. But--so you have to listen to industry. I mean,
that's where it starts.
So we have--like a lot of universities, we require
effectively all departments to have an industry advisory board,
and this means that they have members from industry who
regularly interact with the leadership in the units, the
departments. And that eventually gets filtered sort of
untranslated then into how do you make changes at the academic
level, curricular changes, maybe some experiential learning
opportunities, things like that. And so that's kind of that
feedback loop that you constantly have.
And I'll give you an example. We--at the university level
we have a meeting twice a year with leadership, academic
leadership and leadership from Boeing, for example. They're a
major--obviously, a major U.S. business in our area. We'll
spend an entire day just talking about what's new on our
horizon and what's new on their horizon and then how do you
sort of make those things connect, how do you work on the
curriculum, how do you do other things like that. So that's a
big one.
And so for us, you know, the career-oriented sort of STEM
type, you know, majors, they have a lot of stickiness. I think
I use that term, you know, with young people. They see it, they
kind of connect the calculus they're learning with the outcomes
that will eventually be perhaps aircraft design or something
like that, and so we try to kind of keep those connections
going as well.
And then industries, you know, the aerospace industry, you
know, provides incredible numbers of internships, and those
have to start early on. But that research back on campus while
they're there and while they're sitting in those classes and
learning all the chemistry and physics and math, having some
real-world research that they can be involved in is so valuable
because they can walk out of their chemistry class and go into
their research lab and figure out, hey, that's connecting the
dots there. And I think that's incredibly valuable for any of
those that are there. So, I mean, literally, those connections
between are very valuable.
Mr. Waltz. Dr. Butler, I only have a few minutes
remaining, but what recommendation do you have? How can NSF be
more helpful, and how can they encourage to establish these
connections with industry?
Dr. Butler. Yes, I mean, the--you know, being able to--you
know, I see three pieces to sort of very successful sort of
partnerships let's just say. It's industry because that's
where--that's the end of the line. That's the real-world
applications. That's where things have to continually evolve.
It's academia, as we've heard. That's where ideas are coming
out. That's where students are really thinking about their
futures. And then it's government. And that's the--where the
NSF and other types of agencies fit in there. And so being able
to identify I believe--this is my personal view--areas where
the three of those can work closely together is incredibly
valuable to the country. It's--it sort of complements the other
things we've heard about today.
Mr. Waltz. Right. And we've had conversations, too, about
the NSF CyberCorps scholarship I believe and how we can take a
different view of that.
Dr. Butler. Yes, I think--oh, I'm sorry, sure. I think
programs like that, you know, it's just keeping an eye on
what's out there in the world and sort of--you know, sometimes
not being aware that very basic research does touch a lot of
different industries and, as I mentioned earlier, for example,
the aerospace industry or something like that, that's critical
to the future of any leading industry in this country.
Mr. Waltz. And just in a few seconds I have remaining, if
you and Mr. Wakimoto, if you would be so kind, if you could
just submit something very short in writing, but what would the
value of training be for a lot of your researchers? You know,
we have the benefit of giving a lot of briefings and even
seeing intelligence on how the Chinese in particular but a
number of our adversaries are taking basic research and then
applying it to their militaries directly. I just want to--you
know, we get that here but not everybody gets that appreciation
out in the universities and in the academic research ecosystem.
And if we were able to authorize and appropriate more training
out for your folks, whether that would be helpful. Thank you,
Madam Chairwoman. I yield.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great, thank you. It was--that was
excellent. With that, we're going to turn over to Mr. Paul
Tonko from the great State of New York for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you there, Madam Chair. And I appreciate
the opportunity to continue the Subcommittee's discussion on
the future of the National Science Foundation and how we can
best support the Foundation's role in helping advance
innovative solutions to some of our most pressing challenges.
The CHIPS for America Act, which became law in last year's
National Defense Authorization Act, increases Federal support
for semiconductor manufacturing through new Federal incentives
to conduct advanced research and development of semiconductor
technology, secure supply chains, and strengthen national and
economic security by reducing our reliance on foreign
semiconductor manufacturing. I will point out that New York's
20th congressional District is home to a strong research and
innovation ecosystem ready to help propel the next wave of
microelectronics research, development, and manufacturing. And
I'm thrilled that many are eyeing Albany, New York, as a
potential location for the National Semiconductor Technology
Center that was authorized as part of the CHIPS Act.
Ms. Thompson, in your testimony you call on us to help
clarify the role of NSF in relation to the NSTC. Recognizing
that the NSTC was authorized to advance R&D on industry-defined
needs and challenges for semiconductors, how specifically would
you want NSF to partner with NSTC? Is there a direct
relationship that you think we can better define?
Ms. Thompson. We hope there is a direct relationship
because we believe the NSTC is going to serve as a testbed, as
a place where students, faculty, and industry, we will get
together there and we will tinker together. We will work in the
pressing challenges and innovations needed to move forward the
semiconductor industry. So yes, we believe that NSF and the
grants that NSF provides to faculty, to students are going to
be the basis and the human capital that will be part of the
people that will be at the NSTC. And we encourage and would
like to see rotations, rotations of professors into the NSTC,
rotations of students, as well as rotation of industry, people
in that NSTC as a convener of all people, all the community.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And is there any kind of authorizing
language that you can imagine would be the most empowering that
would assist in that effort?
Ms. Thompson. I think calling out the role of NSF is very
important, and we can definitely provide some language--we can
follow up with your office and provide some language suggesting
for the bill.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And how else can this Committee help
bolster NSF's role in microelectronics research?
Ms. Thompson. Well, a very interesting and good program
that NSF has is the Convergence Accelerator. We have one team
member, one person at Intel that is part of a Convergence
Accelerator cohort going on right now. We believe that that
Convergence Accelerator could be the vehicle to convene
industry and academics together and fund them. That Convergence
Accelerator provides about $5 million for the phase 2 projects.
We believe in semiconductors. The funding necessary might be
larger than $5 million to really get at very impactful projects
between academics and industry.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And, you know, I'm excited about the
opportunity to help enable NSF to continue to evolve by
establishing a new directorate. As is often the case in a major
push for progress, the younger generation will play a critical
role. So graduate students and postdoctoral researchers,
including many in New York's capital region, are on the
cutting-edge of cross-sector collaboration and solutions-driven
research, and I believe the success of this new directorate
will depend greatly on the contributions of enterprising early
career researchers.
Dr. Blazey, in your testimony you propose a reformulation
or expansion of the Graduate Research Fellowship Program to
ensure students receive cross-disciplinary training. Can you
give us more info, background on that thinking?
Dr. Blazey. Sure. Thank you for the question. Well, all
the way back to my days at OSTP it was very clear that we were
educating mostly academics for--in the universities and that
the students--about half of them were going into industry, and
the students were rather ill-prepared for basic things like
project management, rigorous safety training, things like
hazard awareness analysis, team building, and it strikes me
that this will become even more important when we have a
directorate for science and engineering solutions where the
intention is for them to move into industry, help
commercialize--build solutions to some of our societal
problems. And so I think it's even more important that we give
them what some call the softer skills but the ability to work
in those--in the non-academic environments. So I think what NSF
needs to do--and I'm sure they're considering this--is they
have to reformulate what traineeships look like with this new
directorate.
Mr. Tonko. Great. Thank you so much. With that, I'll yield
back, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Chairwoman Stevens. All right. Great questions. And with
that, we'll turn it over to--oh, and also, I wanted to remind
my friend Mr. Tonko where I sit here today in Livonia,
Michigan, is around the corner from Infineon, a great chips
manufacturer. So Michigan also has something to do on these
semiconductors, OK. You know, I know that, you know--
[inaudible] myself. We're doing chips here, too, so--but with
that, we'll turn it over to Mr. Lucas for 5 minutes of
questions. Thanks, all.
Mr. Lucas. And as always, Chairwoman Stevens, you are
enthusiastic, and I appreciate that.
Dr. Wakimoto, as we know, China is making substantial
investments in R&D, and it's expected to pass the United States
soon in total R&D spending. As I mentioned in my opening
statement, I believe we need to focus on what makes the U.S.
research system work, not trying to copy another country's
playbook. What do you think has made the U.S. ecosystem when it
comes to scientific research successful and should be
protected? And along with that, what areas do you think that we
are in need of improvement on? And I know sometimes we ask what
seem to be rhetorical questions, repetitive, but nonetheless,
we're establishing a record in creating a discussion here. So,
Doctor?
Dr. Wakimoto. Well, yes, it is somewhat rhetorical because
NSF is a shining example of investment into basic research,
which everyone here on the Committee knows of many examples
where that has worked so well. But, as the Committee has
already rightfully written into the NSF for the Future Act,
it's use-inspired research. You know, I think it really comes
to the very heart of a public university at least--and then I
would also say private universities. We sort of lost our way a
little bit and need to really ratchet up our game.
I will share with you this APLU (Association of Public and
Land-Grant Universities)--I don't know if you can see this
really well but there's an APLU document that's entitled
``Public Impact Research,'' so it's been endorsed by all of
APLU. It is essentially use-inspired research, and I really
would like to share this with the Committee because I think it
does a wonderful job why the universities have to rally
together and in some sense sets the background for a solutions
directorate for NSF.
I think some of the cautions that I would put out there
because I'm very excited, but you sort of danced around some of
them. Some use-inspired research and technology-driven
solutions are quick turnaround, and I applaud that. Sometimes
we need solutions right away. But some use-inspired research is
very similar in timescale with basic research. It could take
years. Even though you know where you want to go, it could take
years to go there, so I'm a little worried about what the NSF
Director said, speed and scale. I love scale. Speed maybe for a
good fraction but I'm not sure for everything. If we have
everything at NSF just quick turnaround, I think that could
change the DNA a little bit that I would be concerned about.
The only other caution I would say with universities
because I know I don't have a lot of time is that we also have
to change. I think some of our P&T, promotion and tenure
process, tends to bias it toward basic research, and sometimes
even institutions like ours we don't give the recognition to
faculty and students that are doing the use-inspired research,
and that's on us. I think we need to fundamentally change and I
think they are, slowly. So I hope that helps.
Mr. Lucas. Absolutely. And my next question to you,
Doctor, also but, Dr. Farooque, if you'd like to comment, can
you both address this issue of long-term, sustainable funding?
Why is stable funding important to basic research, and what
damage can, you know, volatile funding patterns do to the
research enterprise, again, making and reinforcing here the
fundamental principles we need to remember as we legislate?
Dr. Wakimoto. Yes, I'll just take a quick stab at this. I
mean, I am such a strong proponent of knowing what the funding
is going to be for several years. I'd rather know that rather
than have a huge infusion in year one and then have a
precipitous drop after that. I think there are examples that
you can point at NIH (National Institutes of Health) where they
tried a doubling and they ramped up quickly and then it fell
off a cliff, and that left a lot of researchers who had ramped
up operations sort of grasping as to what the next step was, so
anything that's predictable, stable is guaranteed to pay off
big time.
Mr. Lucas. Dr. Farooque, any thoughts on that?
Dr. Farooque. Yes. Thank you. I think that there's a lot
of lessons to be learned by looking at what we did in dealing
with Japan, meaning like we also actually studied their
innovation systems, so we could be strategic in terms of, you
know, our not brute force and ignorance. You know, we don't
need to copy. It's not a matter of putting more money in, but
it's trying to understand what is their advantage. It's right
now--you know, NSF had the science--the science and innovations
policy program, which is supposed to study this kind of thing
that John Marburger started during his tenure at the White
House. I think we need to actually also equally study because
by the 1980's we actually knew what was Japan's strength. You
know, how they were organizing and what we needed to do to make
sure our interests were protected. So I would also encourage
the social science research that looks into the innovation
systems and innovation policies [inaudible].
Mr. Lucas. Thank you both and thank you to the entire
panel. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Stevens. Right. With that, we're going to turn
over to Congresswoman Gwen Moore from Wisconsin, another Great
Lakes State, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. And again, I am
so excited about all of our witnesses here today. And of course
it's just like a big, huge classroom where you learn so much.
I have a couple of questions and I hope that 5 minutes
will be long enough. I want to talk about where I'm from. I'm
from Milwaukee, Wisconsin. It's right on Lake Michigan. And of
course Lake Michigan is my favorite thing that's a constituent
of mine, not a human being is Lake Michigan. And then of course
Lake Michigan is the only Great Lake entirely enclosed within
the United States, so I think we have a great stewardship over
it. But that being said, the Great Lakes of course provide 84
percent of the fresh surface water in North America and 21
percent of all the fresh water in the world. It is a very
precious resource.
And so, Dr. Farooque, I was interested, outside of the
nexus between energy and water, what can the National Science
Foundation do to help us? You know, there's this old African
proverb that says water has no enemies. You know, you would
never know that when you think of all the people who want to
pollute it, who don't care for the conservation of it. And, you
know, literally in this region we formed a water council.
Students at University of Wisconsin--Milwaukee and Whitewater
are studying how to get rid of invasive species, and I was
wondering if--what can NSF do directly to help water-based
technologies?
And then I want to follow up with a question of Dr.
Blazey, very distressing testimony about STEM--about people of
color not having exposure to STEM education, wanting to know
what you think legislatively we could do to turn that around.
Thank you.
Dr. Farooque. Thank you for that question. And actually,
you know, it's important for us to remember that it's--we
always talk about high end, the new, shining objects, and, you
know--but we shouldn't actually forget about our problems at
the community level and the need for the National Science
Foundation to not neglect them.
So in terms of water, you know, I--my specialty is in
public engagement and community engagement, and we did a
project in--under the program called Public Interest
Technology. And we looked at trying to team up universities and
nonprofits to look at their problems, to engage the community.
And in Waco, Texas, the Baylor University looked at engaging
their whole community, you know, into trying to first frame the
problem because when we talk about use-inspired science, the
first important step is to involve the stakeholders who are at
the ground and community level, and we have not--as I mentioned
in my testimony, not start with what is the most interesting
research question because those problems helps us ground our
science to reality. And then we can bring--and then we can step
back and bring the best science that answers those questions.
You know, same thing in the question about, you know, lead
in our water or what happened in Flint, Michigan. We can--we
actually need to work with the community in identifying these
problems that are not addressed and then bring in our
scientists and our expertise to help address them. Thank you.
Dr. Blazey. OK. Thank you, Congresswoman Moore, for the
question. Should I answer now or did you have a follow-up? OK.
It's a great question, and we've thought about this for a
while. And the basic strategy or principle that we--would be
most effective is to bring the opportunity where the students
are. For a lot of reasons, underrepresented minorities are sort
of geographically bound. There's financial reasons, there's
family obligations, and so they just can't up and go to a
different university to pursue these opportunities. So we need
to bring the opportunities to them.
And that's where this partnership model makes the most
sense to me because you just can't out of whole cloth start new
opportunities at institutions that are emerging in their
research profiles. So having--I mentioned AI earlier. Having a
partnership with some university that has tremendous resources
for AI or quantum information systems to partner with these
regional or comprehensive universities to be sure that there's
some opportunity for the students that are geographically
bound.
And that's why I like the partnership section in the bill.
As Dr. Wakimoto mentioned, it could go farther, and I think
that's sort of a debate that the Committee should have,
Subcommittee should have on what the right level motion forward
should be.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much. And maybe start a little bit
earlier finding students rather than when they get into
college.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. Thank you. That was
fabulous. And speaking of geography, our Members are mostly in
the Eastern Standard Time Zones. Ms. Moore is Central. Next
Members are so going to be in the Central Time Zone, but we've
got a couple of our witnesses who tuned in from Arizona and
California. I've been meaning to recognize your earlier hour
than the--you know, you really were a good morning. It wasn't
brutal, but, you know, 8 a.m. for you was, you know, a nice
time to start.
So with that, we're going to go to Mr. Gonzalez, also in
the Eastern Standard Time zone, Ohio just south of me here in
Michigan, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking
Member Waltz, for holding this timely hearing today to continue
our discussion about the important role that NSF plays in our
research economy. As we examine the most productive and
effective avenues for not only reauthorizing but also
strengthening NSF, our witnesses have provided some incredibly
valuable perspective, and so I do want to thank you for that.
That's what we need in these hearings. That's why they're
productive.
So I'll start with Director Thompson. Many of our
witnesses discuss the importance of tying NSF research and
science in general to addressing societal challenges and trends
that are evident in the tech industry today. Could you speak a
bit more about the importance of having NSF become more
involved in this space? And how important is this focus for
industry researchers, and how do you see it playing out?
Ms. Thompson. Thank you, Congressman Gonzalez, for the
question. We see NSF's reach and scale as very important and
significant. A company and a group like mine at Intel, we are
only a few people. We can only reach so far. And of course most
of us are located in the West Coast, so the first place we go
is our community colleges, our universities near home, which
Intel has many sites, but still, the reach of NSF across the
country, the bringing together different tier of education
institutions, it's something that is really needed. It's
something that will bring many others into high-tech or into
STEM education, and that's why we believe working and
collaborating with NSF is very important.
Mr. Gonzalez. Great. And then to open up the same question
to our university witnesses, how can the new directorate for
science and engineering solutions position that is proposed by
the NSF for the Future Act provide a benefit to university
researchers? Feel free to jump in, whoever wants to take it.
Dr. Wakimoto. Well, I mean, I guess the obvious answer
just by creating this new directorate, I mean, I know I've been
incredibly excited. This creates an opportunity that just
wasn't there in the past, so I think at the highest level
that's how I would answer.
Dr. Butler. I can jump in. I would add, sir, that, you
know, there are industries where the line between basic
fundamental research and end products is really short. In other
words, you know, the fundamental mission, basic research, at
NSF often takes decades to evolve into usable technology, but
there's industries where it happens really fast. And so the
ability to have, I think, a directorate that allows that--to
recognize that to know that there is a fine--shortened time
between basic research and applied applications is--I think is
pretty good. I think it will help a lot--help the country a
lot.
Mr. Gonzalez. Great. And then, Dr. Blazey, I was curious
if you'd weigh in on this as well as you provided a word of
caution in your testimony on this new directorate pivoting NSF
from its mission of basic research. Could you maybe sort of
take the other side of the coin and just get your perspective
out a little bit more?
Dr. Blazey. Well, thank you for the question, Congressman
Gonzalez. So, first of all, I think the main way--a main way it
will help the researcher community is because it's by nature
interdisciplinary, and many of the problems we're facing are
called wicked problems, kind of term of art in the research
community, and having a directorate that can cross directorates
and pull together expertise and resources for these
interdisciplinary problems will really make a difference.
My concern is that if the stress--if--is on moving things
quickly into the innovation phase, it's already sort of giving
the very large research universities a head start because they
have really deep and impressive and valuable intellectual
property already at their command, and they can just get a--
start moving faster in innovation, and there's nothing wrong
with that. I think we should all be proud that we have that
kind of capability at the large universities. There's just--my
caution is that it's something else that will sort of
concentrate research opportunity at the few schools.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. I think that's a fair concern. And I
appreciate you voicing that. And I'll yield back, and thank
you, Madam Chair, for holding this hearing and keeping us on
time.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great yes, excellent. And I'll just
mention briefly before I introduce our next Member for
questions, our Ranking Member Mr. Waltz has to depart at 12:30.
Rest assured to our witnesses and our fellow questioners he
will be reading through the testimony, OK? So--just because we
don't have him sitting in his beautiful palm tree box that he's
in from Florida, you know, but thank you, Mr. Waltz, for your
leadership.
And with that, just allow me to take a minute to introduce
Dr. Foster, who is also a Chair of the Subcommittee on Science
on Oversight and is just a brilliant and wonderful mind to have
on this Committee with us. So with that, Dr. Foster, 5 minutes
of questions for you from Illinois.
Mr. Foster. Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and to our
witnesses.
You know, the last line of questioning was talking about
how you deal with this transition from basic to applied. You
know, there already exists inside the different directorates of
the NSF the complete pipeline, you know, all the way through
SBIRs and commercialization. And so as at least some of you
have been recipients of grants not only from the NSF but if I
recall properly I think Gerry has probably been on the
receiving end of everything from DOD to a long list of things,
and so these are handled differently. But do you envisage that
if we stand up a new a directorate that's focused on applied
solutions, that what would happen is that if you have a grant
under the--say, the mathematics and physical science
directorate that you would then when you had a bright idea that
looks like it was more applied, that then you would transition
your grant to this other directorate and have to make friends
with a whole new set of grant supervisors in a different
directorate and then when you decided that, OK, there was now a
startup business behind us, you would transfer it to a third
organization? And is that going to cause grief if you have--you
sort of stovepipe the different development levels instead of
incorporating them in each intellectual area? I guess, Gerry,
do you want to take a swing at that?
Dr. Blazey. Yes, Congressman Foster, I think that it won't
be as sharp as that. I think, as you know, faculty have
multiple inquiries going sometimes, and sometimes they'll be
taking something--they'll see an opportunity to take something
to market and that could be an independent funding stream from
their basic research. So I think it's less stark and less well-
defined. I think an organizational issue will be how to
coordinate that continued support for basic research and that
funding to move things into the innovation ecosystem. And I
think that will require careful thought and planning on the
part of the NSF.
Mr. Foster. Yes. And I'd also mention it happens already
between different agencies right now. They have to spend a lot
of their time, you know, deconflicting, you know, efforts from
where you have parallel efforts, some of which are very
valuable.
Another issue that we're going have to deal with is the
issue of big science. There are places in science where there's
no alternative to have big, centralized facilities to be
competitive. You know, Gerry placed his career where it was
because he was within--Northern Illinois University is within
driving distance of a large DOE-sponsored national laboratory
with unique capabilities that didn't exist anywhere else.
Similarly, if you talk about, say, an integrated circuit
device development, you know, you're going to have to provide
for many purposes access to a state-of-the-art fab. It is not
reasonable for a university with some bright idea to go build
their own fab. And so--and one of the challenges there is that
they're actually under the control of industry and trying to
understand how to make it worth industry's time to open up
their facilities.
You know, I had a sort of not very encouraging experience
a little while ago. Argonne Lab recently has--you know, one of
the neat things they did was to deploy Cerebras 1 if I
remember, which is a wafer-scale AI computer, the first truly
transistor computer and just a phenomenal thing, and then I
asked the CEO (chief executive officer) when they had the
celebration, oh, who did the wafer fab for that wafer-scale
computer, and it was an offshore company. And it sort of broke
my heart. I said, well, what happens when you contacted the
American companies and they didn't--they weren't interested
because of--for whatever reason?
I was wondering, you know, Ms. Thompson, you know, what
are the things that we can do, you know, not only for basic
research but also for startups to handle this conundrum of how
we make it worth your time to do something that would not
otherwise be worth your time and share your state-of-the-art
resources?
Ms. Thompson. Yes, thank you very much for your question,
Congressman Foster, and I really appreciate the opportunity to
talk about this. Intel has had a small program called the
University Shuttle Program in which we get to manufacture
foundries, silicon for universities. It's a relatively small
program. It's something that we're looking forward to
expanding. And, as you've heard from our CEO, the investments
in R&D are growing, and so we expect that we will be able to
support more of these prototypes that get designed and built by
students and professors.
Mr. Foster. Yes. Well, for many years NSF funded something
that was called MOSES (Measurement Methodology of Scalable
Enterprise Systems)----
Ms. Thompson. Yes.
Mr. Foster [continuing]. Which I was very happy to
participate in. And I think a lot of people with my amount of
baldness remembered fondly that. And it's a very effective
thing, and it's one of--I think one of the tragedies and
actually maybe even one of the reasons that the chip industry
is in trouble right now is that we didn't prioritize that and
weren't generous enough with making it worth your time.
Ms. Thompson. And if I may add, this is why we are so
interested in ensuring that there is a very clear link between
the NSF and the NSTC because we see this as two pieces of a
very important puzzle. And we would be happy to provide more
language suggesting how to document the engagement between the
two.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. I'm over time and yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes, well, we'll take you up on that
documentation.
But with that, let me turn it over to my colleague Dr. Jim
Baird, also a research scientist in his own right representing
Indiana and that other university, maybe called Purdue. All
right. Dr. Baird, over to you.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, and I appreciate
your enthusiasm. And I also appreciate Ranking Member Waltz for
conducting this hearing here today. And I always learn
something in these Science Committees, and the talents and
skills of our witnesses are very impressive.
But as Representative Stevens mentioned, I am fortunate to
have an outstanding research and STEM-focused university like
Purdue University in my district, and they work extremely well
with NSF. But about 29 percent of our GDP (gross domestic
product) in Indiana comes from manufacturing, small-business
manufacturing, and so I'm really interested--Ms. Thompson, I
think I'll start with you--could you please discuss what kind
of technology training can be conducted through the 2-year
program? And please share your thoughts on how the NSF might be
able to help support those efforts? That's my first question.
Ms. Thompson. Thank you, Congressman. Thank you for this
question. We at Intel have been partnering with 2-year colleges
for many, many years. We recently have announced an engagement
with community colleges to create a degree in artificial
intelligence, so the first associate degree for community
colleges. We have been working with the Maricopa Community
College system, and we are hopefully targeting about 20
colleges to be part of this program in which students are able
to learn the basics of artificial intelligence and get a degree
on AI. With the possibility of working with NSF, we would be
able to scale to much further reach and in more regions of the
country, and that's why partnering with NSF is paramount to us.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Would any of the university
witnesses care to respond to that relationship with the junior
colleges?
Dr. Butler. Yes, this is----
Mr. Baird. So----
Dr. Butler. I'm sorry.
Mr. Baird. Go ahead.
Dr. Butler. I'll just be brief. This is Barry Butler at
Embry-Riddle. Yes, I agree. I think, you know, the--most all of
us do have partnerships of some kind with community colleges.
In our case we focus a lot with those that have a discipline-
specific, you know, that are, you know, similar to what we're
focusing in aerospace. The programs are good, and I think it
just addresses that issue that, you know, we do have a lot of
people in this country that start their education that way,
and, you know, to bring them in to other universities, whether
it's through partnerships, whether it's through transition
programs is really opening up the--sort of the funnel for
talent, and I think that's so critical. How it's done with the
different types of programs, it varies from school to school,
but I just think there's so much talent out there that we just
have to address it all and not assume that everybody that's
going to be in the STEM workforce of the future starts a 4-year
program at a name university. That's just not the way it is.
Dr. Blazey. Yes, Congressman Baird, I'll just chime in. As
I stated in our testimony, about 50 percent of our students are
transfer students from the local community colleges in
Illinois, very important for them to transfer into a university
to finish their 4-year degree for--again, as I mentioned
earlier, they're geographically and financially bound, and this
is an important opportunity to start broadening the STEM
opportunities with those students as well.
Mr. Baird. You know, an observation that I would make in
our district, sometimes the opportunities you have in those
junior colleges or 2-year programs, they may not have the funds
or the interest to go to a 4-year immediately, but the fact
that they get into those schools and get a hands-on experience,
all of a sudden their curiosity, it stimulates them to want to
go further. And when you get a student like that that gets
committed, I think it's very insightful and helpful for them to
want to go on to advanced degrees and get involved in STEM per
se. If you tell them it's STEM at the beginning, they might not
be excited, but you get them in a lab and get them
experienced--or get them hands-on experience, then suddenly the
ballgame changes.
So I think my time is about up, and so I appreciate
Congresswoman Stevens. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. Thank you for that, Dr. Baird.
I think that was so spot on and so important for us to think
through. And I had to spend a summer at community college. I
got the privilege to spend a summer at a community college, and
it was--I connected right into those assets and it was quite
transformative right here in southeastern Michigan.
But we've got a really special Member of Congress who's up
next, freshman Member, Congresswoman Deb Ross from North
Carolina for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and thank
you so much to everybody who's testified today on this crucial,
crucial issue.
I represent the 2d District in North Carolina, which is
the Research Triangle area, and we are a very STEM-focused
area. As a matter of fact, yesterday, I was the special guest
for a STEM charter school that drew people from several
municipalities, several counties, and, let me tell you, the
diversity of the young women at that charter school was
something to behold.
But I have North Carolina State University in my district,
land-grant, STEM university that gets a fair amount of money
from the National Science Foundation and is doing really,
really well. I was with them and the second gentleman and the
Secretary of Transportation last week seeing all the amazing
work that they're doing in engineering and other areas.
I also represent two HBCUs that used to have medical
schools. And they very much want to be able to benefit from
research funding and offer more STEM to their students. But
both Presidents of these HBCUs, Shaw and St. Aug's, said that
they simply do not have some of the infrastructure and the
equipment to do that kind of research.
And so I'll direct this first to Dr. Blazey and then
anybody else who wants to pipe in. How can NSF help with that--
just the capacity building? Because the talent and the students
and the desire are all there.
Dr. Blazey. Yes, thank you for that question,
Congresswoman Ross. Well, it gets back to that partnership to
build the intellectual capacity. It's not enough for students
just to visit, and it takes time for the faculty to learn the
technology and the intellectual aspects of a new topic. So one
way is fellowships with the already-established universities,
and then those individuals, those faculty members, though
scientists can take back that expertise back to their school.
And these days, the partnership can be virtual, so--but I think
really a partnership to get the intellectual expertise.
Infrastructure is a problem for emerging research
institutions. NSF does have a program, major research
instrumentation program and medium scale, and I think the
answer is to increase the funding for those programs, which is
in the bill, but to be mindful of how those resources are
distributed to broaden research opportunity.
Ms. Ross. OK. I also have a question for Dr. Farooque. At
NC State, which gets a fair amount of NSF funding,
international students make up 35 percent of their graduate
student population. As a matter of fact, my husband got his
graduate degree in engineering there, and he said he was one of
the only U.S. citizens in his graduate program. And--but we
need all of these graduate students for the research that we do
here. And in your testimony you talked about how, in your
words, you were an early contributor to the leaky pipeline
problem in STEM. How can we be more inviting of those graduate
students? I also serve on the Judiciary Committee, and we're
dealing with some necessary changes, I hope, to our immigration
laws. But tell me how you think we can keep this talent here in
the United States after we've educated these wonderful people?
Dr. Farooque. Well, thank you for that question. The STEM
problem, that leaky pipeline problem that in my time is
actually very different from the STEM problem that we are
seeing now. For instance, you know, I have a student who
graduated from Carnegie Mellon University in computer science,
and he worked or interned with Apple, interned with DARPA, and
he is now doing--touring with bands to do their sound system
because he just does not find what our big tech is doing as--it
doesn't agree with his moral or ethical positions.
So a lot of--there's a lot of concerns that--about big
tech that fresh graduates, they're feeling, and that's why
there's a network of 31 universities called Public Interest
Technology University Network that the New America Foundation
started and my institution is a part of. They're trying to
address this gap that, you know, our technology is obviously
meeting our market needs but not addressing our societal values
so that, you know, we can retain because the nonprofit sector
is not big enough for these talents.
Now, in terms of retaining students, the competition
abroad is very different now because there's a lot of places, a
lot of options to go for people. So we need to be actually
trying to draw our home--talent here at home as much as we can.
And to go back to the question about HBCUs and create--and
also the previous question about community college, we need to
give them an infrastructure to participate. You know, when I
was at the University of New York, which also has a group of
community colleges, we had a two-tiered granting program where
the community colleges competed with community colleges because
what happens and--when they come in and big grants, the large
universities dominate and they don't have any opportunity to
participate.
When I was at Purdue University, I was part of a
University Transportation Center. We had members of Martin
University, for example, in Indianapolis. They just did not--
could not participate in any of the activities or any of the
research projects we were doing. So it's kind of bringing also
an equity in the system for the--for these--also part of our
R&D system for them to participate because they're going to
become very, very important as we make this transition, as the
point made earlier about 2-year colleges as we transition.
People are not going to go back and get a 4-year degree. And
this will be their quickest way to a change in career, the
future of work and so forth. So I think NSF can pay attention
to that and look at examples that are around.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, and I've exceeded my time,
Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you so much. All right.
And with that, we're--we've got two more Members for
questions. Our next Member is from Kansas, new Member of
Congress, freshman who's also on the Homeland Security,
Cybersecurity, and Innovation Subcommittee, great, you know,
background I think from both Committees to have on our
Subcommittee, also political background, so always like it when
people who have dedicated themselves to running for office want
to be on the Science Committee.
So with that, Mr. LaTurner for 5 minutes of questions, and
thank you again, Deb Ross. Mr. LaTurner, it's your turn.
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member,
for holding this hearing today. I appreciate the testimony of
our witnesses on the role that National Science Foundation
plays in furthering our research, development, and innovation
efforts in this country, and I believe it's an important
component in maintaining leadership in the worldwide and
scientific community. By emphasizing the ideas of a strong STEM
workforce and robust public-private partnership, America will
continue to be the top scientific leader in the world.
This question is for all of you. We've heard a lot about
the importance of accountability to public needs as it relates
to research and development. Can you explain how each of your
institutions or company engage with community partners as you
develop your R&D agendas?
Dr. Butler. I guess I can start.
Mr. LaTurner. You can jump in. Yes, go ahead, please.
Dr. Butler. I'll go ahead and jump in. Yes, so I'm in
the--primarily in the aerospace industry, so our--you know, our
community--so our community so to speak is--it really is across
the whole country, but when we look at sort of locally, we look
at it from a point of view of engaging the--both the State as
well as the local community in terms of what's--what are their
key priorities in our case in terms of economic development,
and so we're closely attuned with them. We know that bringing
aerospace industry around our university, which is what we're
doing through our research park quite successfully I think,
helps the community in terms of its--basically its economic
status. It elevates the level of earnings in the community and
provides additional opportunities for people around it. So we
kind of view ourselves in that way with our local community.
Dr. Wakimoto. Yes, I would add that there are two
mechanisms we use at UCLA. One is a number of our schools and
units have advisory committees with community members on there.
Another place where we really interact primarily with industry
is our tech transfer and development unit where we are strongly
engaged with industries, whether they're medical, whether
they're engineering, et cetera because they guide us in terms
of where we need to focus our efforts. And they help us
actually make decisions about what research is the ones that we
should actually transition for public use.
Ms. Thompson. At Intel we engage with different community
members. We definitely engage with the top-tier universities,
the top-tier research universities, also with our local
universities, our local community colleges, and our local
education K through 12 systems. And, as you can imagine, as
employees, we also volunteer a lot of hours, last year close to
a million hours were volunteered. And since we we're mostly
engineers, we're volunteering in programs to advance STEM at
all levels of the educational system in the regions where we
are located.
Dr. Farooque. I'm a----
Dr. Blazey. Yes----
Dr. Farooque. Oh, go ahead.
Dr. Blazey. Go ahead, Mahmud, please.
Dr. Farooque. Thank you. I was going to say that social
embeddedness is part of our university charter at Arizona State
University, so we take--we pride it very strongly, and it is
also part of our incentive system.
The other thing I would mention about working with the
communities, the National Science Foundation had created a
network of science museums called the National STEM Education
Networks that's over 400 museums all over the country. And
those community--they are community organizations that can work
to bring citizens and nontraditional participants into the STEM
process. So I think that's a tremendous resource that National
Science Foundation has created that can be used to engage not
only the public but also community organizations. And we had a
funded project from NOAA where we worked on climate change
resilience where we worked with science museums in 20 different
cities, and they worked with the local planners and resilience
planners and their plans. So there is a way--there's already a
network, and we should leverage it. Thank you.
Dr. Blazey. So at NIU, engaging with the local community
is very much in our DNA. As Dr. Wakimoto mentioned, we have
advisory boards, and they're all seven colleges. We actually
focus on it quite extensively. We have a division for outreach,
engagement, and regional development, and we consult, work
with, assist the communities across the State in northern
Illinois with that division.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate it very much. Madam Chair, my
time is running out. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great, thank you.
And with that, we're going to turn to our last Member of
Congress for questions, very significant to have Mr. Don Beyer
on this Committee. His home base is the NSF. He's very
dedicated to this agency, and we look forward to hearing his
questions. And with that, Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Madam Chair, thank you very much. You know, I
have a particular parochial interest because the National
Science Foundation is about 5 blocks from my house, and I've
been good friends with the last two Directors. And it's been
great to have these 2 hours of affirmation of the National
Science Foundation in our life.
But anticipating a debate that's coming up, let me push
back on a couple of witnesses, first for Dr. Cruz Ms. Thompson.
I was on the call with our Chairlady sometime earlier with the
President of a major university who pointed out that there was
no equivalent to the Bell Labs in our country today, no huge
university or business investing money in use design,
application design stuff, and that the National Science
Foundation was essentially failing in its lack of emphasis on
things that were to be used. For example, he said that the
National Science Foundation today would never have funded the
development of chips or integrated circuits or things like that
because there wasn't basic research, rather there was a company
trying to find some way to replace vacuum tubes. Especially now
with the--this National Science Foundation for the Future, how
do you respond to that criticism? Does the National Science
Foundation--do they or can they play a meaningful role in
actual use-based rather than curiosity-based investments?
Ms. Thompson. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. I
can tell you from my experience I have been working close in
partnership with the NSF for the last 3 years, especially with
the science directorate, and I can attest for a very important
prioritization of collaborating in use-inspired science and in
use-inspired applications of research. I think the example of
the Convergence Accelerator is one. The example of last week's
announcements of three U.S. agencies plus nine companies
working together to advance resilient and intelligent next-G,
basically the fundamentals of the 6G programs show you that the
NSF is poised to do it. Perhaps what it needs is more funding.
Mr. Beyer. So that's a great pivot. And so, Dr. Wakimoto,
the fiscal year 2021 NSF budget is about $8 billion. Under this
new NSF for the Future Act, it will double in 4 years to $16
billion. Is that too much money to quickly? Will you have good
money chasing bad projects?
Dr. Wakimoto. I actually don't think it's too much too
quickly because a large fraction of that money goes into the
new directorate. If you actually look at the RRA (Research and
Related Activities) budget minus the new directorate, it's 6
percent increase over that timeframe, which is, you know, a
healthy increase but it's not like an enormous infusion into
the other basic science directorates.
Mr. Beyer. So, Dr. Blazey--thank you, Dr. Wakimoto. Dr.
Blazey, the Endless Frontier Act, which is sort of I think fair
to say the alternative to this NSF for the Future talks about
Congress deciding on 10 key emerging technologies for their new
directorate for technology and innovation. Should Congress be
deciding what the emerging technologies are or will be for a
10-year period of time?
Dr. Blazey. Well, first of all, I'll say that most of
those technologies they have listed are appropriate, but I do
think that the NSF should be allowed to decide how to--which to
pursue and at what level.
Mr. Beyer. So let me ask the same question about money,
too, Dr. Blazey, because Endless Frontier Act has $100 billion
over 5 years in this new directorate for technology and
innovation. Is that too much money too fast?
Dr. Blazey. I think it's difficult to spend that much
money that fast, and I think a ramp-up would be more
appropriate. And also I think one has to be very careful, as we
said earlier before. We have to do no harm to the basic
mission, and so I think that has to be balanced with the growth
and the ramp-up of the money.
Mr. Beyer. Very cool. Thank you very much. And, Dr.
Farooque, one last question. The Endless Frontier Act also
talks about testbeds, and I find that many of my peers are
excited about getting money out of Cambridge and Berkeley and,
you know, the handful of places where it goes. Is there
something NSF could also be doing independently of Endless
Frontiers?
Dr. Farooque. Well, my personal view is that other
agencies are better positioned to do that than the National
Science Foundation because it will be asking for too much of a
transition that is not in its core mission, so--and for that
kind of money, it might not be used as well as could--it can.
The other thing--concern about that kind of level of investment
is the absorptive capacity. I don't think we have that kind of
workforce to absorb that amount of money so quickly.
Mr. Beyer. Madam Chair, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great, thank you.
Before we bring this hearing to a close, we're just going
to thank our witnesses again for participating in today's
hearing. The record is going to remain open for 2 weeks for
additional statements and questions that Committee Members may
ask of our witnesses.
And just as a reminder, today's hearing is called ''The
National Science Foundation: Advancing Research for the Future
of U.S. Innovation, Part II,'' part two. So we're in a series.
You know, it's kind of like, you know, these sci-fi films where
they're so massive and it's such a complex thing and we did one
last week, now we had part two, and we're going to continue to
dive in. But rest assured, as Mr. Beyer just so nicely
positioned us, we will be coming back to the record for your--
for what you've given us today. This is going to be a part of
how we move forward.
And the great thing about our government and these
branches of government is, you know, we have got a process for
passing and shaping the Nation's laws. A lot of times that
process frustrates people because we don't get things done. But
right now on this Committee we have a track record of getting
done and doing and delivering. And frankly, this is where you
achieve unity.
You know, I think I said bipartisan at the beginning of
this hearing. But if you listen to what we are asking and
talking and engaging with all of you on, you know, the U.S.
scientific research enterprise, American innovation,
competitiveness, engaging in our communities and leaving no one
behind, those are the things that bring everyone together.
That's how we say it's positioned and united and committed to
delivering a real solution and an agenda forward.
Now, we aren't the appropriators on this Committee, you
know, but we are going to be making a very serious
recommendation through our authorizing to the appropriators
about what we want to do. And we know we have a President
finally--you know, a President who wants to, you know, spend a
little bit, you know, but--and that's no offense, but he's
really committed to the investing here because the ROI (return
on investment) is also there.
So, you know, it's a beautiful country, and it's so many
great comments and questions here, and so I imagine I'd be
expecting some things for the record here. I'll just keep our
witnesses on alert. But the 2 hours you've given us this
morning and into the afternoon for those of us in the time
zones that slipped into the afternoon are greatly appreciated.
And with that, we're going to excuse the witnesses. The
hearing will now be adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:02 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Roger M. Wakimoto
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Gerald Blazey
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Report submitted by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
