- A REVIEW OF THE DECADAL STRATEGY FOR PLANETARY SCIENCE AND ASTROBIOLOGY 2023 2032

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW OF THE DECADAL STRATEGY
FOR PLANETARY SCIENCE
AND ASTROBIOLOGY 2023 2032

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 26, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-59

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-613 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. DON BEYER, Virginia, Chairman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              BRIAN BABIN, Texas,
AMI BERA, California                     Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MO BROOKS, Alabama
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BILL POSEY, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          YOUNG KIM, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

May 26, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Don Beyer, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    14

Witnesses:

Dr. Robin M. Canup, Co-Chair, Steering Group, Committee on the
Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey, National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Assistant
Vice President, Planetary Science Directorate, Southwest
Research Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Philip R. Christensen, Co-Chair, Steering Group, Committee on
the Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey, National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Arizona State
University
Oral Statement...............................................    48
Written Statement............................................    59

Discussion.......................................................    75

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Robin M. Canup, Co-Chair, Steering Group, Committee on the
Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey, National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Assistant
Vice President, Planetary Science Directorate, Southwest
Research Institute.............................................    90

Dr. Philip R. Christensen, Co-Chair, Steering Group, Committee on
the Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey, National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Arizona State
University.....................................................    95

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Don Beyer, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
Paula Szkody, President, American Astronomical Society.......    98

A REVIEW OF THE DECADAL STRATEGY

FOR PLANETARY SCIENCE

AND ASTROBIOLOGY 2023-2032

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 26, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m.,
via Zoom, Hon. Don Beyer [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. This hearing will come to order. And
without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess
at any time.
And before I deliver my opening remarks, I wanted to note
that--today that the meeting is being held virtually. And a
couple of reminders to the Members, please keep your video feed
on as long as you are present in the hearing. And you are
responsible for your own microphones. So, obviously, please
keep them muted unless you're speaking.
Finally, if you have documents that you wish to submit for
the record, please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose
email address was circulated prior to the hearing.
So good morning, and welcome to today's hearing entitled
``A Review of the Decadal Strategy for Planetary Science and
Astrobiology 2023 to 2032.'' Thank you to our distinguished
witnesses for joining us today, witnesses and authors and
thinkers, and we're really excited to have you.
Today, we're going to hear about the vision for the future
of planetary science and astrobiology, and the vision is truly
breathtaking--returning samples from Mars, sending envoys to
the ice giant of Uranus and Saturn's moon Enceladus, even
infusing planetary science into human exploratory programs.
These are just a few of the inspiring and ambitious activities
organized around priority science questions that set the stage
for a planetary decadal vision.
Before I continue, I want to take a moment to thank the
hundreds of scientists who've contributed to the decadal survey
process. I tried to read as much of it as I could, but I was
astonished at how much science went into the process itself.
And thank you to the committee that shepherded the survey and
of course, most importantly, the co-chairs who led this, who
put all this together who are with us today, the once-in-a-
decade undertaking.
Decadal surveys obviously require enormous effort. They've
got to reach a consensus on priorities and make hard choices
about how to achieve a bold scientific vision within the
realities of a finite budget. And while the vision inspires,
it's the hard work, taxpayer investments, and people who turn
that vision into reality.
For the first time, this decadal survey makes important
recommendations on the state of the profession, including, and
especially, diversity, equity, and inclusion. Ensuring broad
access and participation in implementing this decadal is
central to its success. So I want to voice my strong support
for breaking barriers and opening doors so that all of
America's talent can be part of this exciting future in
planetary science.
The United States, with our international partners, has
reveled in a golden age of planetary science that has allowed
us to send probes to every planet in the solar system, to send
spacecraft to the surface of Mars on three separate occasions
in just the last decade, and to sample the asteroid Bennu.
There's much more to come as NASA (National Aeronautics and
Space Administration) and the community develop missions that
will study Earth's fiery neighbor Venus and send an orbiter to
Europa and deploy a rotorcraft on the hydrocarbon world of
Titan.
And as we look to the future, we can't rest on our past
successes. Maintaining U.S. leadership requires that we hew to
the carefully crafted strategy laid out in the decadal survey,
maintain balance, manage costs, embrace innovation, and ensure
a talented pipeline. And it's up to us in Congress to make
those necessary investments. Really, we can't afford not to, if
we want this Nation to lead in answering some of the most
consequential questions for humanity: Are we alone? Is there
life beyond our planet? Are there near-Earth objects (NEOs) on
a trajectory headed toward Earth? And how will human presence
in deep space affect our understanding of the solar system?
So I want to thank again our witnesses for being here
today. I'm eager to hear your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Beyer follows:]

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing, ``A Review of
the Decadal Strategy for Planetary Science and Astrobiology
2023-2032.'' Thank you to our distinguished witnesses for
joining us today. We're excited to have you.
Today, we're going to hear about the vision for the future
of planetary science and astrobiology over the next decade. And
the vision is truly breathtaking-returning samples from Mars,
sending envoys to the ice giant Uranus and Saturn's moon
Enceladus, and even infusing planetary science into human
exploration programs. These are just a few of the inspiring and
ambitious activities organized around priority science
questions that set the stage for the planetary decadal vision.
Before I continue, I want to take a moment to thank the
hundreds of scientists who contributed to the decadal survey
process, the committee that shepherded the survey, and, of
course, the co-chairs with us today who led this once-a-decade
undertaking. Decadal surveys represent an enormous effort. They
must reach consensus on priorities and make hard choices about
how to achieve a bold scientific vision within the realities of
finite budgets. NASA, the scientific community, and Congress
need and value these surveys; they keep us honest as to what is
most important.
While the vision inspires, it's the hard work, taxpayer
investments, and people who turn that vision into reality. For
the first time, this decadal survey makes important
recommendations on the state of the profession, especially
diversity, equity, and inclusion. Ensuring broad access and
participation in implementing this decadal is central to its
success. I want to voice my strong support for breaking
barriers and opening doors so that all of America's talent can
be part of this exciting future in planetary science.
The United States, with our international partners, has
reveled in a golden age of planetary science that has allowed
us to send probes to every planet in the solar system, to send
spacecraft to the surface of Mars on three separate occasions
in just this last decade, and to sample the asteroid Bennu.
There's much more to come as NASA and the community develop
missions that will study Earth's fiery neighbor, Venus, send an
orbiter to Europa, and deploy a rotorcraft on the hydrocarbon
world of Titan.
As we look to the future, we can't rest on our past
successes. Maintaining U.S. leadership requires that we hew to
the carefully crafted strategy laid out in the decadal survey,
maintain balance, manage costs, embrace innovation, and ensure
a talented pipeline.
And, it's up to us in Congress to make the necessary
investments. We can't afford not to, if we want this nation to
lead in answering some of the most consequential questions of
humanity:
Are we alone? Is there life beyond our planet? Are there
near-Earth objects on a trajectory headed toward Earth? And how
will human presence in deep space affect our understanding of
the solar system?
I want to again thank our witnesses for being here. I am
eager to hear their testimony.

Chairman Beyer. And I'd now like to ask for unanimous
consent to enter into the record a letter from the American
Astronomical Society. And if there are no objections, I will so
order it.
And now let me recognize my friend Dr. Babin from Texas for
his opening statement.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
this. I'm looking forward to this hearing. And I see my Ranker
on there. Mr. Lucas, thank you very much, and really appreciate
all of you. Looking forward to hearing this expert testimony.
I'd also like to thank our esteemed witnesses for appearing
today. The decadal survey process is no small feat. Not only is
the subject complex from a scientific and technological
standpoint but from an organizational and coordination, and
that--those aspects are just as daunting. The task of producing
a consensus position among brilliant minds that informs the
next decade of investments in cutting-edge exploration cannot
be understated.
Many of us on Capitol Hill are accustomed to the day-to-day
realities of politics, but the decadal process reminds me of
the old joke that academic politics is the most vicious and
bitter form of politics because the stakes are so low. I
disagree. The stakes for planetary science are high. The issues
that we are discussing influence norms of behavior in space for
future generations. The goals we set inspire our children and
our grandchildren to pursue challenging fields of study like
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. The
technologies that we develop to enable these discoveries enable
our economic and national security. And that's why the work
that you do is so very important.
The task set before you should be fully appreciated. The
questions, destination, and concepts that you evaluated and
prioritized were vast and very, very complex. And they involve
not only planetary science but also cost estimation,
management, budget formulation, supply chain risk,
international relations, national security, market analysis,
and many, many other aspects that are so critical to a
successful portfolio of programs.
Previous decadal surveys initiated missions that inspired
all and piqued our curiosity and drew front-page attention as
the world's--on the world's newspapers and nightly news
features. From roving and flying on Mars to sampling asteroids
and returning dramatic images of distant Pluto, planetary
science missions capture our imaginations and beckon us to
explore farther into the cosmos. This decadal survey continues
that tradition.
In addition to reaffirming support for a Mars Sample Return
mission and a Europa mission, it also recommends a mission to
Uranus, a mission to Saturn's moon Enceladus, and calls for a
lunar rover mission to collect large samples over long
distances and then deliver them to the Artemis astronauts for
an eventual return here to Earth.
The report also provides important support for a near-Earth
object survey mission to identify potentially hazardous
asteroids that can impact Earth and have catastrophic effects
on all of us. The recommendation to fully support the
development, timely launch, and subsequent operation of the
NASA--excuse me, of the NEO Surveyor mission is particularly
important as NASA proposes to slash the NEO Surveyor mission
budget and even reprogram existing appropriated funds from the
current fiscal year (FY). These missions recommended by the
report will advance science, maintain global leadership, and
protect our precious planet.
Bold and ambitious plans are important. As we saw over the
last two years, China successfully landed a rover on Mars and
returned samples from the Moon. Their plans are very ambitious.
Ours should be even more so, more ambitious. But we must be
vigilant in how we implement these recommendations and to carry
out these plans. To the Academies' credit, they also
recommended alternative programs and funding--if funding is not
available to support their aspirational goals. This will enable
NASA and Congress to make informed decisions throughout the
decade. As we've seen over the years, these decision criteria
are important to have when difficult decisions have got to be
made.
In order to turn these recommendations into a reality, we
must ensure strong program management and, above all,
accountability. Cost overruns impact other missions and
programs within the division and can delay future missions. We
can't afford to have one program eat the lunch so to speak of
other important activities, and that's why Congress will have
to closely examine the recommendations to alter the cost caps
for Discovery and New Frontier class missions. I'm also
interested in better understanding the panel's thoughts on how
to limit the risk of international participation cost overruns
and schedule delays for the Mars Sample Return mission, as well
as the panel's thoughts on how to best use NASA's current
astromaterials curation facilities at the Johnson Space Center
for Mars samples. I proudly represent Johnson Space Center.
Once again, I want to thank you for your service and your
time today, and I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

Good morning, and thank you Mr. Chairman for holding this
fascinating hearing.
I'd also like to thank our esteemed witnesses for appearing
today. The decadal survey process is no small feat. Not only is
the subject complex from a scientific and technological
standpoint, but the organizational and coordination aspects are
just as daunting. The task of producing a consensus position
among brilliant minds that informs the next decade of
investments in cutting-edge exploration cannot be understated.
Many of us on Capitol Hill are accustomed to the day-to-day
realities of politics, but the decadal process reminds me of
the old joke that ``academic politics is the most vicious and
bitter form of politics, because the stakes are so low.'' I
disagree. The stakes for planetary science are high.
The issues we are discussing influence norms of behavior in
space for future generations. The goals we set inspire our
children and grandchildren to pursue challenging fields of
study like science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
The technologies we develop to enable those discoveries support
our economic and national security. That is why the work you do
is so important.
The task set before you should be fully appreciated. The
questions, destinations, and concepts you evaluated and
prioritized were vast and complex. They involved not only
planetary science, but also cost estimation, management, budget
formulation, supply chain risk, international relations,
national security, market analysis, and many, many other
aspects that are critical to a successful portfolio of
programs.
Previous decadal surveys initiated missions that inspired
awe, piqued curiosity, and drew front-page attention on the
world's newspapers and nightly news features.
From roving and flying on Mars, to sampling asteroids, to
returning dramatic images of distant Pluto, Planetary Science
missions capture our imaginations and beckon us to explore
farther into the cosmos. This decadal survey continues that
tradition.
In addition to reaffirming support for a Mars Sample Return
Mission and Europa mission, it also recommends a mission to
Uranus, a mission to Saturn's moon Enceladus, and calls for a
lunar rover mission to collect large samples over long
distances and deliver them to Artemis astronauts for an
eventual return to Earth.
The report also provides important support for a Near Earth
Object Survey Mission to identify potentially hazardous
asteroids that could impact Earth and have catastrophic
effects. The recommendation to fully support the development,
timely launch, and subsequent operation of the NEO Surveyor
mission is particularly important as NASA proposes to slash the
NEO Surveyor mission budget and even reprogram existing
appropriated funds from the current fiscal year.
These missions recommended by the report will advance
science, maintain global leadership, and protect our planet.
Bold and ambitious plans are important. As we saw over the last
two years, China successfully landed a rover on Mars and
returned samples from the Moon. Their plans are ambitious. Ours
should be even more ambitious.
But we must be vigilant in how we implement these
recommendations and carry out these plans. To the Academies'
credit, they also recommended alternative programs if funding
is not available to support their aspirational goals. This will
enable NASA and Congress to make informed decisions throughout
the decade. As we've seen over the years, these decision
criteria are important to have when difficult decisions must be
made.
In order to turn these recommendations into reality, we
must ensure strong program management and accountability. Cost
over-runs impact other missions and programs within the
division, and can delay future missions. We can't afford to
have one program ``eat the lunch'' of other important
activities.
That's why Congress will have to closely examine the
recommendation to alter the cost caps for Discovery and New
Frontier class missions. I am also interested in better
understanding the panel's thoughts on how to limit the risk of
international participation cost overruns and schedule delays
for the Mars Sample Return mission, as well as the panel's
thoughts on how to best use NASA's current astromaterial
curation facilities at the Johnson Space Center for Mars
samples.
Once again, thank you for your service and time today. I
yield back.

Chairman Beyer. Dr. Babin, thank you very, very much.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Chairman Beyer. At this time, I'd like to recognize
Congressman Lucas if Congressman Lucas as Ranking Member would
like to offer any opening statements.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the courtesy, but I'm
enthusiastically waiting for our panel, so I will pass.
Chairman Beyer. All right. Thank you very much, Congressman
Lucas.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning.
Thank you, Chairman Beyer, for holding this hearing, and
welcome to our distinguished witnesses. We are fortunate to
have both co-chairs of the decadal survey with us today. I know
we are all eager to hear about their vision for the future and
what planetary scientists hope to learn in the next decade
about the formation, evolution, and interactions of planetary
bodies. I also look forward to hearing about the next steps and
key questions in the search for life beyond our planet.
The National Academies' decadal surveys are widely
respected and highly influential. Each survey is a monumental
effort, with the input and involvement of hundreds of
scientists. This decadal survey ensures that the Nation's
investments in planetary science and astrobiology are guided by
the highest priority and most compelling science questions.I'm
also glad to see that for the first time ever the survey
addresses diversity, equity, and inclusion in the planetary
science field. Improving access, diversity, and inclusion are
critical to realizing the decadal survey's vision and to
sustaining our leadership in scientific research.
NASA has made groundbreaking discoveries in planetary
science in recent years. The first powered and controlled
flight on another planetary surface and the ongoing return of a
sample from the asteroid Bennu are just two examples. If these
successes are any indication, I know that the new decadal will
bring equally inspiring and important results.
To fully realize the decadal strategy, however, we need to
ensure that NASA maintains a focus on project management best
practices and cost controls. NASA has struggled to manage cost
and schedule for its large planetary science missions. The
implementation of this new decadal survey will suffer if
project management challenges continue.
Finally, as we look ahead to the exciting planetary science
that awaits us, it is important that we reflect on why this
great nation pursues such ambitious, complex programs in the
first place. Sixty-one years ago, yesterday, President John F.
Kennedy laid out to Congress and the nation his audacious goal
to land a man on the Moon and return him safely to Earth by the
end of the 1960s. As we did back then, so can we now push the
boundaries of what's possible in science, technology,
engineering, and math. Doing so will inspire generations to
come and lead to new knowledge and terrestrial benefits.
I again want to welcome our expert witnesses, and I look
forward to their testimony.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Beyer. So in the absence of our major Chair, let
me now introduce our witnesses. Dr. Robin Canup is Assistant
Vice President at Southwest Research Institute where she leads
the Planetary Sciences Directorate in Boulder, Colorado. Dr.
Canup is a theoretician, and she studies the formation and the
early evolution of planets and their moons. She's modeled many
aspects of the formation of the Moon and has also developed
models for an impact origin of the satellites of Pluto and
Mars. Another major area of Dr. Canup's work has addressed the
origin of the systems of rings and satellites around the outer
giant planets. Now, Dr. Canup is the co-chair of the 2023 to
2032 Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal Survey. That's
why she's here. And she earned her Ph.D. and master of science
in astrophysics and planetary sciences from the University of
Colorado Boulder. Doctor, it's wonderful to have you here. It's
so rare to have anything good come out of Colorado, that it's
really terrific.
Dr. Philip Christensen is the Regents Professor in the
School of Earth and Space Exploration at Arizona State
University. His interests--research interests focuses on the
composition, processes, and physical properties of Mars, Earth,
asteroids, Europa, and other planetary surfaces. Dr.
Christensen has built seven science instruments that have flown
on NASA's Mars Observer, Mars Global Surveyor, Mars Odyssey,
Mars Exploration Rover, OSIRIS-REx, and Lucy missions and the
UAE's (United Arab Emirates') Hope Mars orbiter. He is also co-
chair of the 2023-2032 Planetary Science and Astrobiology
Decadal Survey. Dr. Christensen received his Ph.D. in
geophysics and space physics from the University of California
at Los Angeles.
So as the witnesses know, you will have each five minutes
for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony, much longer,
will be included in the record of the hearing. And when you've
completed your spoken testimony, we will begin with these
rigorous questions. And each Member will have five minutes to
question the panel.
So with that, we'll start with Dr. Robin Canup, and I hope
you will tell us how to correctly pronounce your name.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ROBIN M. CANUP,

CO-CHAIR, STEERING GROUP,

COMMITTEE ON THE PLANETARY SCIENCE

AND ASTROBIOLOGY DECADAL SURVEY,

NATIONAL ACADEMIES OF SCIENCES,

ENGINEERING, AND MEDICINE;

ASSISTANT VICE PRESIDENT,

PLANETARY SCIENCE DIRECTORATE,

SOUTHWEST RESEARCH INSTITUTE

Dr. Canup. That is correct, and thank you for the very kind
introductions.
Good morning, Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member Babin, and
Members of the Subcommittee. We are deeply appreciative of the
opportunity to speak to you today about our decadal report. And
perhaps we could bring up the first slide.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ten years ago, Dr. Steven Squyres came here and argued for
an ambitious program of planetary exploration. Thanks to the
generosity of Congress, that program became a reality and
ushered in a decade of unprecedented success. Our Sample Return
and Europa Clipper are now underway and will revolutionize our
understanding of the early habitable Martian environment and of
the habitability of an icy ocean world. These flagship missions
have been accompanied by a vibrant program of missions at
varying cost levels, as well as new partnerships between NASA
and the private sector that are increasing access to space and
its affordability.
Against this backdrop of incredible accomplishments and
with awareness of efforts being undertaken by other space
agencies around the world, we put forth an aspirational plan
for the next decade to ensure groundbreaking scientific
advances, as well as our Nation's continued leadership in solar
system exploration.
Next slide, please.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

We began our task by defining the most important scientific
questions that motivate our endeavors, which fall within three
scientific themes.
And next slide, please.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The first theme, origins, addresses how the primordial disc
of gas and solids that orbited our young sun evolved to yield
the outer giant planet systems and Kuiper belt objects and the
inner asteroids and terrestrial planets, including our own
Earth-Moon system.
Next slide.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The second theme, worlds and processes, considers ongoing
gravitational interactions and bombardment, the interior,
surfaces, atmospheres, and climates of solid planets, the
properties of gas-dominated Jupiter and Saturn, as well as the
ice giants Uranus and Neptune, and the many diverse systems of
moons and rings.
Next slide.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The third theme, life and habitability, addresses how life
on Earth emerged and evolved, other habitable environments
across the solar system, and the central question of whether
life formed elsewhere and how to detect evidence of it. Related
to all these themes is the study of planets orbiting other
stars, which can help us better understand whether Earthlike
planets are common or rare in the universe.
Answering such fundamental questions requires a highly
skilled and creative work force.
Next slide, please.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Broad access and participation, as well as equitable
processes, are needed to recruit, retain, and nurture the best
talent to work in our field. Our report makes numerous
recommendations to enhance diversity, equity, and inclusion in
our profession, including actions to minimize the effect of
biases in our processes to enhance outreach to underrepresented
communities, and to foster respectful and inclusive work
environments.
It is basic research and analysis (R&A) that provides the
intellectual foundation that ensures that NASA's activities are
optimized to advance scientific knowledge. In addition, the
openly competed R&A programs support broad access and entry
into our profession. While NASA's planetary program has grown
substantially in the past decade, the per-year fractional
investment in basic R&A has decreased from 14 percent in 2013
to less than 8 percent currently. It is essential to the
continued success of our Nation's planetary science program
that this trend be reversed and that a minimum of ten percent
of the annual program budget be invested into R&A.
Turning now to missions, the committee reaffirms the broad
scientific and strategic importance of Mars Sample Return and
recommends that it be completed as soon as is practically
possible as the highest priority of NASA's robotic exploration
efforts.
One of the most exciting new missions recommended in our
report involves increased cooperation between NASA's science
and human exploration endeavors. The Artemis program calls for
landing humans on the Moon starting in the 2020's with
increasingly sustained operations on the lunar surface. The
committee strongly supports this visionary program and argues
that it is imperative that Artemis be accompanied by a
similarly visionary scientific program. To not do so would be a
missed opportunity for NASA and the Nation that would undermine
the tremendous potential value of the Artemis program.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

To that end, we prioritize a transformative mission, a
robotic human partnership we call Endurance-A. This lunar rover
mission would complete 1,000-kilometer, 300-mile traverse
across the South Pole-Aiken (SPA) basin of the Moon on the
Moon's far side collecting a large suite of samples along the
way. The rover would then deliver these samples to a location
on the lunar surface for return to Earth by Artemis astronauts.
This mission would revolutionize our understanding of the Moon
and the history of the early solar system recorded in its
oldest impact basin.
Thank you for the invitation to testify, and I'll be happy
to answer any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Canup follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Canup, very much. I'm
looking forward to our questions, too.
Dr. Christensen, the floor is yours.

TESTIMONY DR. PHILIP R. CHRISTENSEN,

CO-CHAIR, STEERING GROUP,

COMMITTEE ON THE PLANETARY SCIENCE

AND ASTROBIOLOGY DECADAL SURVEY,

NATIONAL ACADEMIES OF SCIENCES,

ENGINEERING, AND MEDICINE;

ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Christensen. Thank you very much. Chairman Beyer,
Ranking Member Babin, and distinguished Members of the
Committee, it is indeed a pleasure to get a chance to talk with
you today.
One of the key tasks that our committee was given was to
prioritize the large flagship planetary missions that NASA
should undertake in the coming decade. As you just heard from
Dr. Canup, there's a remarkable array of science questions that
we wish to answer, and the flagship missions provide the best
means to make fundamental progress toward doing so.
We selected the Uranus Orbiter and Probe as our highest
priority flagship.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Uranus is an ice giant that has far more ice and rock than
the gas giants of Jupiter and Saturn. The ice giants may be
among the most common planets in the universe, and yet they
remain the only planets in our solar system that have never
been studied in detail. Uranus is an intriguing body whose low
internal energy atmospheric dynamics and complex magnetic
fields present major puzzles. It is unclear when and where
Uranus formed and may have actually swapped positions with
Neptune during early solar system migration. And finally,
Uranus's largest icy moon are potential ocean worlds in
themselves.
The next slide, please.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Our second priority flagship is the Enceladus orbiter and
lander. Enceladus is an icy moon of Saturn with active plumes
that bring water from the subsurface ocean to the surface where
we can study them. Orbilander will address one of our most
fundamental questions: Is there life beyond Earth. The Cassini
spacecraft detected methane, ammonia, and other simple organics
in the plumes but could not measure the complex molecules
associated with life. Orbilander will spend two years on the
surface beneath an active plume and study that ocean material
as it rains down upon the lander.
Our committee also evaluated more than 25 medium-class or
New Frontiers missions and prioritized the most promising
candidates.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

New Frontiers missions are competitively selected and
provide the science community with the opportunity to bring
forward their most innovative concepts. From this amazing set,
we've selected nine themes. These missions include sample
returns from a comet to study the role comets play in
delivering water and organics to Earth and a mission to Ceres,
a large ice-rich asteroid to study its formation and
habitability.
Another mission would land an orbit on a primitive ice rich
centaur asteroid, and another would probe into Saturn.
Together, these would improve our understanding of giant planet
formation and the composition and nature of the early solar
nebula. Our set of missions also includes a network of landers
on the Moon to gain insight into its origin and interior state,
and a mission to Venus to investigate its atmosphere and how
that interacts with the surface. Finally, there are missions to
the amazingly complex ocean worlds Enceladus, Titan, and Triton
in order to assess their habitability and to search for
evidence of life.
Planetary defense is an international--next slide, please.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Planetary defense is an international enterprise aimed at
providing protection to the people of the world from
devastating asteroid and comet impacts. Advancement in
planetary defense will require enhancements in asteroid
detection and characterization and the ability to rapidly
assess newly identified hazards. We recommend that NASA fully
support the development and timely launch of the NEO Surveyor
to achieve the highest priority goal of asteroid detection and
characterization.
In summary, our report outlines a portfolio of activities
that will significantly advance the frontiers of planetary
science and astrobiology in the coming decade.
[Slide.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Our recommended program defines an integrated suite of
flight projects, research activities, and technology
development that will produce transformative advances in our
knowledge. This program is balanced across missions of
different sizes and destinations and includes key
recommendations for cooperation with NASA's human exploration
program, as well as U.S. industry and international partners.
The recommended program is both aspirational and inspirational
and enables the robust training of a diverse science and
engineering work force, drives technology, and maintains strong
U.S. leadership in space exploration across the solar system.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Christensen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Dr. Christensen, thank you very much.
We'll now begin a round of questions. I will begin.
Dr. Canup, you talk about a minimum of 10 percent of the
annual program in research and analysis activities. How do you
differentiate that from what NASA is doing overall? Is this--
I'm trying to--just differentiate between is this planting-flag
missions versus trying to understand what--exactly what's going
on?
Dr. Canup. So the R&A program has several parts. One is
data analysis essentially, taking the data produced from our
missions and analyzing, determining essentially what it means.
A second part involves basic research to develop new hypotheses
based on that data and new ways to test those ideas. And then
the third element is really developing the conceptual
underpinnings for future endeavors. Based on what we know, what
are the new questions, what are the instruments and techniques
and measurements needed to address those, and what are the next
suite of missions to address those questions. So the R&A
program, which is largely done through relatively small, highly
competitive individual investigator grants, serves all of those
roles within the portfolio.
Chairman Beyer. And that's just making sure that we
understand all the data that we've gathered through these big
experiments?
Dr. Canup. Absolutely. And synthesizing that data into an
actual rethinking of these questions and our understanding of
the solar system at large.
Chairman Beyer. Yes. You talked about the 1,000-kilometer
traverse across the South Pole-Aiken basin, which reminded me
of all the stuff we've read about people who went to the South
Pole in the first part here in the--on this planet, Roald
Amundsen and the like. Will there be human beings in that or is
that going to be just a robotic rover?
Dr. Canup. The rover itself will be robotic. The plan would
be to land it through a CLPS (Commercial Lunar Payload
Services) delivery service on the Moon and the complete
traverse, much like our traverses on the surface of Mars, will
be robotically driven. But then ultimately, it will bring back
the samples to a location where the astronauts can return them
to Earth.
Chairman Beyer. I have a friend who's a retiring
Congressman from Colorado who would like to drive that rover on
the 1,000-kilometer mission.
Dr. Christensen, I was fascinated by all the many things
you both have offered, but the planetary defense, you know, in
a world with climate change and a world where we've had the
threat of nuclear war, we're very aware of the extinction
events that asteroids have caused in the past. Is there enough
attention being paid to the possibility of asteroid hits and
the awareness of what it could do to life on Earth?
Dr. Christensen. There's certainly a lot of research on
that. We know a lot. And we've characterized the largest
objects that could hit the Earth, but what we need to
understand is the next range, the 50- to 150-meter size that
could cause significant damage on the Earth. And that is the
class. We know there's a lot of them out there, and we're still
in the process of trying to identify them and we have a long
way to go. And so we strongly recommend that we complete that
characterization just so that we know what the threat is and
then we can begin to do something about that threat if it turns
out to--something is going to hit in the near future.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you. You know, one thing I love about
this job is I learn amazing new things every day. How did you
ever--you guys ever figure out that Uranus and Neptune may have
switched positions?
Dr. Christensen. I'll leave that to Robin.
Dr. Canup. It turns out that the early models for the
origin of the solar system presumed that the planets formed
largely in their current orbits where we see them today. And
over time we've grown to appreciate that, as planets form
within these primordial discs around their star, their orbits
migrate. They move a lot. And as we've built models that
incorporate those migration effects, many of them involve
substantial migration of the outer planets, and we see evidence
of that migration in the properties of the Kuiper belt object
directly. And a lot of those models that produce solar systems
that look most like our own actually start with five giant
planets in the outer solar system with three ice giants and
often eject one, and Uranus and Neptune end up changing places.
So these are some of the theoretical models that we try to
track--we try to test with various types of constraints.
Chairman Beyer. Great, thank you very much, fascinating,
fascinating work. I am instructed that our next questioner will
be the distinguished Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr.
Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And continuing along
the discussion about the near-Earth objects--and I would
address my questions to the panel, whoever is appropriate and
would care to answer. In 2005, Congress tasked NASA to identify
90 percent of the 140-meter potential hazard near-Earth objects
by 2020. NASA missed the deadline and remains years away from
achieving that goal, but observations from the National Science
Foundation's (NSF's) Rubin Observatory, coupled with a new
space-based infrared mission, have accelerated that survey. And
additionally, NASA established the Planetary Defense
Coordination Office in 2016 to help coordinate their efforts
for planetary defense.
However, NASA's FY '23 budget request cuts and delays the
space-based infrared mission known as NEO Surveyor. Your
report, along with the previous 2019 report from the Academies,
recommends maintaining that NEO Surveyor mission. Should
Congress allow NASA to reduce funding from FY '22
appropriations for the NEO Surveyor? I asked you a nice
question.
Dr. Christensen. I'll start. Clearly, our report strongly
endorsed that mission. We spent a lot of time discussing it,
and the consensus was very much that this is an important
mission, it's crucial to the people here on the Earth, we need
to understand and identify these objects. And so we clearly
strongly endorse it, and we continue to urge NASA and Congress
to ensure that that mission gets funded and launched in a
timely fashion.
Mr. Lucas. So that obviously means my next question about
should Congress maintain funding for the NEO Surveyor in 2023
is an obvious yes, I would assume.
Dr. Christensen. Yes, we think that it needs to happen and
should happen quickly.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you. The report also indicates that the
Mars Sample Return mission cost grows more than 20 percent--if
the mission cost grows more than 20 percent above the $5.3
billion estimate or to more than 35 percent of the Planetary
Science Division's budget in any given year, NASA should seek
budget augmentation. That's a really polite way to put that, a
budget augmentation to cover the cost rather than take money
from other planetary science efforts. Where should that
augmentation come from other than NASA?
Dr. Christensen. Well, that's a very good question. We
spent a lot of time--one of the--as one of you mentioned, one
of the big concerns that the planetary science community has is
that these large missions grow in cost and complexity and they
begin to dominate and upset the balance of missions across the
portfolio. And so rather than impact other planetary science
missions, our report recommends that this portfolio be
maintained and that money be found elsewhere. Now, obviously,
that's a difficult task. We didn't go into where that money
should come from, but we were trying to maintain the integrity
of a balanced program.
Mr. Lucas. Absolutely, and I appreciate that completely.
And you can imagine in Congress our discussion of where such
funds would come from. I mean, we're going to look at non-NASA
science and technology activities, you know, there are things,
energy, environment, basic research, just a variety of things.
But I appreciate that.
Last question----
Dr. Canup. If I may add----
Mr. Lucas. Please.
Dr. Canup. If I may add quickly, we also considered the
strategy of delaying the overall mission to reduce the per-year
cost but felt that ultimately that increases the total cost,
and so that was not the recommendation of our report
accordingly.
Mr. Lucas. Absolutely. NASA's increasingly leveraging novel
ways to acquire science data such as data buys, hosted
payloads, rideshares, CubeSats. Can you speak to the merits and
risks of these approaches of acquiring additional science data?
Dr. Canup. Sure. We talk in the report about the important
role of some of the smaller CubeSat-like programs. Simplex is
one example of that. These are programs that, by their nature,
can respond nimbly. They can tolerate more risk, which allows
us to develop new technologies, and so we see those as playing
a key role. We encourage the use of the small missions and
rideshares to flexibly accommodate additional science and
technology development as budget profiles allow.
In terms of data buys, there are definitely some areas
where those may be relevant. I don't think we speak too much to
that in the report, but Phil can add if I'm misstating on that.
Dr. Christensen. No, they're not.
Mr. Lucas. So it is fair to say that sometimes these novel
approaches have the potential of helping NASA carry out their
priorities in the overall decadal survey, so things worth
looking at.
Dr. Canup. Correct.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you very much, and with that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Lucas, very much.
Now, let me recognize the distinguished Congressman from
Colorado, Mr. Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. I was going to say go Buffs, and
that's--I will say go Buffs. And I'll say no offense to the Sun
Devils.
I guess my question--and this is to my colleagues--you
know, you talk, Dr. Canup, about the overall percentage of the
R&A or the research budget, the science budget, planetary
science has shrunk. It's grown but it's shrunk compared to the
rest. In terms of the Artemis program, you also mentioned that
you didn't feel there was enough science being integrated into
the system. So can you talk to me a little bit about where you
see these budget constraints, and can you talk to me about what
needs to be done to do some more science in the Artemis
mission? And then I've got an idea where there's more money to
be found that I want to talk to my colleagues about.
Dr. Canup. Sure. Right now, our assessment is you have the
Artemis program being defined and driven naturally by the Human
Exploration Directorate, and there is consideration about what
opportunistic science in a sense might be done, along with
those plans. What we emphasize is that that kind of add-on
approach of science is probably unlikely to produce truly
transformative science that we think is worthy of this program
and the historic level of investment that is going to be
associated with it.
What we argue for in the report is that there be some type
of structure organizationally within NASA that gives the
Science Mission Directorate and particularly the Planetary
Science Division--they currently have the responsibility for
executing lunar science, but they don't have the authority to
implement any requirements on the Artemis program. And so the
report argues that the organizational structure needs to be--
needs to evolve so as to give the Science Directorate at NASA
that authority to--and--to actually have a true integration of
the requirements from both human exploration and science.
And we make some suggestions. Although we're not overly
prescriptive on that, we leave it up to NASA to address this,
but we make some suggestions such as a new entity at the
Associate Administrator level in NASA that would be in charge
of coordinating the different directorates that are all
involved in the Artemis endeavor. And so that's the type of
recommendation we make there.
In terms of the R&A program, we incorporate that
recommended 10 percent level investment. We see that in the
same way a private company will allocate a certain amount of
its budget to investment in its future development. NASA should
be investing a fixed percentage in its analysis of data and its
future development as well. So we incorporate that in our
budget plans, and we get to that increase by a progressive
ramp-up in the first few years of the decade. Hopefully, that
answers your question.
Mr. Perlmutter. I guess what I was going to suggest because
I want to see the science integrated here, and that really is
NASA's mission and obviously your mission in putting this
report together. Part of what's going on with Artemis--and this
also applies to, you know, future operations that include
Mars--is that there is a national security component to all of
this that is taking up part of the budget. And so to my friend
from Oklahoma, I don't see this as really a zero-sum game
within NASA where we need to have our security parts of the
budget to participate in this. So NASA can do its science and
isn't having to front national security money as part of this
whole program.
So I've spoken to Adam Smith and others about integrating
some of the defense sums, which to the scientists I'm sorry
that we might integrate some national defense money in here,
but we need to do that to cover the cost of the program. And it
would only be appropriate because that's what we're doing.
I'll--I don't know if we're going to get to do a second
round, but I have lots of questions about the use of the Webb
telescope for sort of this planetary study that we have, but
I'm curious what the--what you all thought about that.
And I'll yield back to the Chair, but please don't be
bashful when I'm gone to talk to the defense folks about some
money for this. Goodbye. I'll yield.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congressman Perlmutter. And it
is my intention to do a second round as long as we have enough
people hanging around.
And with that, let me reduce our Ranking Member, Dr. Brian
Babin.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I really
appreciate it.
The U.S. taxpayer made significant investments in the
Astromaterials Acquisition and Curation Office at the Johnson
Space Center for past and future Sample Return missions. This
includes the documentation, preservation, and preparation of
samples from the Moon, asteroids, comets, solar wind, and the
planet Mars. Their highest priority is to secure the future
availability of these samples for the worldwide scientific
community. Understanding the Mars Sample Return mission may
require additional capabilities, should NASA leverage those
existing capabilities rather than starting from scratch and
building a new facility? I'd like to hear what each of you has
to say there. Thank you.
Dr. Christensen. Sure, I'll start. The report is very
focused on creating the minimum facility to receive the
samples. These are samples that may have life or organics in
them, so we have to treat them very carefully. But we make the
recommendation that that initial receiving facility be the bare
minimum necessary to verify that the samples are safe to then
distribute to the scientific community. And that's the real key
part, to get them out to the community. So we advocate not
building a new facility with a lot of capability, but the
minimum needed to do that biocontainment and biohazard
detection.
We also argue strongly that NASA needs a plan for how to
curate these samples. We weren't specific in where that
curation should occur, but we clearly expect NASA to do a very
careful evaluation and do what's the most--makes the most
sense, is the most cost-effective way of providing a long-term
curation and that the Houston facility is obviously a very
strong candidate.
Mr. Babin. Thank you for saying that. OK. Any--how about
you, Ms. Robin?
Dr. Canup. The key is assess the safety of the samples as
quickly and cost-efficiently as you can and get them to a
curation facility to start having them accessible by the
scientists. This is the legacy of that program, this amazing
sample set.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you so much. Next question,
international partnerships are a very important aspect of these
scientific missions, but when international partners are placed
on the critical path for missions, it often leads to delays, as
we've seen, and cost overruns. We saw this with the Mars
InSight Lander, the European Service Module, the first module
for the International Space Station, and many other instances.
Should NASA plan on international partners providing key
elements for the Mars Sample Return mission, and if so, what
should NASA do to mitigate the risk of these partner delays and
overruns? And if delays and overruns are caused by
international partners, what should the Planetary Science
Division cut in order to manage the division's overall budgets?
Dr. Christensen. One of the key elements of the Mars Sample
Return is that it is a very modular approach. So, for example,
we currently have a rover collecting and caching samples. There
will be another lander that contains the ascent vehicle, and
the Europeans are currently building the return orbiter that
would bring those samples back to Earth. The nice thing about
that architecture is that if there are delays in any of the
elements, the architecture is--can still go forward. So, for
example, if we put the cache in orbit around Mars and there
were delays or difficulties with that return orbiter, they can
stay in orbit for a long period of time. And so it's--they're a
key partner, but they're not on the critical path in the sense
that the mission would fail if that partnership didn't come
forward. So I think that is the type of partnership that
actually works really well.
Dr. Canup. And there have been success cases like the
Huygens probe on Cassini and--where these partnerships have
worked really well and of course helped to balance the
sometimes sizable cost of these total endeavors.
Mr. Babin. All right, thank you very much. I think--I'm
going to try to get one more in here. The decadal recommends
increasing the cost cap for Discovery class missions from $500
million to $800 million and New Frontiers class missions from
$1.31 billion to $1.6. Inflation was 2.4 percent annually over
the period of the last decadal. Did launch vehicle costs go up
or down over the last 10 years? I thought they went down. Did
spacecraft costs go up or down over the last 10 years?
Dr. Canup. I'll take this one. So the launch vehicle cost
thankfully have generally gone down largely due to----
Mr. Babin. Right.
Dr. Canup [continuing]. Involving the private sector. In
the last decade, the cost structure for the Discovery and New
Frontiers missions with those prior cost caps was changed so
the cost cap only applied on essentially development through
launch, and it did not include the operations phase, what you
do when you're actually at your target. In our new enlarged
cost caps, we once again include all the phases in the cap, so
the intent here is to try to get the cost cap back in line with
what the true lifecycle cost for these missions is turning out
to be. When we look at the recent missions selected at both
Discovery and New Frontiers, even though their cost caps were
different, their lifecycle cost are consistent with the cost
cap structure we propose in the report this time.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you very much. And I see, Mr.
Chairman, I'm out of time. I appreciate the information, and I
will yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Babin.
Let me now recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Congressman Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Chairman Beyer, and I appreciate you
holding this hearing on what is arguably the most enjoyable
Committee in all of Congress.
Dr. Canup and Dr. Christensen, you can alternate back on
these. I just--I have three questions really, four--maybe four.
What would you recommend NASA and the National Science
Foundation do to create a close relationship so that the
ground-based observations can be leveraged more effectively to
ensure goals are being met?
Dr. Canup. Sure, I'll take that one. The report talks about
how important those ground-based facilities are to solar system
research, not just to astronomy and astrophysics overall, as
well as the future facilities as well. One of the key NSF NASA
recommendations in the report is that currently it is not
straightforward to fund projects of mutual interest, so in
other words, there are funding mechanisms through NSF or
through NASA, but there are often projects of mutual interest
and we recommend that those agencies work together to try to
develop structures to support those endeavors.
And then we talk a lot in the report about how observations
from those ground-based facilities, how ALMA (Atacama Large
Millimeter Array) observations are revolutionizing our
understanding of how our solar system formed by looking at
forming solar systems around other stars, for example. So
there's a lot of discussion about the key science that those
facilities will bring and that recommendation related to
increased coordination.
Mr. Posey. With the loss of Arecibo Observatory, which was
important for hazardous asteroid characterization, how would a
more formalized collaboration possibly assist in helping with
the near-Earth orbit survey, which is required by law?
Dr. Christensen. We--the report discusses Arecibo, and we--
rather than come up with a specific recommendation of what
should be done, we emphasize that NASA and NSF need to work
together to develop a plan to replace the capabilities that
were lost at Arecibo, not necessarily a new facility but, for
example, how could existing facilities be enhanced or augmented
to get back that capability? And so we recognize it's
fundamental to the study of asteroids and near-Earth objects,
and we encourage those agencies to come up with a plan to do
that.
Mr. Posey. Should we develop and launch an asteroid
mitigation spacecraft in advance of a threat so we could
rapidly respond if a hazardous asteroid is detected?
Dr. Canup. In our report we recommend that after NEO
Surveyor, which is the survey mission, that the next highest
priority planetary defense mission should be what we call a
rapid flyby reconnaissance mission. We think the next step is
to develop the ability to do a rapid mission flyby to
characterize a threat that we just learned about, so an object
that we just found out existed and we're ready to launch a
craft, a flyby to get a characterization, which is the key
information you need in order to decide on a mitigation
technique to implement. And of course the DART (Double Asteroid
Redirection Test) mission is going to, later this year, attempt
one of those mitigation techniques, a direct impact into an
asteroid to look at the kinetic deflection method for changing
an orbit's trajectory.
Mr. Posey. Do you think there should be a formal agreement
between NASA and the U.S. Space Command to exchange information
concerning near-Earth objects to ensure that future
capabilities can discover objects in cislunar space?
Dr. Christensen. We talk about the potential for inter-
agency synergies, including a finding that increased
cooperation between U.S. Space Command and NASA's Orbital
Debris Program Office would provide useful information on NEO's
to aid in planetary defense objectives.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. I see my time is about to expire.
I'll yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congressman Posey.
I now recognize the Congressman from Florida, Governor
Crist.
Mr. Crist. Thank you, Chairman Beyer. It's great to be with
you this morning, and I want to thank our witnesses Dr. Canup
and Dr. Christensen.
While NASA's science programs can sometimes be overshadowed
by flashy human exploration goals, I believe that too often
they go in hand--hand-in-hand rather. This question is for
either of the two of you. Can you discuss how NASA's human
exploration program, known as Artemis, could help to meet some
of the science priorities laid out in this latest survey, and
what actions could NASA take to more effectively merge its
science missions with the Artemis program?
Dr. Canup. Sure, I'll be happy to take that. So the
Endurance-A rover mission that we talk about, the goal here is
to really do a thorough exploration of the far side of the Moon
that's not represented by the samples that were returned from
the Apollo set. The far side of the Moon is generally older,
and in particular this enormous South Pole Aiken basin is
thought to be the oldest impact large crater on the Moon.
What those samples that the rover will collect will do,
first, is it will constrain what we think was the very heavy
bombardment rate, the very early solar system, the first half-
billion to billion years of Earth's history when we think life
was evolving, it'll tell us--it'll constrain that bombardment
rate. That also in turn constrains the models of how the solar
system formed that we talked about earlier that involve the
giant planet migration of orbits because that migration drives
or we think drove big impacts into the inner solar system. So
Artemis with this Endurance-A component, the rover would not
only be able to date the SPA basin but also date the old basin
impacts that are superimposed on it.
We don't have any samples of the Moon's mantle, the
interior of the Moon in either our meteoritic or our Apollo
sample. They're all from the crust. We think the most likely
place to find samples of the lunar mantle again is on the far
side exposed by this big impact basin. The rover would also be
searching for and acquiring those samples. Those will tell us
about the bulk composition of the Moon. That constrains the
origin of the Earth-Moon system.
And finally, there's a big asymmetry in the geology and
the--even the shape of the Moon's far side versus the near
side, and there's a lot of fundamental geology and questions
that relate to the origin of that asymmetry that those samples
will also address. And like the Apollo sample set, this sample
set from Endurance-A would be this incredible hundreds-of-
kilograms legacy not just for these science questions that we
envision now but also for future generations and techniques
that we haven't even conceptualized yet.
The fundamental challenge is always how to integrate
science into the human exploration plans. These are two
independently appropriated directorates. They have different
goals. We acknowledge these challenges in the report. We make
suggestions about aspects of how the organization needs to
work, that the responsibility and authority to implement
science needs to be coherent in the organizational structure to
make these top priority science goals happen. So when we land,
we don't just get the sample from the site where we landed. We
get this incredible sample set selected carefully over the
whole surface of the Moon.
There's the suggestion I mentioned of a new entity at the
AA level to coordinate and make this happen, but again, we
tried to not be overly prescriptive in telling NASA how to
achieve the needed management structure but rather to focus on
the principles that the management structure needs to reflect
in order to be effective.
Mr. Crist. Thank you. Dr. Christensen, I'm curious. Can you
discuss what priorities laid out in the decadal survey--am I
saying that word right, decadal? What does that mean?
Dr. Christensen. One decade.
Mr. Crist. Oh, a decade. OK, great. In this one-decade
survey can only be accomplished by sending humans to the
surface of the Moon and/or Mars like in 2033, Ed?
Dr. Christensen. I'm a geologist, and, you know, it's
amazing what a human can do in a very short amount of time. And
so I think all of us eventually want to see human explorers,
scientists, astronauts on the Moon, on Mars doing what humans
are really good at, making quick decisions, working, you know,
very, very intelligently.
And so what we really hope to see is an integration of
NASA's spectacular robotic program with this inspirational
human exploration program and bringing those two together
because there are--humans are hard to keep alive and safe, but
they can do incredible things once they get there. So hopefully
these--this will eventually be the goal, that we'll learn
enough from robots that it's safe and effective to send humans.
Mr. Crist. Great. Doctor, thank you very much. I appreciate
both of you this morning, and Chairman Beyer, thank you for the
opportunity, and I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you----
Mr. Crist. God bless you all.
Chairman Beyer. Thanks, Congressman Crist, very much.
Now, let me recognize the gentlewoman from California,
Congresswoman Kim.
Ms. Kim. Thank you, Chairman, for having me. You know,
sometimes missions are delivered under cost. In order to
incentivize cost-effective development of principal
investigator-led missions, should NASA explore the
possibilities to allow the principal investigators to use
underruns on development for research and analysis activities?
Either one of you can address this or both of you can address
this.
Dr. Canup. That wasn't a topic that we touched on in the
report, but we clearly talk about the importance of
incentivizing both the cost structure of the original proposal
announcements to--and as well as operations and implementation
of missions so as to incentivize maximizing that scientific
return per total mission cost, right? So, we didn't
particularly address the topic you raise, but it's an
intriguing one.
Ms. Kim. Mr. Christensen, do you have any input in that?
Dr. Christensen. Not much, just to say beyond what Robin
said, there have been missions, there have been examples in the
past, ones that I've been part of where that was done, where
underrun was allowed to be used and carried forward into the
science operations phase. As Robin said, it's not something we
discussed, but it certainly is something that should be
considered.
Ms. Kim. Great, thank you. You know, NASA, it plans on
leveraging public-private partnerships to explore the Moon, and
they've also stated that that will take a more commercial
approach. So the question to you both is what customer other
than NASA do you see on the horizon that would make this
commercial?
Dr. Christensen. I'll start. That's a very good question.
It's one that we've been struggling with as a community for a
very long time. I mean, clearly, we're scientists. We see the
scientific potential. I think it's very difficult to say, but
maybe it's communications, maybe it's resources, maybe--you
know, I think there's a lot of potential commercial
applications for the Moon and, yes, even for Mars. I think in
the report we strongly encourage NASA to continue these
commercial partnerships to enable this capability and then let
the entrepreneurial commercial worlds take over and come up
with really good ideas.
Dr. Canup. If I might add, one way in that we're seeing
benefits outside of planetary science already is in launch
vehicle development, because NASA is one customer, and we
benefit from improvements and reduction in cost, but we're not
the only customer. Just getting satellites into orbit and other
more distant and more efficient ways of reusing launch
vehicles, those benefit science, too, even if they're not going
to the same place we want to go.
Ms. Kim. Thank you very much for both of you. I know I'm
jumping back and forth here because I was at another meeting,
just jump in, but I want to thank you so much for both of you
and for the work that you are doing. It's critically important,
and I appreciate all your work.
With that, Chairman, I will yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congresswoman Kim. And we're
going to do a second round, so you're welcome to stay if you'd
like. It may just be Mr. Perlmutter and I, but that's totally
fine.
So let me begin. By the way, I want to pile on just
editorially with Congresswoman Kim's comments about the
commercial sector. I know it's a little harder to figure out
because they're in the business of making money. We had a
hearing a week or two ago on space situational awareness and
space traffic management, orbital debris, and it was very clear
most of the discussion was about where on the bell-shaped curve
between totally commercial or totally governmental should
reality lie? I think a lot of us would be in a very different
place when it comes to the kind of planetary observations that
you're trying to do, but good to keep it in mind in any case.
They certainly are developing lots and lots of capabilities.
To Dr. Christensen, you talked about is their life beyond
Earth and how all these missions could contribute to that. Is
it safe to say we're just thinking about organic biology,
astrobiology, in this solar system, that you're not really
expecting to learn anything that's extrasolar from this?
Dr. Christensen. Well, one of the things that we included
in the report was the discussion of exoplanets. Much of that
resides in the field of astronomy but there's tremendous things
that our solar system can inform us about looking for life
outside our solar system and vice versa. So our report was
focused primarily on destinations in our solar system, but we
clearly, in the search for life, in the thinking of life, you
know, how does what we learn here inform our search outside and
vice versa? We clearly see this strong interaction between the
search for life locally and the search for life in the
universe.
Chairman Beyer. It is fascinating, the old Enrico Fermi
question, if there's life in the universe, why do we feel so
alone? Where are they?
So, Dr. Canup, in looking at the nine themes, you dedicated
your life to this planetary science and understanding it. Which
is your favorite?
Dr. Canup. My personal area of work relates strongly to
that first theme on origins, so that's my personal favorite.
What transitions from this disc of gas and dust into a
planetary system and what affects that and how much is
stochastic and kind of random in its outcome, and what are the
more deterministic outcomes that one could predict.
As we worked to develop those themes and priority science
questions, big questions emerged from the whole committee as we
discussed this and we talk about in the report, the--and this
gets to your question to my Co-Chair. How does the solar system
and our ability to actually bring back samples and study things
in situ, how does that provide our ground truth constraints so
we can understand more broadly the formation of solar systems
throughout the universe? That's one theme.
Another theme, yes, we know there are habitable
environments elsewhere in the solar system, but did they or do
they have life? And that--wanting to make that step to get to
actual life detection in this next decade was a huge priority
of this committee that came out in the report. And so there's a
lot of passion behind that question I would say.
Chairman Beyer. How disappointed will you be if we don't
find any signs of life--no fossils, no organic materials?
Dr. Canup. If you found life, obviously, that would be one
of the, if not the, greatest discoveries of science ever, but
now that we know that there are these other environments where
we have energy and we have the nutrients and we have liquid
water, if we find a complete lack of evidence of life, that's a
really interesting question, too, because then the question is
why not? If you had these other environments where you had all
of the pieces that we think we understand as being the key
things for life and you don't see it, why didn't it emerge? So
to me this is a question that doesn't have an uninteresting
answer, but of course it would be more exciting to see evidence
of life.
Chairman Beyer. And certainly when you look at how many
different ways life has expressed itself and endured on this
planet, you know, if you figure out what the first star is--by
the way, I've read that if you get a room full of scientists
and say how many believe there's other life in the universe,
every hand goes up, which is pretty interesting.
Dr. Canup. That's true. I think that's accurate.
Dr. Christensen. I agree.
Chairman Beyer. Let me ask my favorite scientist to raise
his hand right now, the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you. So I was going to say my
favorite of your three topics, your themes, was life and
habitability. And I'm just--you know, this--all of this stuff
excites me so. You know, here I am a bankruptcy lawyer and, you
know, I just love this stuff. And when you two are talking
about it, it just--I just really appreciate it.
So let me focus. Somebody mentioned the Atacama Large
Millimeter Array, ALMA, and Webb. How--you know, I'm thinking
of those two things looking deep into the universe and knitting
together black holes. How do you see them helping you two in
studying our solar system?
Dr. Christensen. I'll just comment. I think, you know, my
colleagues who work on James Webb, for example, have an
incredible set of questions of their own, so I think that
particular observatory will be focused on, you know, big-
picture questions of star formation and looking deep into the
universe. I think it will be a very long time before that's,
you know, applied specifically to planetary questions. But as
Robin said, it's--you know, what goes on in our solar system is
identical physics to what's going on in other solar systems,
and so those telescopes, those observatories will tell us a
tremendous amount of information about what goes on elsewhere
that is directly relevant to us back here.
Mr. Perlmutter. So you haven't bought time yet on Webb or
anything like that to study, you know, a microscopic thing on
Uranus or Saturn or something?
Dr. Christensen. We've tried but so far haven't succeeded.
Dr. Canup. But in the same way that our solar system,
because we can get samples from objects, we can learn things
about the detailed chemistry and compositional constraints that
the astronomers will not be able to access for an exoplanetary
system. But there's a converse relationship, too. The
astronomers, they can look at stars that are just being born.
They can look at planetary systems that are just being born.
They can actually see discs that have gaps in them with a newly
born planet in one. This can give us the ability to essentially
look back in time and to tell us what the processes in our
early solar system were like, and then we combine those with
our understanding of the oldest parts of meteorites, and you
can start to get a more complete picture of how solar systems
formed and evolved. So they're very complementary.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK. Looking back at the last decadal
report, what do you two think we accomplished the best? I mean,
what answers or what things did we do to, you know, satisfy the
areas of interest in the last report? What--give me the
successes.
Dr. Christensen. As Robin touched on at the very beginning
of her talk, I think the last decadal was outstandingly
successful, again, thanks to Congress and the American public
for making that happen. But the highest priority was let's get
started on Mars Sample Return. We're doing that. The second
priority, which many of us thought would not happen in the
decade, let's do a Europa orbiter. That's happening. The New
Frontiers missions, we've made tremendous progress there. So
from my view it's a success story up and down the report, and
there's very few things that haven't come to pass.
Dr. Canup. In addition, they were--the last report really
developed, I think, this idea of programmatic balance, meaning
not just going to different places but having different scale
activities, small missions that can incorporate more risk and
be implemented with a high cadence that can be very responsive
all the way up to flagships and everything in between. I think
the current planetary program has done a really good job with
that, in addition to the New Frontiers program that Phil
mentioned. The Discovery program, I think we've done an
excellent job of maintaining that. It's a high cadence program,
very innovative. Here's your cost cap. Go anywhere. Propose the
best science you can imagine and see what the proposers come up
with. And that's been a tremendous driver of innovation in the
last decade as well.
Oh, you saw the--really the development of planetary
defense, a substantial effort in this last decade, and the
lunar discovery and exploration program also has developed
during this past decade, and the whole development of the
commercial sector in terms of providing both launch services
and delivery hopefully to the lunar surface on a regular basis,
so outstanding set of accomplishments across the board.
Mr. Perlmutter. Well, thank you. And I'd say to my
Chairman, you know, we were out to see you a couple weeks ago
with the Science Committee. We visited the university. I just
want you to know, whether it's Arizona or Colorado, the West
has some great scientists. And it's not all on the East Coast,
Mr. Chairman. You should come west sometime.
Chairman Beyer. Which direction is that? Anyway--go ahead,
please.
Mr. Perlmutter. No, no, I was going to yield back. I just
thank you two for working on this report and putting it
together for us and, you know, I'm very excited to see what we
do over the course of this next decade.
Chairman Beyer. I do thank you, Congressman Perlmutter.
And thank you both, Dr. Canup, Dr. Christensen, really
interesting, fun hearing but also extraordinarily important.
And thank you for giving so many decades of your life on these
decadal surveys. These--you know, there are so many tough
things in America today from the kids getting killed by guns
and the COVID and the division between right and left and, you
know, it's sometimes hard to stay up. And I'm trying to make
all my speeches about all the good things surrounding us, you
know, the 11 1/2 million jobs advertised, the 17 States with
the lowest unemployment rates in their history, but it'll be so
much fun in the months to come to talk about the Decadal Survey
for Planetary Science and Astrobiology because this is really,
really good news for humanity.
So we're--thank you for all the work you've spent putting
the survey together, the thousands of scientists that you had
to manage, which I'm sure is difficult. So thank you for
testifying before the Committee.
Formally, let me say that the record will remain open for
two weeks for additional statements from the Members and for
any additional questions the Committee may want to ask of our
two witnesses.
Witnesses, you are now excused. The hearing is now
adjourned. And let me just finish with a great thanks. We are
done.
Dr. Canup. Thank you. It was an honor.
Dr. Christensen. It was very much an honor.
Chairman Beyer. Thanks, all. We will look forward to
continuing to follow your progress in the years to come. Thanks
so much. Bye.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Robin M. Canup

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Philip R. Christensen

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Don Beyer

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
