- STRENGTHENING THE U.S. MICROELECTRONICS WORKFORCE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STRENGTHENING THE U.S.
MICROELECTRONICS WORKFORCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 15, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-44

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-798 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. HALEY STEVENS, Michigan, Chairwoman
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa,
PAUL TONKO, New York                     Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

February 15, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Haley Stevens, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Randy Feenstra, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    16

Witnesses:

Ms. Shari Liss, Executive Director of the SEMI Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    20

Dr. Osama Awadelkarim, UNESCO Chair Professor and Director of the
Center for Nanotechnology Education and Utilization (CNEU) at
Pennsylvania State University
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Dr. Tsu-Jae King Liu, Dean and Roy W. Carlson Professor of
Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Discussion.......................................................    55

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Ms. Shari Liss, Executive Director of the SEMI Foundation........    78

Dr. Osama Awadelkarim, UNESCO Chair Professor and Director of the
Center for Nanotechnology Education and Utilization (CNEU) at
Pennsylvania State University..................................    84

Dr. Tsu-Jae King Liu, Dean and Roy W. Carlson Professor of
Engineering at the University of California, Berkeley..........    86

STRENGTHENING THE U.S.
MICROELECTRONICS WORKFORCE

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Haley Stevens [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. The hearing will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at any
time.
Just a couple of notes that the hearing today is clearly
meeting virtually. And of course the usual reminders to Members
about the conduct of the hearing, keeping video feed on for
Members as long as folks are present in the hearing. And
Members are also responsible for their own microphones.
Certainly, keep your microphones muted unless you are speaking.
And finally, if Members have documents they wish to submit for
the record, please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose
email address was circulated, as always, prior to the hearing.
And with that, good morning. Good early morning, very early
morning to some of you, and welcome to this incredibly
important and exciting hearing on strengthening the U.S.
microelectronics work force. And a warm welcome to our
distinguished panel of witnesses. Today's hearing is going to
pick up where we left off in December from our Full Committee
hearing on American microelectronics manufacturing.
Today, we are focused on the challenge of building up a
microelectronics work force in the United States of America to
fill the new fabs and R&D (research and development) facilities
that will be supported under the CHIPS for America Act.
Investing in the semiconductor work force is certainly
essential to our country's success as we re-shore American
manufacturing and maintain the American lead in technological
innovations.
Also, American manufacturing is near and dear to the heart
of many on this Committee and certainly yours truly. Many of us
have spent time exploring manufacturing challenges. I do so
locally through a program called Manufacturing Monday where I
visit once a week suppliers and small, midsized manufacturers,
geek out with their technology, learn who their work force is,
start to understand what their challenges are, and seek to
bring that back to Congress.
Sponsoring and championing legislation to strengthen
American manufacturing through the Manufacturing USA and
Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program have been
cornerstones of the work of this Committee and certainly this
Subcommittee. And many of us are also a part of the Democratic
Manufacturing Working Group that continues to usher in
legislation to support the American advanced manufacturing
sector.
So it's no doubt that manufacturing is the lifeblood of the
American economy. The CHIPS for America Act, enacted in 2020
through an authorization, will help revitalize American
semiconductor manufacturing through a whole-of-government
approach. The authorization to the Department of Commerce is to
create several key programs to grow domestic capacity in
microelectronics. Funding for the programs included in the
America COMPETES Act, which passed the House of Representatives
earlier this month and is waiting for final passage. When
implemented, the programs are estimated to create more than
40,000 new semiconductor jobs, making today's hearing very
timely.
The CHIPS Act addressed the work force as a key component
of our authorized programs. But today's hearing is also not
bounded by what's just exclusively in the CHIPS Act. We're
taking a higher-level look at challenges and opportunities to
build and expand the semiconductor work force, certainly
exploring diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) to have an
equitable work force that seeks to bring in American talent
from all corridors of this country, something that we have
explored at length in previous Committee hearings as it
pertains to the NSF for the Future Act.
Semiconductor manufacturing jobs are good, high-paying
careers. The semiconductor industry hires from a wide range of
educational backgrounds--that's key, a wide range of
educational backgrounds--with about half of the current work
force holding an associate's degree. Semiconductor employees
across all education levels make about 65 percent more than
their peers in other sectors. These are also steady and safe
careers with ample room for growth and widely transferable
skills. Yet, we have heard from industry and educators alike
about how students, veterans, other displaced workers just are
not aware of semiconductor careers and so they do not pursue
the training needed to enter this field.
I am wondering today, and I hope we do hear today, how
Congress can not only help raise awareness and inspire more
workers to enter into this field but to also think about the
programs, career and technical education, that are going to be
essential to revitalizing this work force across all education
levels to meet current work force needs.
Today, we will also explore how to build and sustain more
educational and training programs across the board, certainly
some that Congress touches, as well as other public-private
partnership programs and initiatives taking place at the
charitable and foundation level. We certainly have an
incredible and seasoned panel here with us today who have
worked through many of the issues firsthand. Collectively, they
have created community college and hands-on capstone
certificates, apprenticeship, and veteran training programs,
developed K through 12 outreach, and led cutting-edge research
programs. Each of these components will be necessary to build
the American semiconductor work force of our future.
And as a reminder, folks, we invented this industry. We
innovated this industry. And it is ours for the taking and to
employ people in.
So thank you again to our witnesses for being here today.
I, among many of my colleagues, look forward to your insightful
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Stevens follows:]

Good morning and welcome to this important hearing on
strengthening the U.S. Microelectronics Workforce. And a warm
welcome to our distinguished panel of witnesses.
Today's hearing will pick up where we left off in
December's Full Committee hearing on American microelectronics
manufacturing. Today we are focusing on the challenge of
building up a microelectronics workforce to fill the new fabs
and R&D facilities that will be supported under the CHIPS for
America Act. Investing in the semiconductor workforce is
essential to our country's success as we re-shore American
manufacturing and maintain the American lead in technological
innovations.
If you know me, you know that manufacturing is near and
dear to my heart. Since coming to Congress, I have sought to
understand manufacturing challenges through weekly
Manufacturing Monday visits, and I have sponsored legislation
to strengthen American manufacturing through Manufacturing USA
and the Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program. Last year,
I launched the House Democratic Manufacturing Working Group.
Manufacturing is the lifeblood of the American economy. The
CHIPS for America Act, enacted in 2020, will help revitalize
American semiconductor manufacturing through a whole-of-
government approach. It authorizes the Department of Commerce
to create several key programs to grow domestic capacity in
microelectronics. Funding for these programs is including in
the America COMPETES Act, which passed the House of
Representatives earlier this month. When implemented, these
programs are estimated to create more than 40,000 new
semiconductor jobs, making today's hearing very timely. The
CHIPS Act did address workforce as a key component of the
authorized programs. But today's hearing is not bounded by
what's in the CHIPS Act. We are taking a higher-level look at
challenges and opportunities to build and expand the
semiconductor workforce.
Semiconductor manufacturing jobs are good, high-paying
careers. The semiconductor industry hires from a wide range of
educational backgrounds, with about half of the current
workforce holding an associate's degree or less. Semiconductor
employees across all education levels make about 65% more than
their peers in other sectors. These are also steady and safe
careers with ample room for growth and widely transferable
skills. Yet, we've heard from industry and educators alike
about how students, veterans, and displaced workers just aren't
aware of semiconductor careers and so don't pursue the training
needed to enter this field. I'm wondering, and I hope we hear
today, how Congress can help raise awareness and inspire more
workers to enter this field.
Awareness is not the only hurdle. There are currently not
enough programs, across all educational levels, to meet current
workforce needs. Today we will also explore how to build and
sustain more education and training programs.
We have an incredible, seasoned panel here today who have
worked through many of the issues firsthand. Collectively they
have created community college and hands-on capstone
certificates, apprenticeship, and Veteran training programs,
developed K-12 outreach, and led cutting-edge research
programs. Each of these components will be necessary to build
the American semiconductor workforce of our future.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today, and doing
the great work you do, I'm looking forward to your insightful
testimony.

Chairwoman Stevens. And with that, the Chair is going to
recognize my dear friend and good colleague from the State of
Iowa, Mr. Feenstra, for an opening statement.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens.
And before I begin discussing today's hearing, I would
first like to say how thrilled I am to be named the new Ranking
Member of Research and Technology Subcommittee. I am truly
grateful to Ranking Member Lucas for asking me to serve in this
role. As I take this new responsibility, I look forward to
continuing the tradition of my predecessors, Ranking Member
Waltz, Ranking Member Baird, and working in a productive and
bipartisan manner. And, Chairwoman Stevens, I hope that we can
continue to build on our friendship and work together to
deliver on the important matters before this Subcommittee, like
the focus of today's hearing.
Today, we will be examining how our U.S. work force can
meet the current and future demands of domestic advanced
manufacturing in the semiconductor sector. I appreciate each of
our witnesses for taking the time to speak with us today and
sharing their experience. I suspect every American has been
impacted in some way by the global supply chain disruption for
semiconductors or chips. Semiconductors have grown to become an
essential part of our modern lives. In Iowa, they are nearly
every--in everything that we do from our tractors to our semi-
trucks to our smartphones. With such an important industry, we
are making a mistake in keeping so much of our manufacturing
capacity offshore.
The U.S. share of global semiconductor manufacturing
decreased from 37 percent in 1990 to just 12 percent today. The
CHIPS for America Act is a bipartisan, bicameral effort to
reestablish America's leadership in semiconductor chip
manufacturing. Funding the CHIPS Act should be the top priority
for Congress. We can and should pass this funding cleanly.
Instead, 2 weeks ago, the Speaker used the CHIPS Act, along
with 12 other bipartisan SST (Science, Space, and Technology)
bills, to move the partisan COMPETES Act through the House. A
partisan superbill is not the way to get this important
legislation done.
Relying on offshore manufacturing has led to supply chain
bottlenecks, a rising cost of materials, and a decrease of
American influence worldwide. We must ensure that the United
States is a leader in producing semiconductors to bolster our
national security and decrease the influence of the Chinese
Communist Party worldwide. China continues to make record-
breaking investments in R&D and the semiconductor industry. By
funding the CHIPS Act, the United States can help to solidify
international leadership in advanced manufacturing for years to
come.
The CHIPS Act will likely generate tens of thousands of new
manufacturing jobs in both high-skilled and trade-focused
roles. This comes as manufacturing companies are already facing
difficulty finding skilled workers. Meeting and growing--
meeting the growing demand for the skilled work force will be a
critical factor in successfully growing our semiconductor
sector.
Today, we will examine how the manufacturing industry,
community colleges, and higher education institutes can work
together collaboratively to solve these problems. I'm looking
forward to hearing from our witnesses and the panel on the
ideas that they have to build out STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics)--the STEM pipeline in this space
and how we should be thinking about leveraging existing
partnerships. I am particularly interested in how we can
capitalize on the expertise of our military veterans and
encourage industry to tap into this talent pool.
The CHIPS Act is a great step toward American investment in
the semiconductor industry, but it's only the first step. The
Committee should continue to consider how we are connecting
Americans with these good, high-wage STEM jobs across our
country. We are at a pivotal moment where Americans are
thinking about a career change, and this conversation about
workforce opportunities could not be more timely.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Feenstra follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens.Before I begin discussing
today's hearing, I would first like to say how thrilled I am to
be named the new Ranking Member of the Research and Technology
Subcommittee. I am grateful to Ranking Member Lucas for asking
me to serve in this role. As I take on this new responsibility,
I look forward to continuing the tradition of my predecessors,
Ranking Member Waltz and Ranking Member Baird, in working in a
productive and bipartisan manner. Chairwoman Stevens, I hope we
can continue to build on our friendship and work together to
deliver on the important matters before this subcommittee, like
the focus of today's hearing.
Today we will be examining how our U.S. workforce can meet
the current and future demands of domestic advanced
manufacturing in the semiconductor sector. I appreciate each of
our witnesses for taking the time to speak with us today and
sharing their expertise.
I suspect every American has been impacted in some way by
the global supply chain disruption for semiconductors or
``chips.'' Semiconductors have grown to become an essential
part of our modern lives--in Iowa they're in nearly everything
from tractors and semi-trucks, to smartphones. With such an
important industry, we are making a mistake in keeping so much
of our manufacturing capacity offshore. The U.S. share of
global semiconductor manufacturing decreased from 37 percent in
1990 to just 12 percent today.
The CHIPS for America Act is a bipartisan, bicameral effort
to reestablish America's leadership in semiconductor chip
manufacturing. Funding the CHIPS Act should be a top priority
for Congress. We can and should pass this funding cleanly.
Instead, two weeks ago the Speaker used the CHIPS Act, along
with 12 other bipartisan SST bills, to move the partisan
COMPETES Act through the House. A partisan ``super bill'' is
not the way to get this important legislation done.
Relying on offshore manufacturing has led to supply chain
bottlenecks, a rising cost of materials, and a decrease of
American influence worldwide. We must ensure that the United
States is a leader in producing semiconductors to bolster our
national security and decrease the influence of the Chinese
Communist Party worldwide. China continues to make record-
breaking investments in R&D and the semiconductor industry.
By funding the CHIPS Act, the United States can help to
solidify international leadership in advanced manufacturing for
years to come. The CHIPS Act will likely generate tens of
thousands of manufacturing jobs in both high-skilled and trade-
focused roles. This comes as manufacturing companies are
already facing difficulty finding skilled workers. Meeting the
growing demand for a skilled workforce will be a critical
factor in successfully growing our semiconductor sector.
Today we will examine how the manufacturing industry,
community colleges, and higher education institutes can work
together to solve this problem. I am looking forward to hearing
from our great witness panel about ideas they have to build up
the STEM pipeline in this space, and how we should be thinking
about leveraging existing partnerships. I am particularly
interested in how we can capitalize on the expertise of our
military veterans and encourage industry to tap into this
talent pool.
The CHIPS Act is a great step towards American investment
in the semiconductor industry, but it is only the first step.
The Committee should continue to consider how we are connecting
Americans with these good, high-wage STEM jobs across the
country.
We are at a pivotal moment where many Americans are
thinking about a career change, and this conversation about
workforce opportunities could not be more timely.
Thank you, Madam Chair and yield back the balance of my
time.

Chairwoman Stevens. Well, thank you, Representative
Feenstra, and, again, welcome to the role as Ranking Member of
the best Subcommittee on House Science, Space, and Technology,
Research and Tech. Thank you for your introductory remarks.
And at this time I would just like to take a minute to
introduce our witnesses. Our first witness is Ms. Shari Liss,
the Executive Director of the SEMI Foundation. The Foundation
focuses on workforce development programs in diversity, equity,
and inclusion initiatives supporting more than 2,400 companies
within the microelectronics industry. Prior to her role at the
Foundation, she served as the CEO (Chief Executive Officer) of
the Ignited, a STEM teacher professional development
organization and as a teacher and curriculum developer serving
in a variety of positions with a focus on mathematics and at-
risk students.
Our next witness is Dr. Osama Awadelkarim. He is the UNESCO
(United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization) Chair for Building Innovation and Manufacturing
Capacities through Advanced Technology Education, and Professor
of Engineering Science and Mechanics at the University--excuse
me, at Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Awadelkarim also
serves as the Director of the Center for Nanotechnology
Education and Utilization (CNEU) and the National Science
Foundation (NSF) Nanotechnology Applications and Career
Knowledge (NACK) Resource Center. His education contributions
focus on nanotechnology, workforce development, and on
nanotechnology secondary and postsecondary education. His
research interests are in electronic materials and devices.
Our third witness is Dr. Tsu-Jae King Liu. Dr. Liu is the
Dean of the College of Engineering and the Roy W. Carlson
Professor of Engineering at the University of California (UC)
Berkeley. Since joining UC Berkeley in 1996, she has taught and
conducted research on semiconductor logic and memory devices
and technology. As Dean, Dr. Liu has bolstered programs to
support the academic success and well-being of both
undergraduate and graduate engineering students. Throughout her
career, she has actively engaged in efforts to diversify the K
through 12 pipelines to engineering degree programs to support
the success of women and students from underrepresented
minority groups and first-generation college students and to
increase the diversity of engineering graduate students and
faculty.
And we do have our Ranking Member of the Full Committee on
here today, which I noticed Mr. Frank Lucas, and so I would at
this time like to turn the--before we hear from our witnesses,
and thank you for indulging their incredible backgrounds, we
will hear from Mr. Lucas for an opening statement. We do not
have our Full Committee Chairwoman, Congresswoman Eddie Bernice
Johnson, with us, so we'll hear from Mr. Lucas, and then we'll
go to witness testimony. So with that, Mr. Lucas, an opening
statement.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, and I appreciate
the traditional courtesy and for holding this hearing this
morning.
I'm thrilled to welcome Representative Feenstra to the
first hearing as Ranking Member of the Science--of the Research
and Technology Committee. In his time on the Science Committee
Representative Feenstra has already shown leadership on
critical issues and offered legislation to help protect our
research from foreign theft, expand research in the development
of biofuels, and improving bioengineering. He understands that
innovative science and technology are key to growing the
American economy.
I would also like to thank Representative Waltz for his
service. He did a tremendous job developing a bipartisan
legislative package to double down on our investments in basic
research, improve U.S. research security, and set a strategic
course for American science and technology development. I wish
him well in his leadership role in the Armed Services
Committee.
Again, thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for letting me start
with that sidebar and now turning to today's hearing.
I'm looking forward to examining our current semiconductor
education and training pipeline and how we can meet the
critical workforce needs of the U.S. microelectronics industry.
Microelectronics are critical to how we live and work. They
power phones. They make our cars safer, our homes smarter, and
help us store and protect vital information.
At a hearing our Committee held in December, we heard
testimony about the factors contributing to global chip supply
chain shortage. It is disrupting many industries and affecting
consumers. We also heard testimony on the potential threat of
countries like China controlling the chip market. Congress is
now looking to make investments to increase the domestic
production of chips to protect our economy and national
security. It took the first steps to address this issue last
year by passing the CHIPS for America Act, which authorized
programs to advance U.S. research development, promote industry
and government partnerships, and incentivize domestic
fabrication of chips. The next step is to provide the necessary
funding.
While I don't agree with the Speaker's strategy to move
chips funding through the House as a part of a massive partisan
package, I think it's time to come together to address our
future domestic chip needs as soon as possible, but our
investments in microelectronics research and development and
construction of new fabrication facilities will be wasted if we
don't have the domestic workforce to support that industry. We
must ensure we have a strong STEM workforce in the United
States to meet the oncoming demand.
If the CHIPS Act is fully funded at the current proposed
level, it is estimated to create 42,000 semiconductor jobs. We
need to fill them. That demand is even higher when we consider
the full spectrum of workers needed to support that industry
from skilled technicians and operators with associate degrees
to those with advanced degrees. For example, we'll need
scientists to achieve fundamental breakthroughs in
microelectronics technology for us to harness the technologies
of the future such as artificial intelligence (AI), 5G, quantum
sciences. We will need engineers and software developers to
package the microelectronics. We will need technicians to
operate the cleanrooms at the fabs.
Today's hearing should provide examples of innovative
training models that not only train new employees but also
retrain and upskill existing members of the workforce,
including departing members of the military.
I also look forward to hearing how Congress can capitalize
on existing Federal investments through public-private
partnerships and how we can provide our youngest students with
the skills to become STEM-literate. I strongly believe that to
remain competitive, attract job-creators, and meet our own
needs for an evolving workforce, we need to take full advantage
of America's full talent pool, no matter their ZIP code.
I hope our witnesses will be able to provide the insights
on how we can assure broad access to semiconductor education
and development and solid retention of STEM employees in the
semiconductor industry.
I want to again thank our witnesses for taking the time to
join us today and share their expertise. I yield back the
balance of my time, Madam Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for holding this morning's
hearing.
I'm thrilled to welcome Representative Feenstra to his
first hearing as Ranking Member of the Research and Technology
Committee. In his time on the Science Committee, Rep. Feenstra
has already shown leadership on crucial issues and authored
legislation to help protect our research from foreign theft,
expand research and development of biofuels, and improve
bioengineering. He understands that innovative science and
technology are key to growing the American economy.
I would also like to thank Representative Waltz for his
service. He did a tremendous job developing a bipartisan
legislative package to double down on our investments in basic
research, improve U.S. research security, and set a strategic
course for American scientific and technological development. I
wish him well in his leadership role on the Armed Services
Committee.
Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for letting me start with
that sidebar. And now, turning to today's hearing, I'm looking
forward to examining our current semiconductor education and
training pipelines and how we can meet the critical workforce
needs of the U.S. microelectronics industry.
Microelectronics are critical to how we live and work. They
power our phones, make our cars safer, our homes smarter, and
help us store and protect vital information.
At a hearing our Committee held in December, we heard
testimony about the factors contributing to a global chip
supply chain shortage that is disrupting many industries and
affecting consumers. We also heard testimony on the potential
threat of countries like China controlling the chip market.
Congress is now looking to make investments to increase the
domestic production of chips to protect our economic and
national security. It took the first steps to address this
issue last year by passing the CHIPS for America Act, which
authorized programs to advance U.S. research and development,
promote industry and government partnerships, and incentivize
domestic fabrication of chips.
The next step is to provide the necessary funding. While I
don't agree with the Speaker's strategy to move Chips funding
through the House as part of a massive partisan package, I
think it's time to come together to address our future domestic
chip needs as soon as possible.
But our investments in microelectronics research and
development and construction of new fabrication facilities will
be wasted if we don't have the domestic workforce to support
the industry. We must ensure we have a strong STEM workforce in
the United States to meet the oncoming demand. If the CHIPS Act
is fully funded at the current proposed level, it is estimated
to create 42,000 new semiconductor jobs.
We need to fill them. That demand is even higher when we
consider the full spectrum of workers needed to support this
industry--from skilled technicians and operators with associate
degrees to those with advanced degrees. For example:
We will need scientists to achieve fundamental
breakthroughs in microelectronics technology for us to harness
the technologies of the future, such as artificial
intelligence, 5G, and quantum sciences.
We will need engineers and software developers to package
the microelectronics. We will need technicians to operate the
cleanrooms at the fabs.
Today's hearing should provide examples of innovative
training models that not only train new employees, but also
retrain and upskill existing members of the workforce,
including departing members of the military.
I also look forward to hearing how Congress can capitalize
on existing federal investments through public-private
partnerships and how we can provide our youngest students with
the skills to become STEM-literate.
I strongly believe that to remain competitive, attract job
creators, and meet our own needs for an evolving workforce, we
need to take full advantage of America's full talent pool, no
matter their zip code. I hope our witnesses will be able to
provide insights on how we can ensure broad access to
semiconductor education and employment and solid retention of
STEM employees in the semiconductor industry.
I want to again thank our witnesses for taking the time to
join us today and share their expertise. I yield back the
balance of my time.

[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Thank you Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking Member Feenstra
for holding this morning's hearing on strengthening our
nation's microelectronics workforce. I want to welcome and
thank the expert witnesses for their testimony.
We spend a lot of time in the Science Committee focusing on
the challenges to growing a skilled STEM workforce for the 21st
Century. I am proud that many provisions in the America
COMPETES Act, which passed the House earlier this month, would
help address some of those challenges. While we need to develop
the STEM pipeline across all fields, there are particular
fields for which the gap between supply and demand is
especially acute. Microelectronics is one such field.
The semiconductor industry is no stranger to labor supply
challenges. In 2018, the Semiconductor Industry Association
noted there were thousands of unfilled technical positions
across the country. This labor shortage has only worsened with
the pandemic. In addition, Congress is now considering
providing $52 billion in funding to bring semiconductor
manufacturing back to our shores. If fully funded, the Chips
for America Act would create an estimated 42 thousand
additional semiconductor-related jobs. Addressing these
workforce challenges is going to require new investments and
partnerships.
One of the major challenges is recruiting a diverse
workforce. In 2021, the Semiconductor Industry Association
reported that Black employees held 4% of all jobs in the
semiconductor workforce, compared to 12% across all employment
sectors. Hispanic employees make up 13% of the semiconductor
workforce, compared to 18% across all sectors. And fewer than
one quarter of employees in the semiconductor workforce are
women. The semiconductor industry acknowledges these challenges
and has worked to increase representation through
apprenticeship models and engagement. I am pleased that we have
a representative from SEMI here today to discuss these
programs.
Creating a capable microelectronics workforce also requires
hands-on learning. Several of our witnesses today have
implemented innovative programs to offer access to hands-on
learning tools for technical and community college students. If
these programs prove successful, we must scale them up.
Distance learning tools and virtual reality technologies may
also offer solutions to increase access.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses' insights on how we
can grow and diversify the U.S. semiconductor workforce,
including through new public-private partnerships. I also look
forward to continuing the bipartisan work of this committee to
advance bold policies to address these challenges.

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you, Ranking Member Lucas.
There's a lot of dogging of Congress, and one of the beautiful
things is that people all across the country and their elected
representation can come together in hearings like this and talk
about such important topics: workforce development, workforce
training, and an industry of scale that we are eager to grab
hold of. So I hope all of us recognize and take away from this
hearing what a ringing and resounding moment this is for our
country.
So with this, we're going to move to witness testimony. Our
witnesses are going to have 5 minutes for their spoken
testimony. The written will be submitted to the record. There's
some nice, printed words here that we all got in advance.
But with that, we'll move to Shari Liss for the first 5
minutes of witness testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MS. SHARI LISS,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE SEMI FOUNDATION

Ms. Liss. Thank you so much. Thank you so much for having
me. Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Member Lucas, and Ranking
Member Feenstra, and Members of the Research and Technology
Subcommittee, thank you for this incredible opportunity to
submit testimony about the critical workforce needs of the U.S.
microelectronic manufacturing sector. We hope to be of service
in helping you examine the challenges our industry is facing in
the microelectronics workforce development realm.
I am the Executive Director of the SEMI Foundation, which
is a 501(c)(3) arm of SEMI, the global industry association
representing the microelectronics manufacturing and design
supply chain connecting over 2,500 member companies. For 20
years the SEMI Foundation has led SEMI's workforce development
and diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives.
Microelectronics is an industry making frequent headlines.
Supply chain disruptions and chip shortages are impacting
virtually every industry and our daily lives. Yet compared to
today's software and social media giants, this industry is
relatively invisible to most citizens and workers, and that's
made workforce development a challenge for decades. Compounding
the issue is the ``Great Resignation,'' which has led to
substantial worker churn within our member companies. The
steadily declining U.S. share of global semiconductor capacity,
COVID-related supply chain disruptions, and an aging workforce
are all important factors. The semiconductor industry's ability
to advance and thrive faces serious challenges as it contends
with an acute shortage of core skills and talent.
Yet another challenge is how to best prepare new workers
for the industry and the industry for new workers. Training
programs must simultaneously be industry-led and worker-
centric, and this process is not simple. Industry must dictate
the specific skills and competencies needed for high-demand
open jobs, and prospective workers must have support systems in
place to complete training and be positioned for success in
their new workplaces. Further, companies report that many
workers lack the essential soft skills, teamwork,
communication, professionalism, time management, conflict
resolution, et cetera, that's needed to thrive in these
workplaces.
Finally, companies looking to hire a more diverse workforce
need to shift their workplaces to a more equitable and
inclusive spaces or these new workers will not feel welcome and
possibly leave those jobs or the industry entirely.
Accomplishing all of the above requires significant
investments. Impacted jobs range all across the supply chain
from entry-level positions in manufacturing to advanced
technical jobs. Our most current data shows that in the last 12
months there were 88,000 open jobs just from SEMI member
companies alone. Our worker shortage is extreme.
It's also important to consider the relative invisibility
of the microelectronics industry compared to adjacent
industries such as software and social media. Microelectronics
companies do not have the same name recognition or allure as
companies such as Facebook--or now Meta--Apple, Spotify, or
Google even though our industry enabled each of these
technologies.
The SEMI Foundation has a framework of initiatives that
help address these workforce challenges that provides a step-
by-step path for leaders to engage with the industry and invest
strategically so we can accelerate economic opportunity for
all. Some of the elements include our Industry Image and
Awareness Campaign. This national media and education campaign
has two elements: a PBS documentary series highlighting careers
in our industry that will reach up to 60 million viewers, and
an online career portal which launches this summer. We're also
launching the SEMI Career and Apprenticeship Network, or SCAN,
designed for the EDA's (Economic Development Administration's)
good jobs challenge. SCAN is a registered apprenticeship
program that trains, supports, and places people into quality
jobs at committed employees--employers. We also do extensive
work with veterans, high school students, and in the realm of
diversity, equity, and inclusion.
While these programs are highly beneficial, there are
challenges to creating programs that benefit students,
employees, and employers. A major issue in ensuring programs
are industry-led, meaning that the programs truly train workers
in high-demand skills for currently open jobs while also being
worker-centric so prospective employees have the support
systems they need to complete training and be positioned for
success.
It's also crucial that workplaces are truly welcoming and
embrace active belonging practices. For companies to have the
workforce they need and to be innovative, productive, and
profitable, they need a far more diverse workforce. That means
women returning to work need to feel welcome. That means that
people that have taken time off for family caregiving need to
feel welcomed back, that veterans transitioning to civilian
jobs, justice-involved individuals charting new paths. This can
only be accomplished through intentional diversity, equity, and
inclusion practices.
There are many areas where policymakers can help transform
our industry for the better. For example, we can increase
investments in awareness and visibility of programs to recruit
new individuals into the industry, encourage organizations and
coalitions to create programs that connect diversity, equity,
and inclusion to their workforce efforts, and increase
investments in STEM education to provide support for full
talent pipeline investment from elementary school all the way
through university with a focus on recruiting, supporting, and
retaining underrepresented groups in STEM education.
Again, thank you so much for this incredible opportunity. I
look forward to our discussion.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Liss follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. And now we'll move to Dr.
Awadelkarim. And we got to get you off mute.

TESTIMONY OF DR. OSAMA AWADELKARIM,

UNESCO CHAIR PROFESSOR AND DIRECTOR

OF THE CENTER FOR NANOTECHNOLOGY

EDUCATION AND UTILIZATION (CNEU)

AT PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Awadelkarim. Thank you.
Chairwoman Stevens. There we go.
Dr. Awadelkarim. Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Member
Feenstra, and honorable Members of the Committee, thank you for
inviting me to this important hearing. I testify today as a
Director of the Pennsylvania State University Center for
Nanotechnology Education and Utilization, known as CNEU. CNEU
was established in 1998 to address the needs of the
Pennsylvania semiconductor industry for skilled workers and is
dedicated to preparing them across the full range of micro- and
nanofabrication applications. The resources of CNEU, which
includes an outstanding infrastructure faculty and a cleanroom
dedicated to hands-on student experiences, are focused on the
incorporation of nanotechnology into all levels of education.
CNEU works with industry and over 40 Pennsylvania
postsecondary institutions to create degree programs
incorporating nanoscale fabrication and characterization with
an emphasis on semiconductor process. A strong semiconductor
industry must have a workforce skilled in fabrication and
characterization at the nanoscale.
CNEU pioneered and developed its resource-sharing approach,
keyword resource-sharing, for such an advanced and complex
manufacturing, which is forming partnerships with research
universities, industry, and community colleges to enable
critical hands-on training, as well as expert faculty resources
that are not available at community and technical colleges.
This resource-sharing model established CNEU as a global leader
in nanotechnology education and workforce development.
Subsequently, in 2008 the Advanced Technology Education
Program at the National Science Foundation created the
Nanotechnology Applications and Career Knowledge Center, or
NACK, at CNEU. NACK has helped to provide needed national
micro- and nanotechnology education infrastructure for the
country by supporting, coordinating, and integrating efforts by
research universities and community and technical colleges
across the entire United States. As a result of NACK's efforts,
the educational workforce development programs in micro- and
nanotechnology are growing at universities and community
colleges throughout the United States.
Industry and research universities have an important role
to play in assisting workforce development institutions in
preparing a skilled semiconductor workforce. This includes
sharing infrastructure, advising on the skills needed,
providing development opportunities for students and educators,
funding and donating functional equipment, and assisting in
student recruitment by highlighting the merits and
opportunities of joining the microelectronics workforce.
In 2008, CNEU piloted the Remotely Accessible Instruments
for Nanotechnology, or RAIN, network, which enables web access
to state-of-the-art characterization--nano characterization
tools for hands-on experience for institutions without these
capabilities. To date, 28 RAIN partners have provided close to
600 remote access sessions to over 11,000 students. NACK is
currently working with the NSF Micro Nano Technology Education
Center to further expand the RAIN network and its utilization.
For the United States to fill the gap in the semiconductor
workforce it's important to draw significant numbers of skilled
workers from underrepresented ethnic groups or populations.
Therefore, since 2018, CNEU has collaborated with historically
Black colleges and universities (HBCUs) and Hispanic-serving
institutions. To date--and from African-American and Hispanic
ethnic groups 45 students including 22 females are being
trained at CNEU. In addition, 167 other students from the same
groups train remotely. Enhancing the representation of females
and other minority groups, including the military veterans, is
crucial in diversifying and prompting equity and inclusion in
the microelectronics workforce.
In the past 2 years, CNEU offered the Nanomanufacturing
Certificate Program for veterans recruited from military
installations in the Tidewater region of Virginia. This work is
in progress and includes attempts to expand the program to
other branches of the military.
During this challenging times, our Nation's semiconductor
industry workforce development needs to be effective,
efficient, and outcome-driven. This calls for Federal
Government intervention and action to boost semiconductor
manufacturing workforce development. Ways in which government
can assist may include implementing the CHIPS Act, supporting
creation on sustenance workforce education, partnerships, and
identifying ways to incentivize industry to become more
engaged.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Awadelkarim follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Great, thank you, Dr. Awadelkarim.
And we'll get to Dr. Liu now. Thank you.

TESTIMONY OF DR. TSU-JAE KING LIU,

DEAN AND ROY W. CARLSON PROFESSOR OF ENGINEERING

AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY

Dr. Liu. Thank you. Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Member
Feenstra, and Members of the Research and Technology
Subcommittee, thank you very much for inviting me to testify on
the topic of strengthening the microelectronics workforce in
the United States. I'm Dean of the College of Engineering and a
Distinguished Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Sciences at the University of California Berkeley where I've
been leading research on semiconductor devices and technology
for over 25 years.
Today, I'm speaking in my capacity as an educator and as
Chair of the Executive Committee for the American Semiconductor
Academy Initiative or ASA Initiative. I'm eager to share with
you my perspective on how universities and colleges in the
United States can partner with the government and industry to
secure America's leadership in semiconductor manufacturing.
The current chip shortage has exposed critical supply chain
vulnerabilities due to the steady decline in the U.S. share of
semiconductor manufacturing capacity, which is only 12 percent
today. Reshoring semiconductor chip manufacturing is critical
for our country's long-term economic competitiveness and
national security, and it requires investment in workforce
development, as well as in new manufacturing facilities.
Integrated circuits (ICs) are highly complex systems that
can comprise up to 50 billion transistors on a single silicon
chip. Designing and building these advanced chips requires
teams of highly trained and skilled workers.
Now, back in 2017, a survey found that 82 percent of
semiconductor industry executives reported a shortage of
qualified job candidates. The challenge of finding qualified
workers has only increased since then, and it is now acute at
all skill and education levels. It takes years to educate and
train a technician or an engineer, particularly for jobs in the
microelectronics industry, which is why action is needed now.
The ASA Initiative aims to grow the talent pool for the
microelectronics industry with speed and scale in order to meet
the urgent workforce needs of a resurging domestic
microelectronics industry. The ASA Initiative promotes
collaboration between universities and community colleges to
empower faculty nationwide by sharing curriculum materials and
best practices for offering high-quality courses and hands-on
training to a diversity of students. It also engages SEMI,
which represent over 2,500 member companies across the
microelectronics ecosystem, to raise awareness and support
students to pursue careers in microelectronics by facilitating
industry--by facilitating professional development and access
to a wide variety of internships and jobs.
This university-industry partnership can connect more than
200 universities and community colleges across the country to
the more than 1,500 SEMI member companies with U.S. operations.
To truly maximize the scale of this initiative requires
leadership and support from the Federal Government. We estimate
that for each $100 million invested per year, approximately
2,000 additional new graduates can be produced annually for the
microelectronics industry.
The Federal Government has shown leadership in the past for
ambitious initiatives like the space race and the Human Genome
Project. The recent passage of the COMPETES Act gives me hope
that America will soon be better equipped to win the chip race.
Thank you very much for your consideration, and I look forward
to answering your questions from the Subcommittee Members.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Liu follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you.
At this point we're going to begin the first round of
questions. The Chair is going to recognize herself for 5
minutes.
Look, this is an incredibly complex sector of our economy
and sector of industry, and listening to what all of you have
to say and in your brilliant testimony, as well as reading your
written testimony, what we are experiencing with the workforce
shortage is something that most Members of Congress hear day in
and day out in their districts, that they just can't find the
employees. I mentioned that I have a program called
Manufacturing Monday where I work really closely and go and
visit small to midsize manufacturers and I hear about their
workforce shortages. We have also known about a skills gap in
this country for a long time that's only been exacerbated by a
pandemic. And now, though, we see other industries, home-
improvement sector, you know, the library, the juice shop, you
know, not necessarily being able to get people in to fill all
the hours that are available.
But specifically for semiconductors and what it takes to
work in a fab, I was wondering if our panel could just lend a
few minutes to what it takes to go into a fab, you know, the
suiting up, the intricacies, the development and, you know, if
there's certain personality or if it's that we just haven't
explained how essential this is. But when you're walking
through the doors--and many of you are at the university level,
that's great, and you're doing this, though, at the university
level or at the foundation level. So maybe we could start with
you, Dr. Liu. You know, what does it take to go work in a fab?
Dr. Liu. Well, that's a wonderful question, Chairwoman
Stevens. You know, I think hands-on experience--learning
opportunities is critical in this field. We can learn
theoretically how transistors and chips are made, but unless
you work in a fab and you understand why we need a cleanroom in
the first place, like why do we need to suit up, it's because
these devices are so small, any bit of dust that might fall on
your wafer, you know, as you're processing can actually reduce
the manufacturing yield and cost your company hundreds of
millions of dollars. So I think the hands-on training portion
is actually uniquely critical to the semiconductor industry.
And this is where there's a challenge because it does take time
to learn the physics and the math and engineering, and then to
work in a cleanroom takes a lot of patience because it does
take so many steps to even fabricate some functional dies.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes. I've put on the suit several times
myself, and a lot of respect for people who do it day in and
day out. And, Ms. Liss, maybe you can talk about this as well,
particularly in terms of the diversity, equity, and inclusion
efforts that you have been pursuing. You know, how do we break
down those barriers? How do we get hands-on learning? How can
the Federal Government help, if at all?
Ms. Liss. A great question, and thank you for that. To add
to Dr. Liu's points, you know, I think in addition to the
hands-on training and the technical skills, we're also looking
at building up the soft skills in a number of people. And one
of the pathways that we're building right now is a registered
apprenticeship model to tackle exactly this challenge for
technicians and operators. And in doing that, we're hoping to
diversify the talent pipeline. We're hoping to open more doors
to more communities and partner closely with community colleges
on the ground and technical skills to be able to train folks to
walk into those cleanrooms. We're already seeing a deficit in
those needs, and with chips, we imagine the numbers are going
to grow really substantially in the coming years. So trying to
open this pathway, diversify the incoming opportunities, and
not require 4-year degrees to move into that space is going to
be really critical. So we need support to be able to build out
those programs, again, to diversify the talent pipeline for
sure is a huge part of this work.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes, and Dr. Awadelkarim, you know,
you're joined by a couple of my colleagues from the State of
Pennsylvania who I'm sure are going to be very eager to talk to
you. But, you know, you've mapped out the presence in your
written testimony within the State, and I was just wondering if
you could talk about some of the success stories that you've
seen.
Dr. Awadelkarim. OK. First of all, I'd like to underline
one thing that is very important. We're very fortunate that we
have a dedicated teaching cleanroom. Penn State has been very
generous in giving us the space, giving us the funds to build a
teaching cleanroom. This is not the case in many other research
universities. Cleanrooms are very expensive to build and very
expensive to maintain. So most universities restrict them to
research. And they're hardly--you know, students are hardly
given opportunities, you know, to actually go into cleanrooms
and practice hands-on experiences.
Having this cleanroom and having the general support of the
State of Pennsylvania since 1998 all the way to 2012, we were
able to bring students and teach them hands-on experience, and
students from community colleges hands-on experiences on
these--in this cleanroom.
Now, the first thing that we do when students come and stay
at Penn State is we offer them a very specific course on how to
deal with the cleanroom.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes. And why don't we do this, Dr.
Awadelkarim, because I'm over my 5 minutes. And, as I
mentioned, we do have some colleagues on who are from your
State and I'm sure they would like to brag on what you've
talked about. So why don't I yield back and pass this over to
my colleague, the Ranking Member, Congressman Feenstra for 5
minutes. Thank you so much.
Dr. Awadelkarim. Thank you.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, I just want to thank each one of our
expert witnesses. I mean, you've provided incredible testimony
and insightful thoughts on these issues. And it's just
impressive to hear each one of you.
To followup with you, Dr. Awadelkarim, in your testimony
you state that the goal of the Centers for Nanotechnology
Applications and Career Knowledge is to replicate the success
of your programs nationwide by supporting and integrating
efforts by community and technical colleges across the country
to provide nanotechnology workforce education. So given this
experience, do you think the Federal Government is making
effective and efficient investments in the nanofabrication
education and training?
Dr. Awadelkarim. Actually, I was--you know, this is just a
followup to my answer, you know, to Chairwoman Stevens.
Pennsylvania is very critical in supporting us and allowing us
to do this, you know, for Pennsylvania, you know, community
college. However, the NSF has picked up Pennsylvania experience
and then supported us since 2012. Overall, we were able to
graduate over 1,000 students out of this, you know,
nanomanufacturing initiative that we have. So I can say that
the Federal Government, through the NSF, has been very
generously providing support.
The support actually primarily goes to bringing the
students over here and, you know, maintaining them while they
are here. But I think to actually generalize or replicate this
experience of ours throughout the United States, more funds are
clearly needed, you know, to do this, and we have built some
similar partnerships throughout the United States which can
actually do the same.
Mr. Feenstra. Right. I agree 100 percent. Thank you.
Dr. Liu, thank you for your testimony on the American
Semiconductor Academy. As we look to expand our workforce while
being good stewards of taxpayer money, what steps would you
take to ensure the ASA is capitalizing on the Federal
investments already made like those at NACK? Do you have a plan
for leveraging those investments while ensuring there's no
duplication of efforts?
Dr. Liu. Absolutely. Thank you for that excellent question,
Ranking Member Feenstra. As Professor Awadelkarim has
mentioned, there are universities in the United States who have
been--which have been supported by the Federal Government to
establish these very expensive and sophisticated facilities,
cleanroom facilities to train students. And so the ASA really
is advocating for increasing accessibility of those facilities.
So, first of all, modernization because the field of
microelectronics is a rapidly evolving field, right? The
technology increases in capability exponentially. The--new
equipment is invented every year. So we'd like to upgrade the
existing facilities and then open them up so that they have
greater--so that more students, a greater diversity of students
can learn in those facilities. But how do you even coordinate
that? So Federal investment is needed to help us coordinate and
leverage existing investments.
Mr. Feenstra. Right. And do you see--the coordination--I
look at the Federal programs like the NSF, the national labs,
the Department of Commerce. Do you see problems coordinating
there or is that pretty seamless?
Dr. Liu. I think it's pretty seamless because the
facilities are standalone. They operate--they do get funding
for multiple sources. I think this is a multiagency, you know,
opportunity to work together to support, you know, the
universities to be able to help more students across the
country, yes. I think that's the best use of our Nation's--our
taxpayers' dollars.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, that's great to hear.
Ms. Liss, can you please speak on how the American
Semiconductor Academy can play a role in connecting academia
and industry to ensure students are being trained with the
skill sets needed by the industry? I think there's so much
going on right now, and I'm just wondering how we can do this.
Ms. Liss. Thank you. That's a great question. And we're
very excited about our partnership with Dr. Liu and the ASA.
You know, we been talking a lot about the ability to connect
industry members to the education system more seamlessly and to
have input on the needs, the really tremendous and critical
needs that we are not filling within the workforce from an
education standpoint in terms of which courses, curriculum,
degrees are needed to be able to fill all of the jobs that are
coming. And our partnership is really beautiful in a lot of
ways because a lot of our work at the SEMI Foundation is
building the pipeline K-12, building apprenticeship models,
partnering with the community college system, and now also
helping to serve into the university system as well. So I think
by connecting industry voices to university system will be able
to better identify the competencies and skills that are needed
in order to be successful in this industry.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, that's great to hear, thank you.
Ms. Liss. Thank you.
Mr. Feenstra. And I yield back. Thanks for each of your
comments.
Chairwoman Stevens. All right. Thank you. And now we will
hear from Congresswoman Ross for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Ross. Great, I got to go early. Thank you so, so much.
And this is a terrific panel.
And I just have to share this. I'm from North Carolina,
from the Research Triangle area, and I--before I came to this
Committee meeting, I went to Wake Tech Community College. And
they just got a $1.4 million NSF grant to allow Wake Tech
students to do hands-on research, have mentors, get paid
apprenticeships, get communication skills, and be able to work
in cutting-edge areas.
And the student who we talked to was talking about
antimicrobial resistance, which was--is very important for the
biotech industry at Wake Tech. But when I talked to the
President of Wake Tech, he said if there was this kind of NSF
grant for microelectronics, Wake Tech would be applying for it
in a heartbeat. And we have a new East Wake Tech campus that's
opening up soon focusing on manufacturing.
And so I think maybe starting with Ms. Liss, but I'd like
to hear from all of the panelists whether or not since we're
going to be giving NSF some more money and we've got this money
for semiconductors, whether this type of program where we marry
all of these things and in addition several of our colleges and
universities would be involved, including land-grant and HBCUs
if people wanted to go beyond their apprenticeship and get
higher education. Tell me whether you think we should set up
these programs, you know, all across the country or whether
this works? And let's start with Ms. Liss and then maybe Dr.
Liu and then keep going around.
Ms. Liss. Yes, that's an excellent question. And yes, yes,
and yes. So I think what we're trying to do is build these STEM
ecosystems that can support this industry in each of the
regions that we're focused on. And our Good Jobs Challenge
grant app that we just submitted, it was building an ecosystem
in California and Arizona as two starting points. But we've
already been approached by multiple States to do similar and
expanded work. I think bringing together workforce development
boards, K-12 education, community colleges, universities,
economic councils, State-level legislators is going to be
really critical in building things that will help scale and be
supported and continue to be maintainable. You know, I think--
and sustainable. I think that's going to be the most critical
part of this work is bringing together all of these voices to
make sure that we're adding real value to this industry and
finding the folks that can make the most difference in the
world through it. So, yes, absolutely. I love that that grant
was awarded and we're doing some more work. Thank you.
Ms. Ross. Dr. Liu and then Dr. Awadelkarim.
Dr. Liu. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman Ross. That is
wonderful. Congratulations on Wake Tech's success in securing
that grant.
I echo everything that Ms. Liss said, and I just want--just
would like to add that at Berkeley we have had programs funded
by the NSF. We call it Transfer-to-Excellence to support
community college students coming to Berkeley because we have
the facilities to gain research experience during the
summertime. But I think the key there is to expose them to
increase awareness of this field and to understand that there
are good jobs here and this--they can make a tremendous impact
on society, a positive impact. And then that incentivizes them
to go back, take their courses more seriously, and even maybe
not even aim for technician roles but transfer to university
and aim for higher--a higher level professional degree. So I
think a lot of it is increasing awareness and attracting
students and motivating them to stick with it, right? It does
take many years and it's not easy. It's a rigorous education
that they must go through. So programs like that I think indeed
should be replicated. We should share those best practices
across the Nation.
Dr. Awadelkarim. Maybe what I could--I always feel very
happy, you know, when I hear that more money is going to the
advanced technological education program, the NSF, and that
seems to be what's going to happen here. So that is very
encouraging itself.
I think the ATE (Advanced Technological Education) program
has done a lot in actually, you know, propagating, you know,
nanofabrication and semiconductor manufacturing across the
community colleges. And now the NSF has Micro Nano Technology
Education Centers, which is a national center, and we at NACK
are working very closely with this center that is trying to do
the same thing, in other words, disseminate semiconductor
education throughout.
I think the suggestion that I will make is trying to get
into this program or to this pool of money, universities and
industries, together with community colleges, in kind of
partnerships because they need each other and they need the
infrastructure that is provided by industry and universities so
that this, you know, approach that we prove very successful,
you know, resource-sharing could actually flourish. So if that
kind of funding stream is created, that would be great.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And with that, we are going to
hear from Congressman Gonzalez.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking
Member Feenstra, for holding this hearing today. Additionally,
thank you to our witnesses for sharing their expertise on these
important topics.
As we've heard from all of our witnesses, it cannot be
underscored enough how important chips are in day-to-day
American life. We see that in every sector of the economy, and
it's disheartening to hear that over the course of the past
three decades, manufacturing of these chips has been offshored
and, even more troublesome, to adversaries like China.
On the positive side, of course, I was thrilled to learn
that Intel Corporation has chosen my home State of Ohio as the
future home of semiconductor manufacturing facilities. The
project will generate more than 20,000 jobs projected--I think
it will be higher when we look at downstream jobs--in Ohio and
reaffirm our stances as a hub for manufacturing and innovation.
I can almost think of no greater economic development tool than
bringing our chips--chip manufacturing back home to the United
States, but of course they should all come to Ohio.
Dr. Awadelkarim, in your testimony you highlighted the
important collaboration between Penn State, Pennsylvania
community colleges, and other 2-year degree-granting
institutions. How would a State like Ohio or any other State
benefit from these sorts of collaborations going forward?
Dr. Awadelkarim. OK. The reason that our initiative was
only, you know, Pennsylvania-based is because of the funding of
the State of Pennsylvania, which restrict us to only work with
community colleges in Pennsylvania. However, through the NSF,
we're also working with community colleges. I could have
certainly, you know, right, you know, give an answer, you know,
to the kind of community--a written answer to community
colleges that we work with in Ohio, but NACK works across the
entire United States. And so we're able to work with Ohio.
But the biggest issue is for the student to come to Penn
State, that involves high cost for them, and then they need to
be able to find the funds so as to do that. So we prefer that
the work with neighboring university, research university that
can provide that experience to them.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. And what is it about the partnership
that works well? And I'm asking from the standpoint of trying
to figure out, you know, what should all of our States be
thinking about in order to duplicate the success that you've
had in Pennsylvania? What are those key things that we should
be doing more of?
Dr. Awadelkarim. What I would say, the No. 1 thing is
funding of course, you know, for students, you know, to be able
to attend. That's one thing. The other thing is to propagate
the experience and replicate it. In other words, get some
interest in research university and industry that they're able
to do this. And now you're saying that Intel is moving to Ohio,
that's a big blessing because then Intel can play a crucial
role, you know, in actually building that partnership simply
because of the need, you know, for the skilled workforce.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. With that, I'm going to switch to Ms.
Liss. Piggybacking off that, we know that there's not currently
enough people still to fill these jobs even though they're
great jobs. Has the SEMI Foundation begun to look at programs
that could increase the pipeline? And how should we think about
spreading awareness in particular for our students?
Ms. Liss. Yes, all of our programs are about increasing the
talent pipeline and looking at this desperate situation in
terms of workforce need. And we actually are about to launch
this very significant image and awareness campaign around the
industry. The website tool that we're about to launch in June
will be a skills analysis and skills gap analysis tool for
students, for veterans, for women returning to work. It will
tell the stories of the industry. It will show the breadth and
depth of the opportunities. It will link to all the
universities and community colleges that are offering content
and curriculum and degrees in this space. And it is to raise
awareness about the industry.
And I don't know if you've talked to high school students
or even community college students or university students
recently, but if you ask them if they know anything about the
semiconductor industry, they will know everything on their
phone but not how it works, and so we need to change that
dynamic. And from an image perspective, the image is only the
white coat and the cleanrooms. Although that's part of it,
there's so much other opportunity within the industry. So being
able to tell the story in a way that's exciting and sexy for
kids is going to be really critical in building workforce.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes, thank you for sharing that. I couldn't
agree more. And the one thing I like that we're highlighting in
this panel is--or in this hearing is that the skills need to
exist across a whole host of demographics and educational
backgrounds, right? It's not just Ph.D.'s, 4-year college.
Let's get community colleges, let's get the skilled trades
involved and make sure that we have everything we need to
really restart chip manufacturing here in the United States.
Thank you----
Ms. Liss. If I----
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Ms. Liss. I'm sorry, I was just going to say. If it's OK,
I'm already talking to folks in Ohio.
Mr. Gonzalez. Wonderful. Well, I love to hear that.
Ms. Liss. There's a lot of interest.
Mr. Gonzalez. There absolutely is. And with that, I will
yield back to Madam Chair. Thank you.
Chairwoman Stevens. Excellent. And with that, we're going
to hear from my friend and colleague Congressman Tonko. Your
friend and colleague, too, Congressman Gonzalez, so----
Mr. Tonko. OK, Chair Stevens, can you hear me? Thank you.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you, Ranking Member Feenstra
and the witnesses, for being here today.
At the heart of the education and workforce engine driving
the U.S. microelectronics industry are our colleges and
universities. If we as a nation intend to reassert ourselves as
a global leader in chip fracturing, we definitely need a well-
funded and sustained national strategy, a strategy that engages
our community colleges, our 4-year colleges, and research
universities with industry on a large enough scale to make a
real impact.
New York's capital region is home to prime examples of
higher ed institutions with access to cutting-edge fabrication
facilities for firsthand learning opportunities. The Albany
NanoTech Complex, for example, is the most advanced publicly
owned semiconductor R&D facility in our United States and
supports workforce development at all levels. Tech Valley High
School is located at that site. It has ongoing programs with
community colleges for technician training, and it coordinates
with all 64 of our city campuses to increase opportunities in a
variety of career paths from engineering to process operators
and maintenance technicians.
GlobalFoundries also in my district established the first
United States Department of Labor-registered apprenticeship
program in the semiconductor industry at its Malta, New York,
headquarters. It's an 18-month maintenance technician
apprenticeship program with on-the-job training, instructor-led
classes, web-based courses and college courses in partnership
with Hudson Valley Community College and other nearby schools.
Learning opportunities like these great capital region examples
enable direct transitioning to the semiconductor manufacturing
workforce and should be encouraged and replicated throughout
the country.
As you may be aware, the House passed the Microelectronics
Research for Energy Innovation Act as part of the broader
America COMPETES Act of 2022. I led this bill in partnership
with my colleague Mr. Ellzey, and it would authorize an effort
to leverage the Department of Energy's (DOE's) capabilities,
including the DOE national labs and their partners in industry
and academia, to tackle foundational challenges in the
scientific areas relevant to microelectronics. Among the
provisions included in the MICRO Act are directives to support
workforce development efforts related to microelectronics
through scholarships, fellowships, education, and public
outreach activities, hands-on research and equipment training
programs, and indeed certificate programs.
So, Dr. Liu, can you comment on how the national labs might
serve as unique venues for the type of activity authorized in
the MICRO Act?
Dr. Liu. Well, thank you so much, Congressman Tonko. And
it's very inspiring, the example of the New York State, you
know, Albany partnership between government and industry and
universities and colleges. It's really a model, I think, that
we do indeed need replicated in other parts of the country,
including Ohio, Texas, Arizona, and so on.
So the Department of Energy of course has invested in
microelectronics because they need the world's best computers,
right, for their work. And so the national labs also serve as a
resource for our country to train future engineers and
technicians perhaps for some more--aiming for defense industry,
you know, careers, so they definitely play a complementary role
to universities and offer hands-on, practical skills training
that actually can also help to incentivize students to stick
with it and pursue these careers because a lot of the students,
once they take a course in computer science and have an
internship there, they're hooked. We need to give them
internships early. And so this is why we need to work together,
network. How do we replicate the model in Albany? Well, we need
a network to share that through, and so this is what we'd like
to do as soon as possible. Thank you so much for your support.
Mr. Tonko. Oh, thank you. And would either of our other two
witnesses want to comment?
Ms. Liss. Sure. The hub in New York is one of the most
talked about and hopefully replicated models around. Meeting
with the Hudson Valley Community College, SUNY (State
University of New York) Poly, trying to figure how we can build
upon the successes that are happening there and with
GlobalFoundries as well in terms of the apprenticeship model
that they've launched so successfully. So it is about taking
best practices and hoping to replicate that work and seeing
that really come to fruition across the country.
I just want to give my other panelists a moment as well,
but thank you.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much.
Dr. Awadelkarim. And I also commend--you know, we have a
lot of work ongoing with Albany, SUNY Albany, and SUNY Albany
has a NEATEC Center, which is Northeast Advanced Technological
Center, again, funded by the NSF. We've been working together
for several years now, more than 10 years, and we're still, you
know, engaged with them. And I think the investment that the
State of New York has put, you know, on boosting the
semiconductor workforce and training, I think it was--it's
commended, you know, and we certainly work with them in many
areas.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much. And, Madam Chair, I'll just
tell you that it's an honor to have worked with this as the New
York State Assembly Chair on Energy when I was there in that
body and as the leader at NYSERDA, the State Energy Research
and Development Authority, and now in Congress. So it's been a
great bit of collaboration and I'm very proud of it and I hope
we can continue to expand upon it and spread it across the
country. And thank you for your leadership with the
Subcommittee. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. All right. And now we will hear from
Dr. Baird for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I know you have a
background in the auto industry, so this--that makes this
hearing even more significant to you.
And I want to congratulate my colleague, Representative
Feenstra. And you know, he mentioned agriculture and he
mentioned equipment. It's amazing to me that we have such
sophisticated equipment today to be able to do precision
agriculture, and it's going to be so important down the road to
be able to provide food and fiber for the world that we do. And
so if you have not ever been to a farm progress show, I think
Randy would tell you that that's a good place to see all kinds
of technology in place and in action, and it requires all these
semiconductors to do it.
But, you know, this hearing--and I think it's really
important. We have focused on making sure that we try to
energize and attract young people into the industry. And I can
tell you this. One of the avenues that I see in my district has
been the community colleges. And many of you mentioned the
community colleges. But they are right next to in those
communities to industries, and they've been working across the
board with one another to provide the training that is needed
for that industry from that community college. And then in that
same vein I think it takes leadership at the universities as
well.
And so my question to all of you is do you think that we
have sufficient staffing at, say, Purdue or Berkeley or Penn
State? I think I got them all in there from here anyway. But do
you think we've got enough faculty currently on staff to try to
help this grow that has the base, you know, like Purdue's got a
lot of engineering and a lot of this could move across. And so
we might have a sufficient number of faculty to at least expand
on this. So my question goes to all the witnesses. And so, Dr.
Liu, I guess we'll start with you.
Dr. Liu. All right. Thank you so much, Congressman Baird.
That's an excellent question. It's something we haven't talked
about yet. It is true, there will be a need for more faculty
who are empowered to teach, you know, cutting-edge
microelectronics curriculum. And many of the faculty members
who teach in this area today will be retiring in the near
future, and so I think there is a need.
As a part of that $100 million a year investment that I
mentioned earlier does appropriate funding for universities to
incentivize universities to prioritize hiring a faculty in our
field because today a lot of universities are looking to hire
faculty like in computing or so on because there's such a huge
demand for that--for those workers as well. So I think some
incentives for universities to prioritize hiring of faculty in
microelectronics and to help them startup research programs, so
a little bit of, you know, investment is definitely needed
there. And we can do the same at community colleges as well. So
I agree that we--that that is a need.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Good to hear. Dr. Liss?
Ms. Liss. I agree with everything that Dr. Liu just said.
As we're watching the technology shift and change, too, there's
going to be new trainings that are going to be needed for the
university professors, as well as community college professors.
It is a concern in the community college space that I'm working
with closely on this apprenticeship model and on training are
entry-level engineers. There's a lot of concern about keeping
up with AI machine learning, data science, and making sure that
we have all of the right professors in place to do all of that,
so absolutely the need is going to continue to grow as well on
that front.
Mr. Baird. Super. Thank you. Dr. Awadelkarim?
Dr. Awadelkarim. That's an excellent question. Thank you
for that question. Yes, there is a need of course for staffing
to be able to do this. And at CNEU, you know, we hire our own
staff and we have the funding, so we pay the salaries, et
cetera. So none of Penn State faculty are involved in actually
teaching these courses. We have our own staff. So that's one
important thing.
But I'm very excited about ASA and what is being said here
because it's bringing together industry, universities, and
community colleges, and that could be an issue that could be
addressed there, and ASA could play a big role, you know, in
facilitating that kind of need or demand. And I think it's
doable if, you know, the proper funding is in place, you know,
to do that, and if industry plays an effective role in
surmounting that hurdle.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you for that. And I--you know, I'm a
strong advocate for the United States of America taking a lead
role around the world, and I think we have the talent and the
capability. And so having the kind of input we have from you
here today helps us make the appropriate decisions on this
Committee where we can direct dollars to maybe help entice
getting that back to our country.
So I've got 8 minutes left, Madam Chair, and I'm going to
give you 4 of those. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great, thank you. And thank you, Dr.
Baird. And with that, we'll hear from Congresswoman Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you so much, Madam Chair. To everybody
involved in this panel, I represent Pennsylvania's 7th District
covering the greater Lehigh Valley where we have a proud
tradition of American manufacturing leadership. And when I meet
with local manufacturers no matter what industry we're talking
about, they always say that a reliable supply of modern chips
is one of their top business needs.
I also have a significant semiconductor industry presence
in my district. I recently visited the Allentown location of
Infinera, a company that designs and assembles advanced
microelectronics. And my district is a major site for
Advantest, an automatic test equipment provider for the
semiconductor industry to validate chip functions.
So I have been really proud to support the CHIPS Act and to
support fully funding it by passing the America COMPETES Act.
I do believe that Congress must act quickly. This should be
a top priority to jumpstart our return to American leadership
in semiconductor manufacturing, a capability that is vital to
our Nation's overall manufacturing ability and to our national
security.
And welcome in particular I have to do a shout out to Dr.
Awadelkarim. I know I botched your name. I'm so sorry, I tried.
Welcome to a fellow Pennsylvanian here, and thank you so much
for your work with Penn State.
In--now, this is--in your written testimony, each of you
has touched on the importance of on-the-job and apprenticeship
training programs, especially for technician training.
Advantest, which has a site in my district, has closely
followed the work of SEMI and hopes to develop technical
apprenticeship programs possibly as a complement to community
college learning to address its workforce needs.
Ms. Liss, your written testimony describes SEMI's workforce
development initiatives, including apprenticeship models. Based
on your experience leading that work, what barriers exist to
engaging employers in an apprenticeship model?
Ms. Liss. That is a great question. Thank you so much. I'm
actually working quite closely with Advantest----
Ms. Wild. Oh, good.
Ms. Liss [continuing]. On that project as well.
Ms. Wild. Good.
Ms. Liss [continuing]. Which is wonderful. The barriers for
industry engagement is the question, so----
Ms. Wild. Yes, what barriers exist to engaging employers in
this--in the apprenticeship model?
Ms. Liss. Yes, I think it is essentially a heart and mind
shift across the industry. So as the semiconductor industry in
working with hundreds of companies all the time, you know, the
past has always been hiring folks with 4-year degrees, with
Ph.D.'s, with master's degrees. Everybody has to be very
educated to be successful in this space. At the same time, the
industry is saying that we have a real workforce development
challenge and we'd like to diversify that workforce. So in
order to kind of bridge those two sort of compelling challenges
within the industry, we have to start looking at these
alternative pathways to hire.
So I think from an industry engagement point of view, it's
getting people to understand and recognize that these jobs can
be filled through an apprenticeship model, through alternative
pathways, through technical training and not necessarily
require everybody to hold at least a 4-year degree to be
successful. And for me that's the great--that's been the
greatest learning and from the challenging perspective of
working with the industry on that particular model. Everybody
agrees it's needed. It's just getting----
Ms. Wild. Right.
Ms. Liss [continuing]. The buy-in.
Ms. Wild. So are there academic or government services that
are needed to complement the on-the-job training piece of this?
Ms. Liss. Absolutely. You know, so from an academic
standpoint we had to do classroom hours for everybody that goes
through an apprenticeship model. We decided to go the
registered apprenticeship route because it also supplies
wraparound services for workers. It supplies paid community
college in several States, so it's very worker-centric-focused,
which is a fabulous addition if we want to look at retaining
talent, right? And so from an academic standpoint we have to
actively engage the community colleges in this, in addition to
the hands-on training component that happens within either the
university centers or the industry placements themselves.
Ms. Wild. Well, I'm very much on the same page with you.
I--my district has two fantastic community colleges. We have 14
in all of Pennsylvania. Two of them are in my district. And
they have a wonderful reputation for working with the employers
in our region.
And I would just--let see, do I--I have 30 seconds here.
I'd just be interested from Dr. Awadelkarim--so sorry, I know
I'm really botching that. If you could just address the
challenges that institutions--educational institutions face in
forming partnerships with these employers.
Dr. Awadelkarim. One of the difficulties actually is
actually the availability of internships and apprenticeships,
you know, for the students, you know? They are out there and we
know students could apply for them, but, you know, the number
of students that actually would like to do this, you know, or
to take this opportunity are more. You know, they outnumber,
you know, the number of available positions. So if industry
could provide some kind of incentive, you know, to come to
industry that could provide more of these positions, that of
course would be very, very, very welcome, you know, because we
try to place those students in internships and apprenticeships,
you know, in industry, and that is often very difficult to do.
One important thing--one important part that I should also
mention, what about the educators and community colleges
themselves? They need fellowships to be able to actually work
with industry because they go back, take this experience, and
teach back at their community colleges. And that is one big
part of a professional development program that we do for
educators of community colleges. I haven't discussed that in
the--my oral statement, but I've written quite a bit on that on
the written statement, too.
Ms. Wild. Well, thank you so much. My time is definitely
up. This--I could talk about this all day. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great questions. And with that we'll
hear from Congressman Ellzey.
Mr. Ellzey. Hey, Madam Chair, thank you for recognizing me.
I didn't have any questions today. Thank you to all the
witnesses for coming today. It's been an interesting
conversation and much needed, so thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Baird. Madam Chair, I think they're waiting on you.
Chairwoman Stevens. I appear to have a sound issue. Can--is
Congressman Ellzey asking 5 minutes of questions right now or
did he yield?
Mr. Ellzey. I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. OK. He said no questions. Thank you,
yes, sorry, my sound went out. So with that, we will hear from
Mr.--Dr. Bill Foster from Illinois for 5 minutes of questions.
Thank you, Mr. Ellzey. Sorry about that. The sound cut right
out, but now we can----
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Madam Chair----
Chairwoman Stevens [continuing]. Hear from Dr. Foster.
Mr. Foster. Yes, am I audible and visible here? OK. Well,
one of the advantages of Zooming from someone's, you know, like
private study/den is that I accumulate some of my stuff here.
So here is my stuff from my previous careers. This is a circuit
board that I probably spent a week of my life wiring that has
about 250 integrated circuits on about 4,000 wires that I
connected and debugged the thing. It was a 40-megahertz, 35-
stage digital pipeline processor that was used to discover the
top quark, the heaviest known form of matter.
But during my--and so I was very involved in actually using
electronic circuits. But when I look at that circuit today, I
can see the drift of the chip manufacturing business going
offshore. You know, this was built in about 1985, and most of
the chips there are Texas Instruments, Motorola, Signetics.
Actually, you know, Dr. Liu has some name recognition for those
old, great brands. And Cypress Semiconductor, which I believe
is still actually not fabless at this point if I'm correct
about it. Now--and but that's not true. A lot of those
companies have, you know, disappeared, been acquired, or are
fabless and do their manufacturing offshore.
And so one--but 10 years before that back in 1975 when I
was starting my company with my little brother, we had the
bright idea of using the newly invented microprocessor to
control theater stage lighting, which had not been done before,
and so we actually bought the second microprocessor ever built
from this startup called Intel. And the main memory was the
Intel 2102 dynamic RAM (random-access memory). Our company's
phone number today is 4116, the last four digits for the Mostek
MK4116 16,000 bit dynamic RAM, which seemed infinite at the
time.
And, you know, I just watched with sort of--with a very
heavy heart watching the dynamic RAM business go offshore,
first to Japan, then Korea, now a big part of it to Taiwan and
China, and so trying to understand what we should have done.
And it's not just integrated circuits. It is passives. You
know, when I--when we were starting our company, if you wanted
precision crystal oscillators you went to Connor-Winfield in
the Illinois 11th District, and now there are many offshore
vendors they compete with. If you wanted inductors, precision
inductors, you went to Coilcraft, and now they are--who do I
think a big part of their manufacturing offshore. And so, you
know--so we have to keep our eyes on passives and packaging as
surely as we do on just chips themselves.
But also, you know, during my time at Fermilab, after a
while, it became clear that in order to do the experiments we
needed to do, we had to design and build our own ICs. And so I
don't want to over claim, but I think I'm the only Member of
Congress that's designed 10 integrated circuits and had them
all work the first time. And so--and we also did a lot of
supervising of engineers who, you know, made the final versions
of these designs.
And so, yes, Dr. Liu, you also supervised these engineers,
and one of the thing that I was struck by is it was--the thing
that got them going is this is my chip. And, you know, we
would--we at that time had access to something called MOSIS,
which I take it has kind of disappeared, which is a way that
they--you know, you used to be able to get for not very much
money a small number of a new chip design, you know. And the
fact that that, too, has disappeared I think really takes the
wind out of getting young engineers excited about this.
So I was wondering, you know, what are the things that have
been tried to keep multi-project wafers going that would let,
you know, graduate students or even undergrads have access and
actually build their own chip and get that thrill of seeing the
chip they designed work?
Dr. Liu. Well, that's a wonderful question, Congressman
Foster and Dr. Foster. I actually appreciate that engineers can
also contribute to the leadership of our country, so it's a
pleasure to engage with you in conversation.
So, you know, your question was about the multichip--or
multi-project wafer programs. So it turns out that Intel is in
the process of--actually offers a multi-project wafer kind of
service. They call it the University Shuttle. And--but part of
the challenge is that even though they offer space on chips so
students can design and see their chips fabricated and they
eventually test them, the sophistication of the chips has grown
exponentially since you were a student even though it's not
that long ago. And so the software tools have evolved to allow
people to design billion-component or, you know, thousand-
component products essentially within a few weeks of a
semester. The software tools are actually--are needed to be
able to design these chips today. And that's where
accessibility is a challenge because, you know, if the
computing systems you need, the cloud computing credits you
need to even design a chip because it's so complex, it poses a
barrier.
So this is one of the challenges that we would like to
address with the ASA network. At Berkeley we actually have
designed a course where students within one semester can tape
out a chip--I mean, design a chip and send it to Intel to have
it fabricated in the 16-nanometer generation technology, which
is pretty advanced. We would like to be able to package that
course and allow other faculty at other universities to be able
to teach that course.
However, software companies, electronic design automation
companies have to work with us to make their software tools
broadly accessible, and that's why the ASA should also
improve--involve an online platform that's shared across the
Nation to give students accessibility to those design tools in
order to be able to actually have their chips fabricated by
companies like Intel.
Mr. Foster. OK. And I guess I understand we're having a
second round of questions, and I'll request further on this
because we ought to find a way that we can make the--a better
economic model for getting kids, young kids access to be able
to build their own chip.
Dr. Liu. Yes. Thank you.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. That sounds excellent. Thank
you, Dr. Foster.
And then with that, we'll move to the second round of
questions. It appears as though my sound is maintaining itself.
I don't know why the internet went out for just a minute there,
but for the next round of questions I'll begin.
And my question for the panel is, you know, in thinking
about how we're going to conduct some of the workforce
development programs, could you discuss--development
organizations could contribute to some of the efforts of
assisting with the workforce development needs of the chips
sector?
Ms. Liss. I'm sorry, you cut out for a minute and I could
not----
Dr. Awadelkarim. Yes.
Ms. Liss [continuing]. Hear part of that question.
Dr. Awadelkarim. We couldn't hear it.
Staff. Ms. Stevens, if you can hear, you cut out for a
moment, and it looks like your connection froze.
Mr. Feenstra. I tell you what, this is Congressman Randy
Feenstra. While she's getting back up, I can ask--Congresswoman
Stevens, would you like to--you were cutting in and out. Sorry
about that.
Chairwoman Stevens. I know. I thought I was cutting in and
out. I saw you nodding, and then I heard our technical team say
you cut out. So let me just recap the question.
You know, the Department of Commerce put out an RFI
(request for information) in January asking about the workforce
development needs of the industry. I'm very interested to hear
how the Department of Commerce--and in full disclosure I'm a
former Department of Commerce appointee over a decade ago, so,
you know, not necessarily trying to put anybody on the spot of
understanding all the ins and outs of the agency, but how
should the Department structure the workforce development
requirements under the chips program to ensure that they are a
true priority and not just a check-the-box exercise? And with
that, how could Federal agencies other than Department of
Commerce that are a part of our chips legislation, including
Department of Energy and National Science Foundation,
contribute to these efforts? And that's an open question to all
the panelists. And Dr. Liu is nodding, so maybe we start with
you, but not to put you on the spot.
Dr. Liu. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for asking
that question. I think many of the programs in the CHIPS Act do
mention workforce development, so that speaks to the need that
transcends all special programs, and it's an urgent need for
the industry itself that exists today, so not only the programs
incentivize growth. So I do think that to make the best use of
taxpayer dollars we really should coordinate and learn and
share best practices, you know, from different programs that
have been stood up, especially from the NSF. So I think it's a
whole-of-government kind of an opportunity, a multiagency
solution. Yes, that's the gist of it.
Ms. Liss. You sort of took the words right out of my mouth,
Dr. Liu. But I do--I think this issue is so big and so pressing
and so critical that we have to all come together to support
the efforts. And although, you know, we have mapped sort of
this holistic look at workforce development, we are just one
piece of this very giant puzzle, so we're looking at, you know,
the government agencies coming together and supporting this
really significant need that's going to develop in the coming
years when we already see a need, and we just know it's going
to accelerate and just continue to grow at least over the next
several years. So we're hoping that everybody will work
together, as Dr. Liu mentioned, to find solutions to this
workforce development challenge, and that was in my response on
the RFI as well.
Dr. Awadelkarim. What I could add, you know, to my
colleagues, you know, the comments of my colleague is we have,
you know, the model of the ATE, the Advanced Technological
Education, at the NSF and how it, you know, it was very
successful, you know, in propagating advanced technology across
local community colleges, so why not learn from that and
replicate it in Department of Energy and Department of Commerce
solicitation with emphasis or focus on semiconductor workforce?
So I think that's an experience that we can learn from and we
could, you know, apply.
Mr. Feenstra. You're on mute, Congresswoman.
Chairwoman Stevens. I'm on my phone. I'm on mute. Thank
you, Dr. Awadelkarim. You know, I appreciate your getting in
there as well. And thank you to the brand-new Ranking Member
for stepping in, you know, when the Chair has, you know, a
little technical glitch. Congressman Feenstra, I'm happy to
kick it over to you for 5 more minutes of questions, and thank
you for indulging us today.
Mr. Feenstra. Congresswoman, thank you, Chair. Thank you so
much.
Ms. Liss, can you please elaborate on the SEMI VetWorks?
You know, you think many great men and women come out of our
military service highly skilled but not always with the right
credentialing to be recruited by this industry. Could you
please elaborate and speak on the SEMI VetWork tackle--how they
tackle this challenge and the importance of utilizing this
vital talent pool?
Ms. Liss. Yes, absolutely. Thank you for that question. You
know, we see military veterans and reservists as a strong and
really diverse talent pool that can contribute incredibly to
this field. And one of the challenges we face with getting
them--that population to get involved is the same thing that I
spoke about with students earlier. It's just a lack of
understanding of the industry. When I had the opportunity to
speak with some servicemembers at Fort Hood a few times talking
about the industry and explaining what we do and who we are as
an industry was--it was similar to talking to students in some
ways and also convincing folks that they had the incredible
strengths that they bring to the table that could be very
successful in our industry.
We have job fairs. We have resume-sharing. We created a vet
guide to help our members engage with different bases around
the country. We were asked by our member companies to develop
tools to help them connect more readily with veterans. So we're
really trying to elevate the folks from that part of the sector
to enter our workforce because we just see the incredible value
they bring.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, that's great. I greatly appreciate
that. I mean, it's just another talent pool that we need to
use.
Dr. Liu, I noticed that Iowa State, University of Iowa, and
the University of Northern Iowa, which are obviously in my
State, are not currently on the list of American Semiconductor
Academy university partners. I strongly believe that the
success to programs like these across the country is vitally
necessary if we're going to meet the vast industry demand and
maintain pace with China. What sort of outreach are you
currently doing or do you plan to do in rural communities to
ensure that STEM opportunities are available across the
country, specifically like this in the Midwest?
Dr. Liu. Congressman, excellent question, Ranking Member
Feenstra. Absolutely. So in Iowa there are universities and
community colleges especially that can be a wonderful pipeline
of talent to the industry. And just to be--to clarify, the list
of universities that are participating in the ASA Initiative
are helping to plan it. It is always--it always has been
intended to be, you know, open and accessible to all
universities and community colleges in the United States
because the need is too great. None of us should be trying to
seek only our--you know, to benefit only ourselves. So I think
that we would be open to--we would want to reach out to as many
faculty across the community college systems in every State, as
well as universities across the country. That is the intention.
And I'd like to mention here that, you know, community
colleges are a rich source of talent. I mean, it's a diversity
of students in community colleges, including veterans. I've had
a veteran--Navy veteran work in my research group because he
was at a community college and we had this summer, you know,
research experience. And after that he continued in my group as
a visiting scholar doing the academic work, you know, because
he learned about, you know, semiconductor research and was
hooked.
I also wanted to mention that, you know, community college
and partnership with industry and universities are important
because there's this knowledge network so--framework, so people
today, we're training them on how to make sense out of data,
that we're giving them knowledge of what we need to stay at the
forefront of technology innovation is wisdom. And so this is
where university education complements the training and the
kinds of activities happening at community colleges and in the
industry. We want to cultivate in students a growth mindset,
and that way they not only can contribute to the industry but
also help to continue to lead innovation, right? This is where
we lead, I think, in the world, and we will lead if we can
harness all the diversity of talent in the United States.
Mr. Feenstra. Now, I agree with that, Dr. Liu. How do you--
I mean, this is sort of my area that I'm--I'd like to dive
into. You talk about quantum computing and AI, and as this
continues to grow, you know, do you see--I mean, I'm just
looking at a 30,000-foot view. Do you see that we're getting
further behind in that truly, you know, expert world
comparing--compared to other countries globally? I mean, I get
a little concerned. Or don't you see that necessarily?
Dr. Liu. I think our country right now is still doing
leading research in AI and in quantum computing, but it's
difficult because, unfortunately, for research a lot of our
students are from other countries, right, in the graduate
programs. So this is why it's important to raise the visibility
and awareness that these are really important, you know,
impactful careers, and we want to attract more domestic
students to our programs.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you so much, and I yield back. Thank
you.
Dr. Liu. Thank you.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And with that, is Congresswoman
Ross still with us? Great. Go ahead, Congresswoman Ross, 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much. This has just been
wonderful. And I'm thrilled about our discussion about
attracting more people to this vital industry.
One other thing, and I just really--I've been on my soapbox
about this, but I'd love to hear from all of you about it. We
have a number of young people who we have educated in this
country, and they are the DREAMers, both undocumented and
documented, so children of visa-holders who are now having to
self-deport at age 21, and they want to stay in this country.
They've been educated here. They're highly motivated. And I'd
like to know what your views are on and having us just make
them eligible to stay here and harness their talent and their
industry and their desire to be in the United States with that
talent as opposed to somewhere else in the world? For any and
all of you.
Ms. Liss. I can jump in here to start. I can't really speak
to policy exactly from my seat, but I can say that, you know,
high-skilled immigrants and students educated in the United
States are really critical to the workforce and to the global
industry in general and will positively complement the American
workforce. So policies that preclude U.S. technology companies
from employing uniquely skilled immigrants and the elimination
of opportunities for foreign-born or U.S.-educated STEM
students is pretty counterproductive to the continued
leadership of the U.S. microelectronics supply chain.
So even more concerning are policies that enable the
training of many of the world's brightest minds at our colleges
and universities only to see that talent then be removed. So I
agree with you. I think it's important for us to stay
competitive in this space but also to do it in a way that's
supportive of our country.
Ms. Ross. Thank you.
Dr. Awadelkarim. I think that----
Ms. Ross. Both doctors----
Dr. Awadelkarim. I add my voice to Dr. Liss, you know, in
that respect. And as I mentioned in my opening statement that
we need to--you know, to bring the talent or bring the
workforce or bring the students from all different groups and
populations. And I mentioned, you know, the underrepresented
and the veterans, so obviously, you know, there are more
channels or more pipelines, then that would be most welcome. So
I think that's an opportunity that could be explored.
Dr. Liu. I'd just like to add to my colleagues' remarks
that, you know, it's all about meeting the workforce need but--
so diversity of talent is wonderful for increasing the number
of workers but also for increasing the creativity of the
innovations that we come up with. We all know that if we have a
greater diversity of ideas in a room, the likelihood that we'll
come up with something that's even more innovative than our
competitors is higher. So I think including a wide diversity of
students is important not only to meet the workforce
development need but also to meet the need for talent and
innovation to stay in the lead once we recapture it.
Ms. Ross. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Liss. Can I add something? Is that allowed?
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes.
Ms. Ross. I don't yield back. I reclaim my 1 minute----
Ms. Liss. Sorry.
Ms. Ross [continuing]. And 28 seconds, and you may have all
of it, Ms. Liss.
Ms. Liss. I didn't know all the rules. I just wanted to add
to what Dr. Liu said. You know--oh, now, I totally lost my
thought. I was so on. Oh, I was going to say the studies,
there's a ton of studies about diversity of thought and
leadership and even profitability at companies who look to
hiring a diverse--you know, from diverse communities and
supporting that, especially on a rise to leadership as well. So
diversifying is so powerful and important across the board, and
I just wanted to make sure I said that because I think
profitability for the companies is also a good selling point on
the DEI strategies as well.
Ms. Ross. Well, thank you. And I think we should try to
recruit and retain as much talent as possible in this country.
It improves our competitiveness, it improves our innovation,
and it improves our communities. And with that, Madam Chair, I
yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Excellent. And with that, we'll--I
think Dr. Baird was going to not ask 5 minutes of questions. Is
that OK with you, Jim?
Mr. Baird. Ask me that question again.
Chairwoman Stevens. You're good? You're not asking 5
minutes right now? You're in listen mode?
Mr. Baird. I'm OK.
Chairwoman Stevens. OK, good. Well, I appreciate you
mentioning my love for the auto industry and my automotive
background because you are spot on that this is absolutely a
topic that's near and dear to our automotive workforce. And,
you know, Mr. Gonzalez talked about the Intel lab going into--
the new fab going into Ohio. Well, it's not Michigan, but it's
in our area, and that's one of the things we celebrate here is
all of our Midwestern colleagues. And so we do have another
colleague from the Midwest, Dr. Foster, who wants to ask 5
minutes of questions here.
Mr. Baird. Thank you.
Mr. Foster. OK. Well, first off, I'd like to just second
everyone's endorsement of the concept of, you know, basically
stapling a green card to a STEM Ph.D. diploma, you know,
particularly in things like chip design. And, you know, the
COMPETES Act kept components of our Keep STEM Talent Act, which
was essentially a proposal to do this and not only for Ph.D.
theses but master's theses and the full range of STEM skills
that are necessary for a good integrated circuit design
ecosystem.
And, you know, at the national lab where I was, you know,
operating or providing work at least for a lot of the chip
design team at Fermi National Lab, we always found that a very
diverse chip design team was tremendously productive. And we
had these--you know, these blonde all-American kids, and we
had, you know, Palestinians. We had just everyone you can
imagine, you know, contributing ideas on these chips that
really were way beyond what was even available commercially.
And so I--you know, I saw that benefit up close, the diverse
thought inputs.
Now, if I can go back to the question of trying to get
students hands-on equipment, you know, Dr. Liu mentioned
correctly that when you have access to absolute state-of-the-
art chip designs, you can't--you know, it would be crazy to let
the kids have access to the actual fab equipment, you know?
Intel cannot let that happen. It's--we ran into that in high-
energy physics where, you know, even graduate students were not
allowed to touch the detector because they'd have some bright
idea and, you know, disrupt the thing. And so that is reality.
And you're also right to point out that it is the software
that is really the high bar for entry. You know, back when I
was designing integrated circuits, they had an open source tool
called Magic, which may be--do you remember? Yes. Which, you
know, any university could download and submit a chip and it
was very open. But some of the intellectual property in the
chip design software is some of the software that should be
very closely guarded so that if--that technology does not go
offshore. And so that is a--you know, it's a real risk that we
have to find a way to let, you know, universities all over the
country have access to that state-of-the-art software to build
state-of-the-art chips and yet not have the intellectual
property escape. And I think cloud computing has the benefit.
So that's part of the problem, and I think we can set up a very
broad-based thing so that anyone in any rural college has equal
access to state-of-the-art chip fabrication through access to
the software.
However, there's a second part of the problem, which is
getting the next generation of IC process designers and just
electronic device inventors and having them get access. And
that's a tougher one because I think you actually need to have
physical access to the equipment. There is no substitute to be
able to just walk into the lab, adjust the temperature of this
or the time of this or the chemical reagents in this step and
see how it affects device performance.
And so how--what--you know, what are the promising ways of
getting that--you know, I think it's unrealistic to distribute
that to every college in the United States, but we have to have
at least regional centers where within a reasonable, you know,
daytrip you can come in and get your hands on that sort of
equipment. And what are the promising avenues there and the
ones where the COMPETES Act may be a help? Yes, Ms. Liss, do
you want to take a stab at that? Or Dr. Liu, either one.
Dr. Liu. Ms. Liss----
Ms. Liss. Doctor, do you want to start?
Dr. Liu. Oh, thank you. Really quickly, we only have a
minute left, so absolutely, we--so part of the ASA's goal is to
open up these, let's say, 25 to 30 cleanroom facilities around
the country so that students can travel not too far, within a
day, to get hands-on training because I think that's so
critical, like you have explained. I think we also can take
advantage of advancements in computing, and this is a good
research project that could be funded, for example, by the NSF
to develop digital twins, right? So we can actually create
digital twins of equipment, of process flows so students at
these community colleges and universities that don't have
cleanrooms can actually start to play around with processes and
try to build devices a little bit before they actually show up
and play with it hands-on physically to make the most efficient
use of their time and limited resources at the universities
that do have these facilities.
Ms. Liss. I would just add----
Mr. Foster. There's a big role for the national labs also
in this that was--because that--you know----
Dr. Liu. Yes.
Mr. Foster [continuing]. There are nanotechnology centers
and so on that--and I know Berkeley is involved in that.
Dr. Liu. Yes. Yes. Thank you.
Ms. Liss. And I would just add real quick that, you know,
it's coming up with a lot of member companies as well that we
need more training centers to support their needs, so
everybody's talking about where we could create hubs of
training centers that could really help benefit and partner
with university systems as well. So it's definitely a big topic
of conversation across our member companies.
Mr. Foster. Yes. And we have to find the right way to
subsidize that because it won't be a short-term driver of
profits, and so we just have to recognize that it's a public
good to have a highly trained integrated circuit design
workforce and just--and that's the sort of thing where the
government has to have a role. And I think we've made a mistake
in not--in trying--being too purist that market's the solution
to everything here. There are times when we have to come
together and produce a--you know, a public good like a trained
workforce.
OK. Well, thanks much, and my time is expired.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. Well, thank you for the second
round of questions, and thank you again to our witnesses for
testifying today as we look to all the work ahead for this
amazing industry, its complexities, the people, all of you who
are a part of it.
The record is going to remain open for 2 weeks for
additional statements from Members and for any additional
questions that the Committee might ask of you, our witnesses.
But at this time, quarter to noon Eastern, the witnesses are
excused, and the hearing is now adjourned. Thank you all so
much.
[Whereupon, at 11:49 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
