- JUDICIOUS SPENDING TO ENABLE SUCCESS AT THE OFFICE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

JUDICIOUS SPENDING TO ENABLE SUCCESS
AT THE OFFICE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 21, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
45-866 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                VACANCY
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAY OBERNOLTE, California,
AMI BERA, California                   Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                VACANCY
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy

HON. JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York, Chairman
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             RANDY WEBER, Texas,
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan                  Ranking Member
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     JIM BAIRD, Indiana
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

October 21, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Jay Obernolte, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Jamaal Bowman, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Randy Weber, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    17

Witnesses:

Dr. Katy Huff, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Nuclear
Energy, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

Ms. Amy Roma, Founding Member, Nuclear Energy and National
Security Coalition, Atlantic Council
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    29

Dr. Todd Allen, Director, Michigan Memorial Phoenix Project and
Glenn F. and Gladys H. Knoll Department Chair of Nuclear
Engineering and Radiological Sciences, University of Michigan
Oral Statement...............................................    51
Written Statement............................................    53

Mr. Scott Amey, General Counsel and Executive Editorial Director,
Project on Government Oversight
Oral Statement...............................................    69
Written Statement............................................    71

Discussion.......................................................    81

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Katy Huff, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Nuclear
Energy, U.S. Department of Energy..............................   110

Ms. Amy Roma, Founding Member, Nuclear Energy and National
Security Coalition, Atlantic Council...........................   125

Dr. Todd Allen, Director, Michigan Memorial Phoenix Project and
Glenn F. and Gladys H. Knoll Department Chair of Nuclear
Engineering and Radiological Sciences, University of Michigan..   127

Mr. Scott Amey, General Counsel and Executive Editorial Director,
Project on Government Oversight................................   131

JUDICIOUS SPENDING TO ENABLE SUCCESS
AT THE OFFICE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 21, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
joint with the Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m.,
via Zoom, Hon. Bill Foster [Chairman of the Subcommittee on
Investigations and Oversight] presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. All right. Well, with that, this hearing
will now come to order. And, without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare recess at any time.
The Committee is meeting virtually today, so I remind
Members they should keep their video feed on as long as they
are present in the hearing. Members are responsible for their
own microphones, which they should keep muted unless they're
speaking. If Members have documents they wish to submit for the
record, please email them to the Committee Clerk.
Well, good morning to our witnesses, and thank you for
joining us for our oversight hearing on the Office of Nuclear
Energy, or NE. I'm also pleased to partner with Chairman Bowman
and Ranking Member Weber for our first joint Subcommittee
hearing.
NE has enjoyed broad bipartisan support from Congress, and
the House Science Committee in particular, for many years. We
endowed NE with new authorizations and opportunities in the
bipartisan Energy Act of 2020, and we are working now to
provide even more tools and more funding for DOE (Department of
Energy) nuclear activities in both the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Framework and the Build Back Better Act. I hope,
though, that no one will mistake this support for NE for a free
pass around the contract award procedures, project management
protocols, and basic accountability measures for which the
Department of Energy is widely held in high regard.
In particular, we are concerned about NE's procedures in
issuing three major awards to private companies over the last
couple of years. All three were made on a non-competitive
basis. One of them was $92 million, another one was $115
million, and the third was for $1.35 billion. Now, $1.35
billion represents almost a full fiscal year's budget for the
entire Office of Nuclear Energy. Awards of this size should
merit painstaking due diligence and scrutiny, even if they had
been competitive. To spend this kind of money on a sole-source
basis, DOE's justifications should have been rock solid. But so
far we have not seen that. The justifications for
noncompetitive spending for each award were inadequate,
inconsistent, and opaque to Congress and the public.
As a Member of Congress, I can go into the SCIF (Sensitive
Compartmented Information Facility) in the basement of
Forrestal and discuss the design details of our nuclear
warheads. As a Member of the Financial Services Committee,
during the financial crisis, we were getting near-real-time
reports on the capital positions of giant banks as they
teetered on insolvency. Elsewhere in DOE, if I want, I can ask
for and view detailed procedures and criteria that were used
for contract awards. And it is crucial that, going forward, NE
is held to the same standard for transparency with Congress,
and we appreciate their steps so far toward that end.
Now, this Committee understands that Congress and DOE
leadership are asking a lot of NE. DOE needs to help
demonstrate advanced nuclear technologies by the end of the
decade in order to make a meaningful contribution to climate
change before 2050. If we don't--we do not have a lot of time
to reduce emissions in order to avoid catastrophic warming. New
and existing nuclear reactions are two of our most powerful
tools here.
We are also in a race against foreign competitors who would
like to take up the mantle as global leaders in nuclear energy.
China, Russia, and South Korea see an economic opportunity in
technology exports, and they would like for their designs to
dominate the market. To answer this challenge, we need to
invest wisely in research, design, licensing, and deployment,
and making full use of the world-class resources at our
national labs.
And in any event, NE's skipping competition and waiving the
normal project management and contracting guardrails will not
help nuclear in the long term. The last thing the nuclear
industry needs are new suspicions about political cronyism,
secrecy, haste, or waste. We need to build confidence in the
industry so that climate tech investors and utility off-takers
will come to the table. We need to cultivate trust with
ratepayers and communities who will be served by the new
advanced reactors. We need the NRC (Nuclear Regulatory
Commission) to act promptly and transparently, and if projects
deserve it, to give these demonstration projects a gold star.
In short, NE needs a sterling reputation, and the only way to
get it is to earn it. NE must return to the basics for good
governance in Federal spending: transparency, maximizing
competition, establishing milestones and metrics for
accountability, and avoiding risky contracting vehicles.
Dr. Huff, it's a pleasure to have you before the Committee.
We are all aware that you did not join the Department until May
of this year. All three of the awards that we are examining
were approved under previous leadership, and only one of them
was finalized early on your watch. We won't ask you to
speculate about every decision made by your predecessors, but
we do expect congressional staff, as well as our partners at
the GAO (Government Accountability Office) and IG (Inspector
General) offices, to have full access to whatever records of
decision exist. And we will ask you to commit to a new game
plan for accountability, one that will span Administrations and
will permeate the culture of NE. I know that the Department of
Energy is capable of this because we see it in other offices.
I appreciate the interactions you've had with the Committee
staff in recent weeks about your intentions to correct course,
and I'm looking forward to getting those sentiments on the
record in today's hearing.
I also want to make clear that our hearing today is not
about attacking the winners of the noncompetitive awards or the
projects themselves. We have reviewed the value propositions
for each of these projects, and on a bipartisan basis we find
them laudable. But execution is key. DOE already has made
several spending commitments on these projects, and we do not
want to see a dime of waste going forward. But, in particular,
we will have continuing questions about the $1.4 billion award
to the Carbon Free Power Project (CFPP), which is only 1 year
into a 10-year agreement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Foster follows:]

Good morning to our witnesses and thank you for joining us
for our oversight hearing on the Office of Nuclear Energy, or
NE. I'm also pleased to partner with Chairman Bowman and
Ranking Member Weber for our first joint Subcommittee hearing.
NE has enjoyed broad bipartisan support from Congress, and
the House Science Committee in particular, for many years. We
endowed NE with new authorizations and opportunities in the
bipartisan Energy Act of 2020, and we are working now to
provide even more tools and funding for DOE nuclear activities
in both the Bipartisan Infrastructure Framework and the Build
Back Better Act. I hope, though, that no one will mistake this
support for NE for a free pass around the contract award
procedures, project management protocols, and basic
accountability measures for which the Department of Energy is
widely held in high regard.
In particular, we are concerned about NE's procedures in
issuing three major awards to private companies over the last
couple of years. All three were made on a non-competitive
basis. One of them was $92 million, another one was for $115
million, and the third was for $1.35 billion. $1.35 billion
represents almost a full fiscal year's budget for the entire
Office of Nuclear Energy. Awards of this size should merit
painstaking due diligence and scrutiny even if they had been
competitive. To spend this kind of money on a sole-source
basis, DOE's justifications should have been rock solid. But we
haven't seen that. The justifications for non-competitive
spending for each award were inadequate, inconsistent, and
opaque to Congress and the public.
As a member of Congress, I can go into the SCIF in the
basement of Forrestal and discuss the design details of our
nuclear warheads. As a member of the Financial Services
Committee, during the financial crisis, we were getting near-
real-time reports on the capital positions of giant banks as
they teetered on insolvency. Elsewhere in DOE, I can get
details on the contracting procedures that were used. It is
crucial that going forward, NE is held to the same standard for
transparency with Congress, and we appreciate their steps
toward that end.
Now, this Committee understands that Congress and DOE
leadership are asking a lot of NE. DOE needs to help
demonstrate advanced nuclear technologies by the end of the
decade in order to make a meaningful contribution to climate
change before 2050. We don't have a lot of time to reduce
emissions in order to avoid catastrophic warming. New and
existing nuclear reactors are two of our most powerful weapons
here.
We are also in a race against foreign competitors who would
like to take up the mantle as global leaders in nuclear energy.
China, Russia, and South Korea see an economic opportunity in
technology exports, and they would like for their designs to
dominate the market. To answer this challenge, we need to be
investing wisely in research, design, licensing and deployment,
and making full use of the world-class resources at our
National Labs.
But in any event, NE's skipping competition and waiving the
normal project management and contracting guardrails will not
help nuclear in the long term. The last thing the nuclear
industry needs are new suspicions about political cronyism,
secrecy, haste, or waste. We need to build confidence in the
industry so that climate tech investors and utility off-takers
come to the table. We need to cultivate trust with ratepayers
and communities who will be served by new advanced reactors. We
need the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to act promptly and
transparently, and if projects deserve it, to give these
demonstration projects a gold star. In short, NE needs a
sterling reputation, and the only way to get it is to earn it.
NE must return to the basics for ``good governance'' in federal
spending: transparency, maximizing competition, establishing
milestones and metrics for accountability, and avoiding risky
contracting vehicles.
Dr. Huff, it's a pleasure to have you before the Committee.
We are all aware that you did not join the Department until May
of this year. All three of the awards we examined were approved
under previous leadership, and only one of them was finalized
early on your watch. We won't ask you to speculate about every
decision made by your predecessors, but we do expect
Congressional staff, as well as our partners at the GAO and IG
offices, to have full access to whatever records of decision
exist.
And we will ask you to commit to a new game plan for
accountability, one that spans Administrations and will
permeate the culture of NE. I know that the Department of
Energy is capable of this, because we see it in other offices.
I appreciate the interactions you've had with Committee staff
in recent weeks about your intentions to correct course, and
I'm looking forward to getting those sentiments on the record.
I also want to make clear that our hearing today is not
about attacking the winners of the non-competitive awards or
the projects themselves. We have reviewed the value
propositions for each projects, and on a bipartisan basis we
find them laudable. But execution is key. DOE has already made
several spending commitments on these projects and we do not
want to see a dime of waste going forward. In particular, we
will have continuing questions about the $1.4 billion award to
the Carbon Free Power Project, which is only one year into a
ten-year agreement.
Thank you.

Chairman Foster. And the Chair will now recognize the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Investigations and
Oversight, Mr. Obernolte, for an opening statement.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much, Chairman Foster, and
thank you to everyone for holding this very important hearing.
I represent the State of California, and recent events in
my State illustrate the necessity of investing in next-
generation clean and reliable power generation. No one is more
equipped to lead that effort than the Department of Energy, and
nuclear certainly plays a very important role in that. I mean,
if you look at energy reliability, nuclear is the most reliable
energy that we know how to make. U.S. generation of nuclear
power, I think our uptime was 92 percent of full capacity for
last year, which is just amazing. And also I think if you look
at next-generation nuclear, it's clear that it has the
potential to be, all things considered, the cleanest energy
that mankind knows how to make, so that's a very important
program that we oversee. And the Office of Nuclear Energy is
really the tip of the spear in doing that.
So we here on the Science, Space, and Technology Committee
want to be a good partner to NE in fulfilling its mission, but
we also have an obligation of oversight, an obligation to
ensure that taxpayer resources are wisely and appropriately
spent and that U.S. procurement law is complied with. And
that's, of course, the purpose of this hearing. That's--no
one's finger-pointing here. We want to be good partners, but we
also have an obligation to conduct some oversight.
U.S. procurement law certainly allows sole-source
contracting under certain circumstances, so we want to make
sure that we understand the rationale that was used in these
cases, and also we want to understand the rationale that was
used to waive or backload the cost-sharing in those agreements
because although procurement law does allow for some
flexibility there, there is an important reason why we have
cost-sharing provisions in these contracts.
So I'm looking forward, along with the Chairman, to
learning more about those particular contracts, but, more
broadly, also learning about how we here in Congress can help
the Office of Nuclear Energy fulfill its very important goal.
So thank you very much, Chairman Foster, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Obernolte follows:]

Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Foster, for holding this
hearing.Californians are acutely aware of the challenges our
country faces in ensuring that reliable, affordable energy is
available to all. Recent price surges for energy commodities
have sparked serious concerns for consumers who already face
rising costs for essential goods. Rolling blackouts and power
outages across my home state reinforce the need to support a
diverse mix of reliable energy sources and ensure supply can
meet demand.
The U.S. Department of Energy is uniquely equipped to lead
the way in the development of next-generation clean energy
technologies that will address these concerns--both back home
in my district and around the world. Today, we have an
opportunity to examine one of the Department's applied
programs, the Office of Nuclear Energy. Nuclear energy will
play a critical role in our clean energy future. In 2020,
nuclear power plants operated at full capacity more than 92
percent of the time, making nuclear power the most reliable
energy source in the United States. The Office of Nuclear
Energy supports research and development to maintain American
leadership in the nuclear technology sector, accelerate
deployment of advanced reactor designs, solve fuel cycle
challenges, and increase cost effectiveness of existing
facilities.
On the Science Committee, we share bipartisan support of
this program and its essential activities. Last Congress, the
Committee worked together to pass the Energy Act of 2020, which
included significant nuclear energy R&D provisions. This
Congress, the Science Committee has prioritized oversight of
the Department's implementation of this legislation, and I am
looking forward to receiving an update from the Department on
its progress this morning.
But while we support robust funding for the Office of
Nuclear Energy, we must ensure that American taxpayers are
getting the best return on our investment in this program,
especially as the national debt has climbed over $28 trillion.
My colleagues and I on the House Budget Committee are
confronted regularly with the dire consequences of ballooning
government spending and failure to use our federal resources
wisely.
Today, we hope to learn more about some of the Office of
Nuclear Energy's recent ``sole-source'' awards and awards made
outside of the competitive process to ensure the necessary
safeguards are in place to limit costs and ensure a level
playing field during the process. Over the past three years,
the Office of Nuclear Energy has made at least three large sole
source awards, for the demonstration of the production of high-
assay low-enriched uranium, demonstration and deployment of
small modular reactors, and instrumentation and control
upgrades under the Light Water Reactor Sustainability program,
respectively. In other words, the Department awarded funds for
these projects without offering other prospective participants
the opportunity to submit their own competing proposals. We
hope to learn more about Office of Nuclear Energy's practices
for making sure the most promising proposals have the
opportunity to receive consideration and doing its due
diligence when such sole source awards are necessary.
Federal agencies award contracts and financial assistance
to partner with entities that can provide essential goods and
services and to foster collaboration with stakeholders
performing groundbreaking research, development, demonstration,
and commercial application activities. As Members of Congress,
it is our responsibility to ensure that agencies are being good
stewards of taxpayer dollars when carrying out these
transactions.
Federal law, with a few limited exceptions, mandates that
agencies conducting procurement activities ``obtain full and
open competition'' and utilize the competitive procedures best
suited to the circumstances. Section 988 of the Energy Policy
Act of 2005 establishes cost-share requirements for most
research, development, demonstration and commercial application
activities at the Department. However, these requirements may
be waived under certain circumstances. This waiver authority
can be extremely useful for investing in novel technologies in
the nuclear field but must also be exercised appropriately and
carefully.
I look forward to hearing more about the incredible work at
the Department's Office of Nuclear Energy, how Congress can be
an effective partner in instilling best practices for contracts
and financial awards, and recommendations for maximizing the
value of this program's engagement with the stakeholder
community moving forward.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
to share your expertise with us. Thank you, Chairman Foster,
and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Foster. Thank you, and the Chair will now
recognize Chair Bowman for an opening statement.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, and thank you to all of our witnesses who are
joining us virtually today to discuss the importance of good
governance and spending practices at the Department of Energy's
Office of Nuclear Energy.
This hearing could not be happening at a more important
time. Congress is currently engaged in negotiations on several
proposals that could transform this country's infrastructure
and social safety net, allowing us to unleash the full,
brilliant potential of all Americans and our economy. The Build
Back Better agenda will make major, desperately needed
investments in tackling climate change, including in the
research space. On this Committee, we have spent a great deal
of time discussing how our government should address the
climate crisis, and it is time for us to move from talk to
action. That applies to every aspect of our work here. Whenever
the Federal Government is taking steps that could help
decarbonize our society and improve people's lives, we need to
make sure those activities are as transparent and effective as
possible.
The budget of the Office of Nuclear Energy has nearly
doubled in five or so years, with the budget request for Fiscal
Year 2022 clocking in at $1.85 billion. And spending proposals
currently under consideration would inject additional funds. In
recent years, the office's work has shifted from almost
entirely conducting research in our national labs, to
significant amounts of funding now going to academic and
industrial partners. This kind of applied research, including
demonstration projects and the commercial application of new
technologies, is critical to meeting the challenges of the 21st
century.
This hearing is a step--is a next step for this Committee
in a series of oversight activities we've engaged in regarding
the Office of Nuclear Energy. We spend a lot of our time
working on solutions and legislating as Members of Congress,
but our oversight responsibility is inherent in all of the work
that we do. The rapid expansion of the work and the budget of
this office requires even more due diligence on our part. And
in recent years, we have watched the office execute contracts
and agreements for very large projects. I applaud the Office of
Nuclear Energy for its ambitious approach. But our concerns
primarily center around the fact that a few of these extremely
large awards have been provided in a noncompetitive and
nontransparent way. For example, it should never be quick and
easy to make a government-funded award to one private company
for over $1 billion, especially when Congress learns about it
in the press. And that's part of what we're here to talk about
today. Government-funded research, especially research that is
important for addressing the climate crisis, needs to be done
right the first time. We don't have many shots on goal here to
experiment with. As a nation, we need to do our homework and
turn in--turn it in on time. And if we fail, we need to fail
fast, learn what we could do--could have done better, and
regroup quickly.
Competition is certainly good as a general practice, as it
maintains the integrity of public spending by ensuring that
awards are provided on a merit-reviewed and rigorous basis. But
competition is also an important way to broaden and deepen the
kind of research relationships that our government establishes,
and to bring more people into the process. This can help ensure
that government funds are distributed more equitably and in
line with President Biden's Justice40 Initiative, which says
that 40 percent of overall benefits of Federal dollars should
flow to marginalized communities. We need to be applying this
concept at the beginning of the award process by including it
in the parameters of a competitive award instead of thinking
about it later in the process when it's too late to be useful.
This is a topic that is near and dear to my heart as I am proud
that this Committee is working to make our research activities
more inclusive at every level.
To be clear, we perform oversight for all of the scientific
agencies that the Science Committee oversees. In other words,
this could just as easily be a hearing on any other energy
technology if we had similar governance concerns regarding the
offices that work on those technologies. And this hearing also
is not about specific administrative officials or a political
party. All of the oversight we have performed on this office
has been done in a strongly bipartisan way.
I want to again thank our excellent panel of witnesses
assembled today, and I'm sorry that I will be missing the rest
of this hearing. I'm attending an anniversary dedication
ceremony at the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial. I look forward
to reviewing the hearing record and submitting questions.
With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bowman follows:]

Good morning, and thank you to all of our witnesses who are
joining us virtually today to discuss the importance of good
governance and spending practices at the Department of Energy's
Office of Nuclear Energy.
This hearing could not be happening at a more important
time. Congress is currently engaged in negotiations on several
proposals that could transform this country's infrastructure
and social safety net, allowing us to unleash the full,
brilliant potential of all Americans and our economy. The Build
Back Better agenda will make major, desperately needed
investments in tackling climate change, including in the
research space. On this Committee, we have spent a great deal
of time discussing how our government should address the
climate crisis, and it is time for us to move from talk to
action. That applies to every aspect of our work here. Whenever
the federal government is taking steps that could help
decarbonize our society and improve people's lives, we need to
make sure those activities are as transparent and effective as
possible.
The budget of the Office of Nuclear Energy has nearly
doubled in five or so years, with the budget request for fiscal
year 2022 clocking in at $1.85 billion. And spending proposals
currently under consideration would inject additional funds. In
recent years, the office's work has shifted from almost
entirely conducting research in our national labs, to a
significant amount of funding now going to academic and
industrial partners. This kind of applied research, including
demonstration projects and the commercial application of new
technologies, is critical for meeting the challenges of the
21st century.
This hearing is a next step for this Committee in a series
of oversight activities we've engaged in regarding the Office
of Nuclear Energy. We spend a lot of our time working on
solutions and legislating as Members of Congress, but our
oversight responsibility is inherent in all of the work that we
do. The rapid expansion of the work and budget of this office
requires even more due diligence on our part. And in recent
years, we have watched the office execute contracts and
agreements for very large projects. I applaud the Office of
Nuclear Energy for its ambitious approach. But our concerns
primarily center around the fact that a few of these extremely
large awards have been provided in a non-competitive and non-
transparent way. For example, it should never be quick and easy
to make a government funded award to one private company for
over a billion dollars, especially when Congress learns about
it in the press. And that's part of what we're here to talk
about today. Government funded research, especially research
that is important for addressing the climate crisis, needs to
be done right the first time. We don't have many shots on goal
here to experiment with. As a nation, we need to do our
homework and turn it in on time. And if we fail, we need to
fail fast, learn what we could have done better, and regroup
quickly.
Competition is certainly good as a general practice, as it
maintains the integrity of public spending by ensuring that
awards are provided on a merit-reviewed and rigorous basis. But
competition is also an important way to broaden and deepen the
kinds of research relationships that our government
establishes, and to bring more people into the process. This
can help ensure that government funds are distributed more
equitably and in line with President Biden's Justice 40
initiative, which says that 40 percent of overall benefits of
federal dollars should flow to marginalized communities. We
need to be applying this concept at the beginning of the award
process, by including it in the parameters of a competitive
award, instead of thinking about it later in the process when
it's too late to be useful. This is a topic that is near and
dear to my heart, and I am proud that this Committee is working
to make our research activities more inclusive at every level.
To be clear, we perform oversight for all of the scientific
agencies that the Science Committee oversees. In other words,
this could just as easily be a hearing on any other energy
technology if we had similar governance concerns regarding the
offices that work on those technologies. And this hearing also
is not about specific administrative officials or a political
party. All of the oversight we have performed on this office
has been done in a strongly bipartisan way.
I want to again thank our excellent panel of witnesses
assembled today, and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
With that, I yield back.

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And the Chair will now
recognize Ranking Member Weber for an opening statement.
Mr. Weber. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Chairman, for holding this hearing.
I have been, and continue to be, a strong supporter of
nuclear energy, and I'm pleased with the Committee's continued
bipartisan support for DOE's nuclear energy research and
development (R&D) activities. I hope today's conversations will
inform and improve our shared efforts in supporting cutting-
edge nuclear energy technology for the next generation.
As we all know, nuclear energy is a clean and reliable
baseload energy source that is a central component of the U.S.
energy portfolio. Last year, nuclear energy was our country's
largest domestic source of carbon-free electricity. Robust
Federal investment in advanced nuclear energy R&D is essential
to our energy independence, our emissions reduction plans, our
national security, and our international competitiveness.
We cannot afford to cede leadership in the global nuclear
energy market to our international rivals, like China and
Russia. That's why, last Congress, we passed the Energy Act of
2020, which provided a major update to U.S. nuclear energy
policy. It was a tremendous bipartisan win that, among many
things, modernized and reauthorized key nuclear energy
research, development, demonstration, and commercial
application activities at the Department of Energy.
This legislation was a landmark achievement for the Science
Committee. I was proud to lead the effort in authorizing robust
funding for the versatile neutron source, or versatile test
reactor (VTR), codifying public-private partnerships in
advanced nuclear research, and ensuring department-wide
coordination for the nuclear energy high-performance
computation research program.
But, as we all know, passing legislation is just the first
step in a long journey to seeing those results here at home.
Therefore, this morning, I am eager to hear more about the
Department's progress in implementing the Energy Act. To build
on this success, we also have a responsibility to examine the
Office of Nuclear Energy's practices in awarding R&D funds.
Responsible management of taxpayer dollars has long been a
priority of mine--I trust it is for my colleagues--and I have
always tried to encourage my colleagues to adopt this view to
be sure we're all on the same page.
That's why, in 2019, I was part of a bipartisan Science
Committee request to the Department for more information and
further justification of a large sole-source award for the
demonstration of nuclear fuel production. Today's hearing gives
us a chance to explore some of our lingering questions on that
award and several others. While issuing sole-source awards can
sometimes be beneficial--I think our colleague Mr. Bowman
pointed that out--we need to make sure that the appropriate
safeguards are in place and being utilized to make fully
informed spending decisions.
Our nuclear research and development programs are too
important for us to mismanage, and we want to make sure we get
this right. The advanced nuclear landscape is rapidly--and let
me emphasize that--rapidly changing, and the Department must
appropriately capitalize on new opportunities, make sound
investments, and harness the expertise of the nuclear
stakeholder community.
Let me be clear: I support substantial Federal investment
in advanced nuclear energy technologies, in case you can't
tell. There is no clean energy future without nuclear energy,
and the only way we can fend off the push for global market
dominance from our adversaries is to continue developing
cutting-edge technology right here at home. That is why it's
critical that we closely monitor our--those investments.
I look forward to hearing more about the future direction
of the Office of Nuclear Energy and to a productive discussion
about how the Department and its partners can get the most
value out of their collaborations on behalf of the American
taxpayers. Thank you to our witnesses today for being here.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weber follows:]

Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Foster for holding
this hearing. I have been- and continue to be-a strong
supporter of nuclear energy and I'm pleased with this
Committee's continued bipartisan support for DOE's nuclear
energy research and development activities. I hope today's
conversations will inform and improve our shared efforts in
supporting cutting edge nuclear energy technology for the next
generation.
Nuclear energy is a clean and reliable baseload energy
source that is a central component of the U.S. energy
portfolio: last year, nuclear energy was our country's largest
domestic source of carbon-free electricity. Robust federal
investment in advanced nuclear energy R&D is essential to our
energy independence, our emissions reduction plans, our
national security, and our international competitiveness.
We cannot afford to cede leadership in the global nuclear
energy market to our international rivals, like China and
Russia. That's why, last Congress, we passed the Energy Act of
2020, which provided a major update to U.S. nuclear energy
policy. It was a tremendous bipartisan win that, among many
things, modernized and reauthorized key nuclear energy
research, development, demonstration, and commercial
application activities at the Department of Energy.
This legislation was a landmark achievement for the Science
Committee. I was proud to lead the effort in authorizing robust
funding for the Versatile Neutron Source--or Versatile Test
Reactor, codifying public-private partnerships in advanced
nuclear research, and ensuring Department-wide coordination for
the nuclear energy High- Performance Computation Research
Program.
But, as we all know, passing legislation is just the first
step in a long journey to seeing results at home. Therefore,
this morning, I am eager to hear more about the Department's
progress in implementing the Energy Act. To build on this
success, we also have a responsibility to examine the Office of
Nuclear Energy's practices in awarding R&D funds. Responsible
management of taxpayer dollars has long been a priority of mine
and I have always tried to encourage my colleagues to adopt
this view.
That's why, in 2019, I was part of a bipartisan Science
Committee request to the Department for more information and
further justification of a large sole source award for the
demonstration of nuclear fuel production. Today's hearing gives
us a chance to explore some of our lingering questions on this
award and several others. While issuing sole source awards can
sometimes be beneficial, we need to make sure the appropriate
safeguards are in place-and being utilized-to make fully-
informed spending decisions.
Our nuclear research and development programs are too
important for us to mismanage, and we want to make sure we get
this right. The advanced nuclear landscape is rapidly changing,
and the Department must appropriately capitalize on new
opportunities, make sound investments, and harness the
expertise of the nuclear stakeholder community.
I want to be clear, I support substantial Federal
investment in advanced nuclear energy technologies. There is no
clean energy future without nuclear energy, and the only way we
can fend off the push for global market dominance from our
adversaries is to continue developing cutting edge technology
here at home. That is why it's critical that we closely monitor
our investments.
I look forward to hearing more about the future direction
of the Office of Nuclear Energy and to a productive discussion
about how the Department and its partners can get the most
value out of their collaborations. Thank you to our witnesses
for being here today, and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And if there are Members who
wish to submit additional opening statements, your statements
will be added to the record at this point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning and thank you, Chairman Foster and Chairman
Bowman, for holding this joint oversight hearing on activities
carried out by DOE's Office of Nuclear Energy. I am eager to
discuss nuclear energy's importance to achieving a cleaner
future, as well as how DOE can help further this goal.
Nuclear energy is a major pillar in U.S. clean energy
production today. Generating 20% of our nation's electricity,
the civilian nuclear fleet produces about half of the grid's
clean energy and is key for decarbonizing our power sector. We
must ensure that the Office of Nuclear Energy is set up for
success to give the nuclear industry the tools to continue
innovating, and usher in the next generation of these
technologies.
That is why in my time today, I want to lay out some
valuable lessons learned from a soon-to-be released report by
the Government Accountability Office regarding DOE's record of
project management in advancing new clean energy technologies.
This assessment is pursuant to a requirement that our Committee
included in the Energy Act of 2020.
Now to be clear, the focus of this particular GAO report is
not on the activities of DOE's Nuclear Energy Office, but
rather on demonstration projects carried out by its Office of
Fossil Energy and Carbon Management over the last 15 years.
That said, both the Nuclear and Fossil Energy Offices have
overseen some of the largest projects supported by the
Department. And these preliminary findings tell us that a
decade ago, the Fossil office fell into similar pitfalls that
we are seeing with several projects supported by the Office of
Nuclear Energy in recent years, particularly regarding its
sole-source awards to Centrus, the Carbon Free Power Project,
and Exelon.
Out of nine carbon capture, utilization, and storage
demonstration projects carried out by the Department over this
period, only one was constructed and none remain in operation.
There were many factors that led to these projects' failures,
but in GAO's review, three themes that tie in with today's
oversight hearing emerged.
First, DOE either waived cost-share requirements from
private sector partners entirely, or had the federal government
covering far more of its overall costs early in the project
schedule. We saw this with both of the recent nuclear energy
awards to Centrus and the Carbon Free Power Project.
Second, DOE kept increasing federal taxpayer exposure even
though projects were not meeting their milestones. We have seen
this with the Office of Nuclear Energy's Carbon Free Power
Project and slipping timelines. The project's original
commercial operation date was 2027, that has now shifted to the
mid-2030s.
And third, DOE awarded FutureGen, a billion-dollar carbon
capture demonstration project that failed to come to fruition,
on a sole-source basis. The Nuclear Energy office's Centrus and
Carbon Free Power Project awards were provided on a sole-source
basis, as was the recent Exelon award signed by DOE just a few
weeks ago. As we will hear from our witnesses, competition is
critical to ensuring that the best projects are selected, as
well protecting against fraud and abuse.
These risk-increasing factors can be mitigated by ensuring
the awardee pays its fair share throughout the process; by
setting--and sticking to--performance milestones; and by
competitively awarding these projects.
I would appreciate hearing from our witnesses today about
how the Office of Nuclear Energy can avoid the problems
encountered by DOE's Fossil Energy office in the future, so
that Congress and the American people have complete confidence
in these critical projects. We can all agree-we are here to
support this office in its efforts to address the climate
crisis and enhance our national competitiveness.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Foster. And at this time I'd like to introduce our
witnesses. Our first witness is Dr. Katy Huff. Dr. Huff serves
as Acting Assistant Secretary and Principal Deputy Assistant
Secretary for the Department of Energy's Office of Nuclear
Energy. Prior to her current role, she was an Assistant
Professor in the Department of Nuclear Plasma and Radiological
Engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
where she led the Advanced Reactors and Fuel Cycles Research
Group. She's an active member of the American Nuclear Society
and the past Chair of both the Nuclear Nonproliferation and
Policy Divisions and the Fuel Cycle and Waste Management
Division and, I must point out, a proud graduate of the
University of Wisconsin.
After Dr. Huff is Ms. Amy Roma. Ms. Roma is a founding
member of the Nuclear Energy and National Security Coalition at
the Atlantic Council, as well as a partner at the Hogan Lovells
law firm. She began her legal career at the U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission and currently practices nuclear and
radioactive materials law involving the NRC and the Department
of Energy. She frequently serves as a nuclear regulatory
counsel to clients during mergers and acquisitions. She's also
testified at Senate hearings on the economic, climate, and
national security benefits of nuclear energy for the United
States.
Our third witness is Dr. Todd Allen. Dr. Allen is a
Professor and the Department Chair of Nuclear Engineering and
Radiological Services at the University of Michigan, as well as
a Senior Fellow at the Third Way. He previously worked at the
Idaho National Laboratory (INL) as both Deputy Director for
Science and Technology and the Scientific Director for the
Advanced Test Reactor National Scientific User Facility. He has
served as a Professor in the Engineering Physics Department at
the University of Wisconsin--shout out there--and as an officer
in the United States Nuclear Navy Program.
As our final witness, we have Mr. Scott Amey. Mr. Amey is a
General Counsel at the Project on Government Oversight, or
POGO. He handles legal matters for the organization, directs
its contract oversight and ethics investigations, and promotes
policy reforms. POGO is a nonpartisan independent watchdog that
investigates and exposes waste, corruption, and abuse of power
and when the government fails to serve the public or silences
those who report wrongdoing. The organization champions reforms
to achieve a more effective, ethical, and accountable Federal
Government that safeguards constitutional principles.
Our witnesses will each have five minutes for your spoken
testimony. Your written testimony will be included in the
record of the hearing. When you have all completed your spoken
testimony, we will begin with questions. Each Member will have
five minutes to question the panel.
And we'll start with Dr. Huff.

TESTIMONY OF DR. KATY HUFF,

ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY,

OFFICE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY,

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Dr. Huff. Chairman Bowman, Ranking Member Weber, Chairman
Foster, Ranking Member Obernolte, and Members of the
Subcommittees, it's an honor to appear before you today to
discuss DOE's nuclear energy research, development, and
demonstration or RD&D programs.
The Administration's climate policy is informed by science,
and the science tells us that the time for climate action is
now. Nuclear energy is a key element of President Biden's plan
to put the United States on a path to net zero carbon future by
2050. To meet these ambitious carbon reduction goals and
rebuild the U.S. leadership globally, the Biden-Harris
Administration is prioritizing activities that preserve the
existing fleet of nuclear power plants, deploy advanced reactor
technologies, and expand nuclear energy to markets beyond
electricity.
Nuclear energy will play a major role in the transition to
a clean energy economy by fundamentally underpinning our
Nation's targets for clean, carbon-free electricity, as well as
nonelectric energy markets.
The current U.S. fleet of more than 90 reactors is
imperative to solving our climate challenges. We must ensure
that these reactors remain online and find new ways of using
them to solve energy transition challenges. The Light Water
Reactor Sustainability program conducts RD&D in support of the
existing fleet to continue to provide safe, clean, and reliable
energy. Additionally, NE supports RD&D to reduce the emissions
of energy-intensive nonelectric applications such as clean
hydrogen production for the transportation and industrial
sectors, while improving the economics of nuclear energy.
The Energy Act of 2020 is an important piece of legislation
to ensure nuclear energy is a key element in meeting our
aggressive climate goals, now and in the future. The Department
is advancing these goals with the Advanced Reactor
Demonstration Program (ARDP) and designing the versatile test
reactor, or VTR. At the Department we're particularly
optimistic about ARDP, which has set an aggressive timeline to
develop, license, and build two operational advanced reactors.
These two reactors--X-energy's Xe-100 and TerraPower's Natrium
reactor will be sited in Washington and Wyoming respectively.
The Natrium reactor will be built at a retiring coal power
plant to utilize the existing infrastructure and workforce in
the area. This is the type of coal-to-nuclear transition
demonstration that will help us achieve our climate goals,
while ensuring a just energy transition for the local
workforce.
An economic and reliable supply of fuel will also be
required to operate many of the innovative reactor technologies
under development within the United States. DOE is actively
working to establish the HALEU (high-assay low-enriched
uranium) Availability Program, as envisioned in the Energy Act
of 2020, and we look forward to working with Congress as we
advance HALEU availability.
As we move from demonstrations to widespread
commercialization, we need a fast neutron and test reactor that
can support research for all stages of technology development,
including the existing fleet. And with bipartisan support of
Congress and key Members of this Committee, DOE is designing
VTR to produce an advanced fission environment, specifically a
high-flux fast neutron environment, to support accelerated
fuels and materials development and qualification over the next
60 years.
The Office of Nuclear Energy understands one of the
purposes of this hearing is to address concerns regarding NE's
past use of sole-source contracting during previous years. The
Centrus/UAMPS (Utah Associated Municipal Power Systems),
NuScale, and Exelon sole-source awards were prepared in
accordance with the applicable regulations governing Federal
acquisitions and cooperative agreements. They were thoroughly
reviewed and approved by the Department's Office of Management
and the Office of General Counsel and were documented and
executed legally.
However, we agree with the premise that fair and open
competition is the best practice for Federal procurement and
financial assistance. Early and open expressions of interest by
the Department ensure the greatest number of market
participants for any competition. We take seriously the
concerns expressed about the sole-source awards, and we're
committed to communicating clearly with Congress about the need
to use such awards.
But it's an exciting time to be involved in nuclear energy.
As illustrated by broad support for new authorities granted in
the Energy Act of 2020, Congress has placed their trust in DOE
NE to advance nuclear energy as a key solution to tackle the
climate crisis both at home and abroad. NE is ready to take on
that role and pledges that these programs will be developed and
managed with the utmost integrity, openness, and transparency,
which are key tenets of the Biden-Harris administration.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today. I'm happy
to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Huff follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And next, Ms. Roma is
recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MS. AMY ROMA, FOUNDING MEMBER,

NUCLEAR ENERGY AND NATIONAL SECURITY COALITION,

ATLANTIC COUNCIL

Ms. Roma. Thank you. Good morning. My name is Amy Roma, and
I'm a member of the Atlantic Council's Nuclear Energy and
National Security Coalition and a lawyer at Hogan Lovells.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. As I noted in
my written testimony, while I wear many hats, today, I'm here
in my individual capacity.
Commercial nuclear power serves as an important tool to
achieve U.S. economic interests, including creating hundreds of
thousands of jobs and enabling the United States to participate
in a robust market of nuclear trade, climate change goals by
providing over half of the U.S. carbon-free power and
supporting a just transition to clean energy and U.S.
nonproliferation--U.S. national security objectives by
promoting U.S. safety, security, and nonproliferation standards
globally and strengthening U.S. influence abroad.
While the United States has the largest nuclear feet and
best-run plants in the world, we have seen our international
role as a global leader as a reactor supplier sharply decline
in recent years, replaced largely by Russia, with China close
behind. Russia and China have identified nuclear energy
innovation, domestic deployment of nuclear power, and nuclear
trade as national priorities, promoted by the highest levels of
government and backed by State financing and State-owned
enterprises, and their focus has paid off. Nuclear power plants
are being built all around the world, but Russia is building
them. Russia uses nuclear exports as a tool to exert foreign
influence and reap significant economic gains with a claimed
$130 billion in orders for foreign reactors. Nuclear energy is
also a component of China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI),
with China estimating it could have $145 billion in orders for
foreign reactors and create 5 million Chinese jobs.
The U.S. nuclear power industry competing against foreign
governments for new projects has quickly been sidelined on the
foreign stage and has no new concrete orders for U.S. nuclear
reactors abroad. But we have the opportunity to strengthen the
United States' foothold in nuclear trade with advanced
reactors, and we should want to take advantage of our position
at the forefront of this technology. The market opportunity is
immense, and the stakes of climate change are too high.
Nuclear energy supports the U.S. economy. The nuclear
industry supports nearly half a million jobs in the United
States and contributes about $60 billion to the U.S. GDP (gross
domestic product) annually. It's a non-greenhouse-gas-emitting
power generation source and a crucial tool in the battle
against climate change. As the recent IPCC (Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change) report makes clear, the world needs to
take on a full court press in decarbonization. The electricity
and industrial sectors account for about half of GHG
(greenhouse gas) emissions. Nuclear power could be used to
decarbonize both. It has the ability to provide clean,
affordable, and reliable power around the world, helping raise
the global standard of living, including for the nearly billion
people in the world without access to electricity, and it
promotes energy independence and grid stability.
The world electricity demand is expected to double globally
by 2050, presenting a huge market opportunity for the United
States in the trillions of dollars. And advanced reactors have
a wide range of sizes and applications beyond power generation.
In addition to helping decarbonize the electricity and
industrial sectors, it can be used to desalinate water, produce
hydrogen, and support deep-sea exploration and space colonies.
But we cannot harness this opportunity without the government
and industry working together.
Currently, there are dozens of companies in the United
States developing a diverse range of advanced nuclear
technologies, but they need to be proven before they can be
widely deployed. DOE's Office of Nuclear Energy support in
advancing the commercialization of advanced reactors is
critical. While it has undertaken a number of important
programs, in particular, the recent Advanced Reactor
Demonstration Program has been instrumental in turning
discussions into actions. Under the program, NE supports the
demonstration of two advanced reactors by 2027. That is fully
operational plants that are providing power to the grid. ARDP
also includes another eight awards to other advanced reactor
developers to support commercial deployment of each of these
technologies into the 2030's. ARDP means a number of advanced
reactor companies have the opportunity to show the world that--
what their technologies can do, opening the door to further
domestic deployment and the global market, which is immense.
U.S. innovation, when properly supported, can stand up to
State-backed competitors like Russia and China, and the world
is eager for U.S. reactor options. We can reemerge as a global
leader in nuclear power using U.S. innovation and U.S.
Government support. The opportunity is there, we have the
technology, and the stakes are worth it.
Thank you, and I'm happy to answer any questions that you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Roma follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And next, Dr. Allen is
recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. TODD ALLEN, DIRECTOR,

MICHIGAN MEMORIAL PHOENIX PROJECT

AND GLENN F. AND GLADYS H. KNOLL DEPARTMENT CHAIR

OF NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND RADIOLOGICAL SCIENCES,

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN

Dr. Allen. Good morning, Chairman Foster, Chairman Bowman,
Ranking Member Weber, Ranking Member Obernolte, and other
distinguished Members of the Subcommittees. Thank you for the
imitation to provide testimony on the importance of judicious
spending to enable success at the Office of Nuclear Energy. My
testimony today represents my own views and not those of my
employer or any other organization with which I'm affiliated. I
will focus on the pressing need for the creation of strategic
and coordinated private-public pathways for the development of
nuclear energy technologies.
Currently, approximately 50 American entrepreneurial
companies are working to rapidly bring the next generation of
advanced reactor technologies to the market with an emphasis on
new energy applications and business models beyond large
electricity production. The most advanced of these companies
are in discussions with the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
aiming to build their first plants in the next 5 to 10 years.
Others are actively working with the National Reactor
Innovation Center to demonstrate their novel technologies on a
similar timescale. This is an exciting time for nuclear energy.
Congress has noted this emerging new commercial activity
and responded in a timely and positive bipartisan manner with
many legislative actions that have provided access to testing
capabilities, streamlined the regulatory environment,
established a demonstration program, and established a strong
private-public partnership program. During this period,
Congress has also increased overall budgets to provide more
opportunities at universities and laboratories to not only
support this first generation of advanced reactor deployments
but also to innovate toward future generations of advanced
nuclear energy systems.
While Congress' support for nuclear energy has been strong
and many new important program elements have been established,
these program elements still often appear to operate
independently rather than as an integrated whole. The
sophistication of the research, development, demonstration, and
deployment program elements have increased thanks to
congressional support. But the sophistication of the integrated
program execution and project management have not yet caught
up.
The Department of Energy programs need to simultaneously
coordinate and support many things: a national research
infrastructure program, early innovation, concept development,
demonstrations, and ultimately, commercial deployment.
Historically, the federally funded U.S. nuclear research
programs have not consistently balanced all five of these
elements. Continued and future success requires finding this
balance.
One of the consequences of past insufficient program
integration and lack of programmatic consistency is the limited
results from previous nuclear technology development and
deployment efforts. Though these programs have received
significant investments, they've struggled to transition from
programmatic success to commercial development and use.
Therefore, a framework of principles and policies needs to be
established that guides the programs and drives technologies
for new ideas to deployment.
What might some of these principles include? A larger set
is submitted with my written testimony, but I will highlight
two examples. We should encourage early stage research that
pushes the envelope but which might not yet yield near-term
results. Such research drives innovation for decades. Early
stage research should be daring. We should decide which early
stage research should be continued based on the success of the
research and not predetermined timeframes, as has become the
inclination at the Department of Energy.
Second, we should support well-structured private-public
cost-sharing as an important element in accelerating innovative
technology deployment. Commercial deployment of new
technologies is more likely to succeed if led by industry
rather than by research institutions. The continued funding of
these partnerships should depend on the success of meeting
specific, measurable technical and financial milestones. The
private-public partnerships should evolve based on performance
rather than follow a fixed multiyear plan. Programs from
infrastructure to early innovation to deployment need to
connect to ensure the best new ideas are developed and deployed
in a timely manner. Operationalizing these principles may
require rethinking program structures and interfaces.
Additionally, it's important to provide the Office of
Nuclear Energy sufficient staffing to evolve and support their
management programs and to support collaborative work across
the DOE. The funds provided to the staff of the Office of
Nuclear Energy have not increased sufficiently even as R&D
budgets have grown approximately 60 percent over the past 5
years.
So we're currently in an exciting and ambitious time for
nuclear energy. Over the past three Administrations, Congress
has provided increased funding and legislative support,
recognizing the importance of nuclear technology for providing
clean, reliable energy and supporting good jobs. A number of
new critical program elements have been initiated, and a few
more are needed. The principles and structures upon which these
programs are executed need to be established to ensure funding
is best used as we build 21st-century energy systems. I look
forward to this dialog, as well as the support of the Committee
as it considers how to enable success at the Office of Nuclear
Energy. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Allen follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And finally, Mr. Amey is
recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MR. SCOTT AMEY,

GENERAL COUNSEL AND EXECUTIVE EDITORIAL DIRECTOR,

PROJECT ON GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT

Mr. Amey. Yes, thank you. Good morning. And I want to thank
Chairman Foster, Bowman, and Ranking Members Obernolte and
Weber and the Members of the Subcommittee for asking the
Project on Government Oversight to testify about Federal
spending best practices. I am Scott Amy, POGO's General Counsel
and Executive Editorial Director. POGO is a nonpartisan
independent watchdog that investigates and exposes waste,
corruption, abuse of power, and when the government fails to
serve the public or silences those who report wrongdoing. We
made our mark in the 1980's spotlighting oversight on toilet
seats, coffee makers, and hammers at the Department of Defense
(DOD).
Throughout our 40-year history, POGO has created a niche in
investigating, exposing, and helping to remedy waste, fraud,
abuse, and government spending. We called attention to systems
that placed taxpayer funds at risk and supported reforms that
enhanced competition, accountability, oversight, and
transparency. POGO also has a long history of investigating
wasteful spending and performance issues at DOE and even a
revolving-door instance that may be relevant to today's
hearing.
Let's start this morning by putting Federal contracting
grant spending in perspective. Those dollars have more than
tripled since 2000 when contracts and grants totaled $500
billion. In Fiscal Year 2020 that total exploded to $1.6
trillion with contracts and grants totaling $667 billion and
$971 billion respectfully. While energy is not spending money
at that pace, DOE's spending on contracts and grants nearly
doubled to just under $40 billion in 2020. Those numbers show
that the government is handing out money at unprecedented
levels, and we need to follow best practices, and we need
financial stewards who spend money wisely.
Many events over the past 20 years have called into
question the effectiveness of our spending systems. Spending
has grown tremendously. The acquisition and grant workforces
are stretched thin. Oversight has decreased, and spending on
services now outpaces spending on goods. These--this changing
landscape sometimes places public funds at risk. I present two
questions to the Members of this Subcommittee that they should
ask. What are we buying? What goods and services are required
to meet the Department ]of Energy's needs? Second, how are we
buying them? That is a little more in the weeds, but this
question is vital to buying smarter and for general good
government practices. We need to look at the types of contracts
and agreements that we're awarding, the levels of competition,
the award process, statements of work and the requirements that
are defined, fees, the length or term of the award,
accountability, oversight, transparency, performance, and the
results that we're getting.
As much as possible, the government must engage in the same
practices as we do in our general lives. We need to seek
competition that will ensure best quality and the best price,
provide sufficient administration and accountability, and
fortunately with the workforce stagnation and in some cases
cuts, that has led to a stretched workforce, especially
considering the huge jump in spending. That workforce also
lacks tools to make well-informed spending decisions and the
ability to provide oversight of funds going forward. Agencies
must be transparent because sunlight is the best disinfectant.
Oftentimes, however, the public and even Congress don't have
details or data to oversee spending.
Additionally, we lack information [inaudible] Federal
dollars and are trusted with our national security information,
which then could be stolen or provided to adversaries. We also
need [inaudible] low-risk spending. While risk is inevitable,
it can be calculated and deemed accessible. Low risk means
avoiding sole-source contracts, risky spending types and
vendors, and terms and conditions that place financing and
other burdens on agencies and government officials.
We need to tune out claims from awardees that the Federal
system is just littered with red tape. Currently, the system is
more ``catch me if you can'' than smart buying. When it comes
to the Department of Energy, there are numerous Inspector
General and GAO reports about adequate--inadequate planning,
poor requirements and statement of work, projects that are over
budget and behind schedule, cozy dealing, sole-source awards,
performance deficiencies, and longer-term agreements, which
often lock out genuine competition.
Energy's large management and operation contracts have been
criticized for years. Currently, GAO has contract and program
management for two DOE offices on its high-risk list. I think
today's hearing about recent awards is essential to ensuring
that taxpayer dollars are spent wisely and to prevent DOE's
Office of Nuclear Energy from making GAO's high-risk list.
Thank you for inviting me to testify, and I look forward to
working with the Subcommittees, and I welcome any questions
that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Amey follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you.
And at this point we will begin our first round of
questions. If time and Member interest permit, we may have a
second round of questions. The Chair now recognizes himself for
five minutes.
Dr. Huff, my first questions involve the Carbon Free Power
Plan, a project that has the laudable goal of demonstrating the
economics of mass-producing and operating a significant number
of small modular reactors (SMRs) for power generation. Now, in
November of last year, about three weeks after the DOE
announced that it would provide $1.4 billion to help deploy 12
of 60 megawatt reactors, their private partner in this project,
NuScale, announced that it planned to uprate the SMR design
from 60 megawatts to 77 megawatts. This is a significant design
change, and it was made almost immediately after the contract
award, which I find concerning.
Now, I know you weren't there when this award was made,
but, to your knowledge, did NuScale and the Carbon Free Power
Project disclose to DOE prior to the contract award that it had
plans to change the reactor design?
Dr. Huff. Thank you for your question. I, too, understand
the concerns that this would raise. This award was indeed
granted in the previous Administration, and I can't comment on
what was known when or what was incorporated, but I understand
that decisionmaking at the time did incorporate the existing
knowledge. And something important and relevant to note here is
that we have communicated to the CFPP awardees at this time an
award modification that would enable them to leverage the
uprated sixpack version of the NuScale technology would be
allowable. But we are currently analyzing how that change in
project scope might impact the cost components of the award
with some recognition, of course, in the development of and
assurance that that will serve the taxpayer, recognize the
important accountability that our office needs to implement in
that context. The potential impacts of that uprate on the
schedule of CFPP have been analyzed by NuScale, UAMPS, and the
DOE at this time.
Chairman Foster. Yes, well, thank you. You know, obviously
when you uprate a reactor design, you have to re-examine all
the design margins, make sure they're still adequate, then go
back to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to get the new design
certified at the higher power level, which will take time,
potential design changes, and money. And so how far are you
from having mapped out together the impact on the overall cost
and schedule of this design change, including the relicensing,
licensing of the new design?
Dr. Huff. Absolutely. So the award that NuScale is
operating in on its own outside of the UAMPS experience is
nearing completion. And while a slight extension of their
milestone will enable their uprate over the course of the next
few months, we expect that there's no question that it will
reach completion with the NRC expeditiously because it will
rely on that first application and their design certification,
which was successful through NRC with our original award to
NuScale. And so we're very hopeful that it should have very
minimal impact on the schedule and in fact, in the context of
UAMPS, it should have limited or no impact on the schedule.
Chairman Foster. OK. Well, when you get all that worked
out, I'm sure our Committee staff will be interested in having
a look at the updated design.
I also understand the CFPP made a modification request so
that the project would only deploy six of these larger units
rather than 12. So part of that reduction simply reflects the
power uprate, but still, the six slightly larger units would
only produce 460 megawatts down from the 720 megawatts that--in
the original contract. And so we'd also obviously learn less
about the economies of scale from building multiple identical
SMRs. So is it--first off, is it correct that CFPP and DOE are
now negotiating a modification to produce less power right now?
Dr. Huff. Yes. We have received a request to modify the
award and are analyzing what modifications can improve the
likelihood of that project's success without increasing the
risk exposure to the Federal Government and the taxpayer. We
have clarified with the awardee that communication regarding
such issues need to take place early, frequently, and
transparently moving forward. But indeed in the context of
leveraging that improvement in the uprate, we have communicated
to the CFPP awardees that an award modification that would
enable them to leverage that uprated sixpack version of the
NuScale technology will be allowable but are currently
analyzing the project scope and impact on components of the
cost of the award.
Chairman Foster. Are you currently contemplating that the
DOE will still contribute the same amount of money, $1.4
billion, even though the overall power produced by the project
is going to be smaller?
Dr. Huff. That analysis is ongoing, and of course, you
know, the--exactly those concern is within our scope of
exploration as we conduct our analysis in terms of what will be
allowable and appropriate to ensure that the award does not
overexpose the government for--to risk.
Chairman Foster. All right. Thank you. And it looks like my
time is expired, so I'll now recognize Representative Obernolte
for five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Chairman Foster. I will continue
the line of questioning with Dr. Huff.
In your oral testimony, you acknowledge the concerns that
the Committee has with the sole-source awards. And in your
written testimony you detailed the four sole-source awards that
the Committee has asked about, but nowhere has there been a
discussion of the rationale that was followed in determining
that sole-source was the appropriate method of awarding these.
And so I'm hoping that--I realize that you were not with the
agency when these contracts were awarded, but, I mean,
certainly, a majority of the staff of the Office of Nuclear
Energy was, and so I'm hoping that there's some institutional
memory there that they can tell us in those four instances why
sole-source was the better option.
Dr. Huff. Thank you very much for your question. I am
indeed--I do indeed understand the concern, and yes, while I
was not there, there are of course staff that were there when
these decisions were made, and I will assure you that it is my
understanding that these awards were prepared in accordance
with the applicable regulations and governing Federal
acquisitions and cooperative agreements were thoroughly
reviewed and approved by the DOE's Office of Management, as
well as our Office of General Counsel and that they were
documented and executed legally. But indeed, the sort of
rationale and justification that are documented are the--that's
the information that I also have.
And I will say that I certainly agree that, moving forward,
fair and open competition is recognized within this office
culturally both by me and by the staff as the best practice for
Federal procurement and financial assistance, so we are
committed to early and open expressions of interest by the
Department moving forward to ensure the greatest number of
market competitors and participants in any competition.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. Well, thank you. I saw that in your
testimony. The--to be clear, what I'm asking is not whether or
not the law was followed. I mean, I think it's clear that
you're asserting the law was followed and, you know, we're not
questioning that. What I'm interested in knowing about is the
specific rationale in those four circumstances that led the
office to conclude that sole-source was in the best interest of
taxpayers.
Dr. Huff. Yes, for the really detailed response that you
need for each of those awards, I will refer to the DNFA
(Determination of Noncompetitive Financial Assistance)
justification documents, and I would--if you would be willing,
I'd be happy to take that question for the record and give you
a more detailed and accurate response.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. I would appreciate that.
Dr. Huff. All right? Thanks.
Mr. Obernolte. And following up on what you had just said a
moment ago about the Office of Nuclear Energy's belief that
fair and open competition is the best practice for Federal
procurement, can you talk about moving forward what the
office's stance will be on sole-source awards and the
circumstances under which you think a sole-source award would
be more appropriate than a competitive award?
Dr. Huff. Yes, thank you. I really appreciate that
question. Recognizing upon my arrival that this was a concern
in the context of our relationship with Congress, I have
directed the Office of Nuclear Energy to temporarily pause any
new sole-source awards and execute all of its contracts and
financial assistance awards competitively, including any
related to the pending legislation should it be enacted into
law. And we have already, during the last few months, halted
multiple sole-source award processes in order to initiate
competitive processes instead. Some are very small and would be
really straightforward cases for a sole-source contract, for
example, where we have relationships with entities that are
capable of liaising between us and our tribal working groups.
Those kinds of contracts, there are very few entities that are
capable of conducting those activities. In fact, in most
regions, only one, right, so that is a very clear case for
sole-source, but we are competing similar awards of this nature
as a cultural exercise and a full stop to that activity so that
we can evaluate our ability to compete any and all types of
awards, regardless of their sole-source status in the near-
term.
Mr. Amey. Ranking Member Obernolte, may I jump in for a
quick second and just add one point? And that is this has to be
more than just a check-the-box exercise. I haven't seen a lot
of information on these contracts, and I haven't--but what I
have seen, especially on the Centrus contract and on the CFPP
contract is this almost looked like an earmark. Proprietary
information--I think NuScale was mentioned in the documents I
saw and so was Centrus--what is it, the AC-100M product. When
you name products like that and only one person has the
proprietary rights to those, you're limiting competition
automatically. And so it's--that's why I say this can't just be
a check-the-box exercise. They need to make sure--NE needs to
make sure it goes back and it's looking at the requirements for
all these contracts and making sure that they're as open as
possible to lure in as much competition that they can. And so
we want as many people at the table, but if you limit it with--
and name proprietary products, you're going to limit it--you're
going to limit who you get to the table.
Mr. Obernolte. Yes. Well, I see my time is----
Chairman Foster. Yes----
Mr. Obernolte. But, Dr. Huff, I'm looking forward to
getting the justifications. Just to make the point, I mean, I
don't want you to take--have the takeaway of being--from this
Committee hearing being that sole-source is never--should never
be pursued and, you know, that the Committee will always
question any sole-source contract. But, as Mr. Amey has said,
sunshine and transparency is, you know, the best application of
this. And so moving forward, I think, you know, as long as
we're transparent with each other and your department is very
transparent with the rationale for awarding those contracts, I
think we can avoid this kind of difficulty in the future.
But I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Bonamici for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Well, thank you so much to the Chairs and the
Ranking Members and especially to our witnesses.
I want to start by saying that because of long-standing,
unresolved issues with the management of spent waste,
sustainability, and overall safety issues, I remain concerned
about expanding our current nuclear fleet with existing
commercial technologies. But small modular reactors, SMRs, have
the potential to complement the use of renewable energy sources
and support decarbonization if safety, security, and disposal
concerns are addressed.
And I also want to note that this oversight is critical,
and it's very important that we're getting these questions
answered because I do look forward to our continued efforts and
the efforts by the Office of Nuclear Energy to carefully
develop this technology. And I want to note again the
importance of getting these questions answered because I do
hope that NuScale, which is headquartered in Oregon in the
district I represent, and has partnered and worked closely over
the years with Oregon State University, I hope they can lead
the way.
So I want to start with questions for Mr. Amey. I'm
concerned about how the Department of Energy treated cost share
in its recent noncompetitive grant to Exelon to upgrade to
digital controls at its Limerick Generating Station in
Pennsylvania. So DOE and demonstration projects must secure no
less than 50 percent of funds from non-Federal resources, and
research and development projects on the other hand must meet a
20 percent cost share threshold. So DOE argued that it did not
have to meet the statutory 50/50 cost share for demonstration
because the Limerick project is both research and
demonstration.
So, Mr. Amey, a couple of questions here. The DOD has
regulations that clearly distinguish cost share requirements
for research and development projects versus demonstration
projects. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) of course
has similar guidance. So should DOE consider updating their
departmentwide guidelines and regulations related to cost share
requirements? And would this help avoid cost share confusion
and guarantee greater funding transparency going forward?
Mr. Amey. Yes, thank you for the question. I think the easy
answer is certainly. I think DOE should go back and take a look
at the blueprint that DOD and OMB have laid out and possibly
create a hybrid. I mean, there may be research and development
projects that also become demonstration projects, and so they
may need a different formula for those types of projects, but
cost-sharing is a problem and waivers to the cost-sharing
principles are also problematic because it's, you know,
obviously putting a lot of risk on the taxpayers to come up
with a lot of frontloaded money.
Ms. Bonamici. Absolutely. And I want to take this
opportunity, even though not directly related to oversight but
a really critical issue to ask Dr. Huff a question.
We happen to have in Oregon at Reed College in Portland a
research reactor. It's been there since 1968. It's the only
reactor operated primarily by undergraduate students. They only
license up to 40 at a time. And it's a pretty unique
opportunity for students. But in your testimony, Dr. Huff, you
mentioned the importance of supporting a strong nuclear
workforce, so could you please speak to any challenges that the
office is facing in attracting and retaining talent? I'm on the
Education and Labor Committee. I care a lot about workforce
issues, especially as we transition to a clean energy economy.
So what are the current overall challenges in workforce facing
the industry, understanding that the 40 undergraduate students
at Reed College aren't going to be able to meet the needs
across the country?
Dr. Huff. Thank you so much for this question. As a former
professor, currently on unpaid leave of absence from the
University of Illinois, nothing is more important to me than
university education just like that that you're describing at
Reed College at their very unique research and test reactor.
There used to be quite a lot more of those research and test
reactors actually across the United States, and over time, as
R&D funding and particularly enrollment in the university
system declined in the sort of 1980's that we had a decline in
those facilities.
Interest in nuclear energy has increased dramatically over
the last few decades as the promise for its use in climate
technology has increased, and that new workforce is--has not
been met and--with the same kinds of hands-on technologies to
support the research and training that these research reactors
represented. And so there's a growing and widening gap in that
hands-on training, which I think my office has the opportunity
to fill with the kinds of authorities to support university-
directed R&D that the Energy Act of 2020 has enabled my office
with, as well as another--a number of other opportunities. You
know, we'll have some exciting announcements soon hopefully in
this direction, and I really look forward to communicating with
Congress on their best implications.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much, Dr. Huff. And as I yield
back, I want to reiterate to the Chairs and Ranking Members and
Committee Members, I look forward to working with you on
answering these important oversight questions going forward,
and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And now Ranking Member Weber
will be recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I start with my
questions, I appreciated your point about maybe a second round
of questions because I do have a list of questions I'd like to
submit for the record. I'd like to also echo the sentiments of
your previous speakers. We are ultimately the stewards of the
American taxpayer dollar. So with unanimous consent, I'd like
to submit those questions just in case we don't get to that
second round.
Chairman Foster. Yes, without objection, all Members are
authorized to submit additional questions for the record.
Mr. Weber. OK. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Huff, throughout my years on the Science Committee, I
have supported robust funding for the versatile test reactor to
ensure that the United States has the ability to validate and
test the next generation of nuclear fuels, materials, and
reactor designs. We've spoken about some of those here this
morning. I would opine if you will that if we were serious
about our clean energy future and want to decrease our
dependence on competitors like China and Russia for advanced
nuclear R&D, we must commit to our investment in this essential
research infrastructure.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I was proud to lead
the push to authorize substantial funding for the versatile
test reactor, VTR, in the Energy Act of 2020. Monitoring the
progress of this project is a huge priority for me in Congress.
So I know you're new, but, Dr. Huff, can you share an update on
the status of VTR, and how will you push for that project to
receive the necessary support to ensure it's completed and
operational in time for our researchers to avoid missing the
proverbial boat?
Dr. Huff. Thank you for this question. I, too, believe that
the versatile test reactor is an essential tool for the United
States to regain its global nuclear energy leadership role in
the development of advanced reactors. It's really imperative
and urgent that we make progress in revitalizing a strong
commercial nuclear energy sector, and VTR will provide U.S.
industries and scientists a critical tool.
In terms of an update, you know, the work is ongoing with
the VTR. The environmental impact statement work has been
completed, and that statement will soon be released. The--in an
exciting sort of forward movement, of course, we are--we have
requested full funding for the VTR project to move forward, and
we certainly do appreciate HSST's (House Committee on Science,
Space and Technology's) proposal to potentially fund that going
forward, but we will pursue appropriate funding insofar as it
is possible to move that project forward because it is a really
urgent need to make progress in revitalizing commercial nuclear
energy sector leadership here.
Mr. Weber. Well, thank you for that response. And on any
given night that you have insomnia and you need some nighttime
reading, let me refer you to Amy Roma's testimony about how
important this is because she lays out a very strong case of
why it is so important.
This question will be for multiple witnesses. As part of my
efforts to support advanced nuclear energy development, I have
repeatedly emphasized the risk of our international competitors
who are outpacing us. And it's all--obviously the reason for
the VTR. So I'd like to ask each of our witnesses to answer
this question. What happens--what does it mean to the United
States if we cede leadership in the field of advanced nuclear
technology to our competitors? I'll go back to you to start,
Dr. Huff, but what does that mean if we lose that position?
Dr. Huff. Our leadership enables us to assist in
international nonproliferation goals, in commercializing our
technology designed here to be built abroad. It also underpins
our ability to stand strong in long-term conversations and
relationships around the development of nuclear technology
worldwide. And without that leadership, we have decreasing
influence over those conversations.
Mr. Weber. Glad to hear that you recognize that. Ms. Roma,
I'm going to come to you next.
Ms. Roma. Thank you. I cannot understate how important
increasing U.S. competitiveness overseas is because, you know,
it's easy to villainize Russia and China and just always say
it's Russia and China's fault. Here, it is actually Russia and
China. Russia has 60 percent of the global market for nuclear
power--new nuclear power plants outside of its own country, 60
percent. Behind that is China. China's Belt and Road Initiative
is the largest infrastructure plan that the world has ever
seen, and they plan on building nuclear power plants if they
can, if they can get these bids, all around the world.
One of the objectives of the BRI is not just economic,
right? Both China and Russia stand to make hundreds of billions
of dollars by getting these contracts for advanced reactors
abroad. But one of the stated objectives of both of these
projects is--under the BRI it's so that countries continue--
instead of looking to the West, will look to the East for
friendship, for business plans, for influence. Same with
Russia. You know, they are developing these programs because of
the huge economic benefits that they can reap but also the
significant geopolitical influence.
And I think everybody right now is probably attuned to the
energy crisis that we see emerging in Europe, right? And so
right now when we look at, you know, the clean energy
transition and how we're going to decarbonize the electricity
sector, we also have to look at how do we ensure we have grid
stability that we can turn the lights on and we get power and
we have to look at how do we have energy independence and
security? Every country has to take that into consideration. In
Europe, which relies a huge amount of its electricity on
natural gas that's coming in from Russia, they really do have
an energy independence problem.
And so underscoring how important this issue is I cannot
put enough stress on. From an economic perspective, from an
innovation perspective, from a national security perspective,
it is absolutely critical that we maintain and promote our
leadership on the global market.
Mr. Weber. Well, I'm going to take it that you're in favor
of that.
Ms. Roma. Yes.
Mr. Weber. So, Mr. Chairman, I'm going to yield back. Thank
you.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative McNerney for five minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the Chair for holding this
hearing.
I'm in favor nuclear energy because we're going to need it,
but it's got to be done right, and that includes nuclear waste.
But that's a topic for another discussion.
The Energy Act of 2020 established a program on advanced
nuclear fuel availability within the Office of Nuclear Energy.
This is based on legislation that I led. The program directs
the Department of Energy to create a strategy on advanced
nuclear fuel like HALEU, including a survey of the needs of
domestic commercial use. However, the first HALEU production
contract went to Centrus before this survey was completed. So,
Dr. Huff, what is the Office of Nuclear Energy's status on this
survey of needs? And will it be completed in time for
subsequent advanced nuclear fuel production contracts?
Dr. Huff. Thank you. Yes, we plan to release a request for
information (RFI) soon to solicit really broad stakeholder
input on the various activities associated with HALEU
availability, authorized under the Energy Act of 2020, so thank
you, including the formation of a consortium for HALEU
availability. Response to that RFI, as well as other
stakeholder outreach, will inform the approach for consortium
membership organization in governments, and our current plans,
subject to appropriations, is to take actions to proceed beyond
the completion of the AC-100M demonstrations in a competitive
manner consistent with our commitment to competing work.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. The first HALEU production
contract was awarded through a sole-source contract. However,
the Energy Act of 2020 also contain guidance for the DOE on
milestone-based competitive award processes which would require
certain technical and financial milestones be met before
awarding a grant or contract. Dr. Allen, what are the benefits
to using a milestone-based approach to award service selection
rather than a sole-service--sole-source contract arrangement?
Dr. Allen. Yes, thanks for the question. I think the
advantage is it allows you over time, right, to recalibrate the
relationship and see if you're making progress. I mean, my
colleagues at the Nuclear Innovation Alliance did a nice paper
that looked at how this was used in the space program, right,
and when you think about the awards that we have with
commercial companies, we approach them at different levels,
right? Companies that we think are closer to deployment, we
invest more in. But all that can change, so you want to be
seeing are you meeting your milestones? Is your financial
support consistent with the original agreement? And I think
you're just going to end up with better outcomes over time that
follows what you would see in normal commercial competition if
you have the milestone approach. And so I think it's very
important.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you. Ms. Roma, do you have
anything to add to that?
Ms. Roma. Yes. So in the--you know, in the private sector
space, this is--the milestone approach or tranche funding is
actually very common. It allows you to invest kind of lower
amounts of capital and that when somebody proves they can meet
a stated clear objective, that kind of gives them access to the
next tranche of money. And so you significantly de-risk your
investment, but at the same time, you allow the money to
continue to progress as those milestones are achieved.
It's actually also pretty flexible. I've kind of had to
write up milestones for a number of VC (venture capital)
investments kind of in the private sector space, and you can
tailor it around regulatory accomplishments, technical
accomplishments, business accomplishments such as having like
land transferred over to the new entity, lining up a customer.
And so you can really tailor it to each specific project, but
it significantly de-risks the investment for taxpayers.
Mr. McNerney. OK, good. Mr. Amey, how does the milestone-
based approach make better use of government resources? And
what would be the best practices for DOE to follow up on to
ensure success at this point in the game?
Mr. Amey. Well, as I think Ms. Roma just said, I mean, it
allows you to move forward incrementally and pass off risk as
you're moving forward, so I think that is a good step. We've
all heard of the company SpaceX, and when the Air Force was
trying to do launch vehicle contracts, SpaceX wasn't in--even
in the market and--but the Air Force wanted to do a long-term
lock buy and kind of lock in, and that was, you know--at that
time Senator McCain pushed back on that approach and said,
well, wait a second, these companies may not be viable, but
they may be viable in the course of this contract. Why don't we
just let them at the table? And eventually now look what SpaceX
is doing. We're sending people into space, low orbit. They're
getting now, you know, very large Air Force contracts. And I
think that kind of getting people to the table and that kind of
incremental milestone approach is the best way for the
Department of Energy to go.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you. I spent many years in
industry, and although we didn't get government contracts,
there's no way we would have sole-sourced our supply chain to--
it just wouldn't work in the long run. So thank you for that
output--input, and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Bice for five minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for the
Ranking Members and Committee Chairs putting this together
today.
My question is for Dr. Huff. My State produces a lot of
natural gas, which has served as an energy source working to
reduce carbon emissions. Do you see a role for advanced nuclear
reactors to provide the high temperature heat needed in the
steam methane reforming process that converts natural gas into
clean hydrogen?
Dr. Huff. Yes, absolutely. There is a strong role for the
uniquely clean thermal energy produced by nuclear reactors to
support previously fossil-fueled thermal energy applications
like you have described.
Mrs. Bice. I like hearing that. OK. As a follow up
question, does the Office of Nuclear Energy collaborate with
the Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon Management (FECM) as a
part of this effort? And if so, how?
Dr. Huff. We are beginning a lot of conversations around
how to collaborate with FECM. I'll tell you, breaking down
those stovepipes internal to the Department of Energy and in
fact across the interagency is one of the things I've been most
excited about taking on this job. And I'll tell you the
conversations that we're already having with FECM cover all
kinds of aspects around coal-to-nuclear transitions for those
unabated coal plants, as well as topics around hydrogen, for
example, in the context of, you know, methane reforming, as we
discussed.
Mrs. Bice. Great. Mr. Amey, do you have any recommendations
on how the Department could better insulate itself against the
risk of financial loss in the unique case of these sort of
cutting-edge one-off projects?
Mr. Amey. Well, wonderful question, thank you. It is--I
mean, workforce issues came up earlier, and it sounded as if
that was, you know, taking a look at what experience we can get
from the outside market, but this is also about the Department
of Energy ramping up its workforce and retention to make sure
that it has the capabilities to analyze the technologies that
are coming forward and enter the best agreements. I mean this
is not just the contracting grant workforce or the oversight
workforce or the IGs but this is also the program workforce to
make sure that we have the right people in place. And, you
know, hiring the workforce has been difficult for certain
agencies. There's been some caps, and so that may be something
you have to take a look at.
But overall, I think it is making sure that, again, we
spend money wisely, we have competition, we have the
administrative support that we need, the oversight, the
accountability, you have the transparency that's there. I mean,
it's pretty difficult to find any information about these
contracts other than some summary data that's on the SAM
system, the System for Award Management, or for the USAspending
site.
And so, you know, I would also recommend that NE goes back
and makes all these agreements and contracts available so we
can see what's actually in them. What are the statements of
work? What are the terms and conditions to make sure that we're
getting the best bang for the buck?
Mrs. Bice. Do you think that's--that jeopardizes the maybe
classified or maybe information that they're providing that's
specific to the project that's maybe not public record?
Mr. Amey. Well, there are certainly concerns that you have
with privacy and with----
Mrs. Bice. Proprietary.
Mr. Amey [continuing]. Proprietary trade secrets and
classified information, and that can be redacted and should be,
you know, redacted to the most limited extent, the least common
denominator that it can be. So, you know, that's always
possible, not asking for everybody to put everything out there
that should not be publicly available, but it can be done, and
it should be done so that we can learn a lot more about this,
which will also bring in competition. It will also bring in
innovation. I mean, the more people that see what's happening,
the more people will think, and that's where you want the
competitive, you know, private sector to kind of take over and
say, well, they're taking it here, can we take it somewhere
else?
Mrs. Bice. Well, I think that I hope to work with
Representative Bonamici on some of the workforce challenges
because that is of interest to me as well.
So finally, Dr. Huff, in your written testimony you state
that any invest in RD&D that the private sector or other
nongovernment stakeholders are unable or unwilling to perform
due to uncertainty, cost, scale, or timeframes, how does the
Office of Nuclear Energy minimize the risk to taxpayers when
supporting projects involving substantial uncertainty?
Dr. Huff. Yes, thank you for this question. I, too, feel
strongly about ensuring that we do our homework and turn our
homework in on time, as was said earlier, in terms of this sort
of specific analysis. So the way that this typically works is
we do real analysis of the exposure of the government during
the process of awards, as well as during the approach to their
completion. And programmatic oversight does pay attention to
contract award procedures, accountability, and standards for
risk on taking by the government through our PICS:NE system
and, as was mentioned earlier, some of these other
accountability systems within reporting requirements within the
office. And we generally strive to ensure successful completion
of these projects while simultaneously minimizing government
exposure to risk by leveraging these kind of best practices for
financial agreements when we do the contracting. Yes, we commit
to making--moving forward decisionmaking based on really
rigorous analysis underpinned by scientific fact, mitigation of
government risk, and a focus on the benefit to the taxpayer.
Mrs. Bice. Perfect. Thank you so much to the panelists
today. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. We will now recognize
Representative Lamb for five minutes.
Mr. Lamb. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all the
witnesses.
Dr. Huff, are you familiar with the provision of the
bipartisan infrastructure bill that passed the Senate,
hopefully soon to pass the House, that includes some money for
DOE to use to preserve existing nuclear reactors that are
threatened to shut down for economic or other reasons?
Dr. Huff. Yes, I am. The Civil Nuclear Credit Program,
which we're internally calling Grants for Plants, and we are
preparing a plan to ensure that the oversight and distribution
of those grants, if the bipartisan infrastructure bill passes,
will be executed in a timely manner with a great deal of
oversight on the calculation of needs and risks of those
companies and applicants that are interested in benefiting from
those grants. And so we're working with a number of offices
within DOE, contractors with relevant experience in industry,
as well as in the interagency to ensure that we have a solid
plan moving forward for how to implement that activity.
Mr. Lamb. Great. You know, given the number of reactors we
have in the United States and how old they are, could you say
anything about what you think a reasonable time period is that
we should be trying to preserve these plants and whether--I
think it was $6 billion in the Senate bill--sort of how that
measures up to what you perceive the need to be? I know you
probably can't be exact but just in general terms whatever you
can share with us.
Dr. Huff. Thank you. I appreciate the question, and I will
resist the urge to attempt to be exact. It is a complicated
challenge. The existing plants have--many of them have
successfully applied for and received lifetime extensions from
their original somewhat arbitrary 40-year lifetime extension--
lifetimes to 60 and now some 80 years. And recognizing that the
Department of Energy plays a role in ensuring that the research
and development is done to ensure that those lifetime
extensions are based on scientific fact, I believe that I see
no real strong reason that those lifetime extensions can't
continue quite a while into the foreseeable future for many or
most of those plants. And the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
will continue to review those lifetime extension applications
to the extent that they are applied for.
Now, in terms of whether $6 billion is sufficient, you
know, we've identified quite a number of at-risk plants that
have faced competition in the markets in which they operate,
and the number of plants is large enough where $6 billion will
not be enough to ensure for certain that all existing reactors
will continue to operate to the extension of their lifetime,
but we will continue to evaluate that and implement all of the
funding that is available and directed by Congress as it
becomes available.
Mr. Lamb. Great, thank you. But, I mean, I think it's
reasonable to assume that we're going to be having a life
extension discussion for a decade or more from now, right?
Because, I mean, these advanced reactors, as great as they are,
may take us a while to build and test and prove and ultimately
expand.
Dr. Huff. Yes.
Mr. Lamb. Yes, OK. On the--just one question about the
advanced modular reactor design and what you know about it. Our
State, Pennsylvania, is a pretty large manufacturing hub for
the current model of existing nuclear plants. I think we may
actually have the highest number of companies and employees in
the supply chain in the country. We're certainly up there. Do
you know of any efforts at DOE that are designed to prepare
companies and workers like the ones we have in our State to be
ready to compete to be in the supply chain for the next design
of reactor?
Dr. Huff. Yes, as we in the Advanced Reactor Demonstration
Program support the companies that have reactor concepts, part
of that program does fund some of the supply chain efforts. And
the Federal Government, of course, is undergoing a sort of
broader effort to identify key supply chain risks, and our
office is deeply engaged, especially within the current DOE
evaluation of those supply chain risks. And as we look toward
the supply chain risks, they are an opportunity for jobs just
like the rest of the energy transition. And I know our Office
of Clean Energy Jobs is deeply engaged in that activity.
Mr. Lamb. Great. Well, I would encourage you in any way
that you possibly can to try to make use of the experience and
resources that exist within the firms that are doing this work
already even with the new designs, and it's something we can
stay in touch about. So thank you very much for your service
and your presence with us here today. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we will now recognize
Representative Garcia for five minutes. Or we will at least
attempt to recognize Representative Garcia. And failing that,
Representative Meijer, if you're willing to take over, you're--
you'll be recognized for five minutes.
OK, I guess we'll have to find a way to warn them online.
And at this point I will, I think, proceed with
Representative Stansbury if she is available.
Ms. Stansbury. Good morning.
Chairman Foster. At this point I'd really like Members to
please, you know, make themselves visible in the--if they think
they're about to be up. It makes it much easier for staff and
frankly for me. Thank you. Proceed, Representative Stansbury.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
convening today's panel.
This hearing is all about good government and ensuring
appropriate oversight over Federal agencies, their procurement
practices, and ensuring that the taxpayers' dollars are being
spent appropriately. The DOE contract in question today raises
serious concerns. The Treaty of Washington prohibits foreign-
owned businesses from producing unencumbered uranium that is
fungible between civilian purposes and defense purposes. DOE's
Office of Nuclear Energy has a strictly civilian mission, and,
as such, unless they are directed to work with the DOD or NNSA
(National Nuclear Security Administration), I believe that they
should work solely within and on nuclear energy for nondefense
purposes and that all companies that have facilities with those
capabilities in DOE deciding that their HALEU production
contracts could be used for defense-related applications raises
a number of questions that must be addressed. And I'm glad to
hear that the Department is taking this seriously.
So, Dr. Huff, my first question is actually for you. Did
DOE's National Nuclear Security Administration or the
Department of Defense contribute anything to the $115 million
award DOE gave to Centrus?
Dr. Huff. No, ma'am. To my knowledge, they did not.
Ms. Stansbury. And, Dr. Huff, did NNSA or DOD ever formally
ask the DOE to help make more unencumbered uranium available to
support their future needs?
Dr. Huff. I will have to get back to you to whether any
such conversation may have happened, but my understanding is
that we are in constant communication with NNSA and DOE about
uranium, as it's a shared resource, and attempt to have a
unified uranium strategy, but I will--if you would permit me,
I'd like to respond to that question for the record with the
help of my staff.
Ms. Stansbury. That would be wonderful, thank you. We will
submit that as a question for the record.
And, Ms. Roma, you're familiar with the statutory mission
of DOE's Office of Nuclear Energy. Does this office have a
defense mission?
Ms. Roma. No, I don't believe it does.
Ms. Stansbury. And do you think it is appropriate for the
Office of Nuclear Energy to be cornering the attribute of
unencumbered uranium without DOE or NNSA helping to pay for it?
Ms. Roma. Well, I think that probably is a better question
for Dr. Huff, but I can say that to my knowledge that there
should be no reason while--why the Office of Nuclear Energy,
for its purpose, is worried about the encumbrances on uranium.
The encumbrances on uranium restrict what it can be used for
for largely defense purposes, but from a commercial sector if
you're looking at fuel, it doesn't really matter.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you.
Dr. Huff, I appreciate your commitment for future HALEU
production to be competitive, and I look forward to maintaining
clear and open communication with the Office of Nuclear Energy
and this Committee going forward to ensure that our taxpayers'
money is being wisely spent and appropriately spent, and we'll
submit some questions for the record.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
And, Representative Meijer, if you are prepared, you'll be
recognized for five minutes. But absent that, I will then
recognize Representative Casten.
Mr. Meijer. Thank----
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you all
being here.
My question is for Dr. Huff, and I apologize for being a
little bit wonky. I'm an energy project finance guy by
background, and I'd like to understand a little bit of the
financing structure, the Carbon Free Power Project. First off,
do I understand that that project is a 50-50 DOE private-sector
joint venture? Is that right? And I think--go ahead.
Dr. Huff. So it's important to note that there is an R&D
component and a demonstration component to this award and so
the cost share utilizes a formula that captures the R&D
component with its appropriate level of government cost share
and the demonstration component with its appropriate level of
cost share.
Mr. Casten. Well, let me then just reframe my question. Of
the $1.4 billion that we've approved so far, can I assume that
that's matched with roughly $1.4 billion of money provided by
the CFPP LLC (limited liability company) entity?
Dr. Huff. Roughly, yes.
Mr. Casten. OK. All right. Do you know anything about the
debt equity structure of CFPP LLC? And if you don't, that's OK.
I'm just curious.
Dr. Huff. I know a little bit, but in great detail I would
refer to my staff.
Mr. Casten. OK. But they do have some level of equity
participation?
Dr. Huff. Yes.
Mr. Casten. OK. Does the Department of Energy or the U.S.
taxpayer have any equity exposure in the project, or is it just
a grant?
Dr. Huff. I think we should--I should be very clear about
this because there's a distinction between various kinds of
grants that I would like to make sure are captured cleverly.
Mr. Casten. I guess what I'm wondering is if the future
cash-flows of the project were to change, does the taxpayer
have any downside exposure or upside gain from those change in
future cash-flows?
Dr. Huff. Yes. So it should be the case that while over
time in each budget period there's a differing amount of cost
share between the government and CFPP. The total project area,
which ends in 2029, is less than 50 percent cost share by the
government. In fact----
Mr. Casten. But I'm----
Dr. Huff [continuing]. I think it's closer to 20----
Mr. Casten. But I'm talking about once--but I'm talking
about once the project is fully operational. I realize that
we're on the hook for the money going in, but to the extent
that we make decisions right now that affect the long-term
revenue of this project, I'm assuming that that all flows to
CFPP LLC and not to the taxpayers. Is that a safe assumption?
Dr. Huff. Right.
Mr. Casten. OK. So I ask that because now we've made this
decision. As you know, we had $10 million that was appropriated
for the jump reactor, that this 12th reactor was going to be a
research and development. That, as you know, in the summer of
2020 was changed, and now that 12th reactor is a power-
producing reactor. I'm assuming, all else equal, that that
either increases the equity returns or in some fashion at least
reduces the equity risk to CFPP LLC. And if I'm understanding
what you've said so far, there's no incremental economic gain
just from that decision to the government. Do I--I see you
nodding. Is that--for the record, would you agree with that?
Dr. Huff. Yes.
Mr. Casten. OK. So what did we lose when we took out--
because the expectation was that that 12th reactor was going to
be there for research purposes. I think it would be the first
place in the world we would have been--you know, the INL
researchers would have had the ability to tinker and learn in
real time and in operating a next-generation nuclear facility.
What did we lose in exchange for essentially de-risking the
equity from CFPP LLC?
Dr. Huff. Well, we did lose that opportunity to utilize the
jump module for that research, which, you know, could have
contributed to some research of interest to Idaho National
Laboratory. But in general I think my understanding is that
this was an acceptable pathway moving forward and was
communicated fairly clearly to Hewden Suit at the time during
the decisionmaking process.
Mr. Casten. OK. So we lost some long-term benefit for the
taxpayer but we provided some short-term benefit for the
private participants.
Was the decision on that tradeoff made in consultation with
Congress, in consultation with any Federal oversight authority
since the initial appropriation did contemplate that, or was
that made unilaterally with DOE and private partners?
Dr. Huff. As I was not there, I will need to go back to my
staff and understand the timelines somewhat bit better in terms
of their communications with Hewden Suit and the appropriators
and whatnot, as well as the rest of Congress.
Mr. Casten. OK.
Dr. Huff. But my understanding is that they did do a number
of briefings with Hewden Suit on this topic, but I'm not sure
exactly the order of operations----
Mr. Casten. OK.
Dr. Huff [continuing]. So if you will permit me, I'd like
to answer that question----
Mr. Casten. That would----
Dr. Huff [continuing]. For the record.
Mr. Casten. That would be great. And last quick question
before I run out of time, do you know if the decision to move
that 12th reactor into commercial service was in any way
required by the financing of CFPP LLC, you know, to meet some
loan covenant or otherwise? In other words, did the DOE have a
choice to keep the project going but for that change, and do
you have any visibility into that decision?
Dr. Huff. I do not know if that was the reason for that
decision. I will--we can answer that question for the record.
Mr. Casten. That would be helpful. Thank you very much, and
I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
And now in order to return to proper bipartisan balance on
the order here, we will be recognizing Representative Garcia
for five minutes, followed by Representative Meijer. So,
Representative Garcia, you are recognized.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity here. I appreciate all the witnesses' testimony. I
think we're all in concurrence that nuclear energy is a
critical piece of the puzzle here moving forward. As someone
who has lived a couple years of my life on a nuclear-propelled
boat, I understand the benefits of it, as well as the low risk
associated with it when it's done correctly.
Dr. Huff, if we can, I'd like to just put a bow on the
sole-source award conversation if we can. Obviously, DOE and NE
are subject to Federal acquisition regulations just like any
other government. You mentioned there was a J&A (justification
and approval) done. I'm assuming the J&A went through FAR
(Federal Acquisition Regulation) 6.302, which are the reasons
for a sole-source justification (SSJ), as well as FAR 6.303,
which is the requirements for that J&A to go out the door
before it goes out the door and substantiates the sole-source
justification. I just want to follow up on my colleague
Obernolte's questions and make sure that we're asking for the
right artifacts. You will be providing to us the J&A with the
reasons and the rationale behind the SSJ documents that
ultimately led to the awards to us, is that correct?
Dr. Huff. The DNFA documents that were requested by the
Committee I think we already provided, but we will go back and
make sure that all requested DNFA documentation requested by
the Committee is provided.
Mr. Garcia. OK, thank you. I had a question on your opening
statement and then a question--my actual question I wanted to
get to, so I'll be brief. You mentioned that Biden's plan has a
significant percentage of nuclear capability within it. Can you
give us in a real quick sentence or two what is our current
percentage of energy production as a result of nuclear relative
to what the end state goals of this Administration are?
Dr. Huff. Fifty percent of our--over 50 percent of our
clean energy, clean electricity, is generated by nuclear.
That's about 20 percent of our electric grid. The Biden
Administration has not identified specific percentages of
nuclear in terms of its long-term plan but recognizes nuclear
as a key component in the strategy to reach our climate goals.
Mr. Garcia. OK. All right. We don't need to do a deep dive
on that, but I just want to recommend if you could shape that
to have a meaningful metric or goal to attain. Otherwise, it's
just a talking point. That's not attributed to you. I just--I
think in our own interest we all need to have a goal to try to
strive for.
So on the baseline conversations here, the recycling side
of the house seems to be an opportunity where we can realize
some gains. We've got about 85,000 metric tons, I believe, of
nuclear waste out there. I've seen technologies being pitched
that would take a lot of this waste, recycle it. Some of it
gets reused and the distillates become less toxic for shorter--
much shorter half-lives. Is this something that you guys have
been looking at? And then I guess what is DOE looking to do in
this field, and what sort of opportunities can we realize there
in the short term with, say, studies? How can we help on the
funding side? I--you know, I sit on Appropriations as well, and
money is always a long pole in these types of things. But where
can we help you, and what are the--what is the art of the
possible moving forward on the recycling of waste side?
Dr. Huff. Thank you very much for your question. You know,
actually I have an--kind of interest is--my research is in
nuclear fuel cycles, especially advanced nuclear fuel cycles
and advanced reactors, so it's certainly a topic of
extraordinary relevance and interest to me. As we look forward
into the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program reactors, we
are very interested in ensuring that the fuel cycle is
underpinning those reactor demonstrations, will be fully
supported by the research ongoing within our fuel cycle R&D
program within DOE NE, and sufficient support to ensure that
the labs, you know, expert bench is deep over time alongside
the progress of those advanced reactor demonstration awards is
really critical to ensuring that, you know, as needed, fuel
cycle research and development can be supported and experts are
available at the national laboratories to----
Mr. Garcia. Can I ask a clarifying question? When--you're
saying fuel cycle research and development. Is that--that
includes the recycling element on the backside, correct? OK.
Sorry----
Dr. Huff. That's right. Cycles include both the ones
through fuel cycle, as well as closed fuel cycles that
incorporate recycling like what you're discussing.
Mr. Garcia. Got you. Got you, got you. OK. Very good. And I
certainly would be interested off-line if we can get whatever
information, if my office can coordinate with you to see sort
of what the state-of-the-art and the art of the possible in
this regard.
Dr. Huff. We'd be thrilled to give you a briefing.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you all for your service, and I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Meijer for five minutes.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for our
panelists who are gathered here today and for holding this
hearing. I guess I also want to specifically welcome Dr. Allen
from Michigan State University. Glad to have another
Michigander here in the room.
I have a couple of more specific questions that I want to
get to in a second, but briefly, Dr. Allen, could you just
briefly comment on the role that the nuclear academic community
can play on ensuring the success of public-private
partnerships?
Dr. Allen. Yes, I think it's very important. You'll notice
if you dig into the history of some of these companies that
are--you're now talking about new products. Those came from
academic institutions, right? So I think we play a role in
workforce development, which we've already talked about. I
think innovating so that maybe the generation after this one is
even better, like we view that this is just the first step in a
long number of advanced nuclear technologies. And so I think
anywhere from innovation, workforce, getting people to use our
facilities to support these companies are all important. So we
do more at the front--at the innovation side, but we support
end-to-end.
Mr. Meijer. And then obviously NuScale came out of that
kind of academic environment and a lot of which----
Dr. Allen. Right.
Mr. Meijer [continuing]. Good, close collaboration with the
Department of Energy as well.
And I guess, you know, getting back to NuScale, are there
any domestic nuclear reactor manufacturers--I mean, NuScale is
coming online with their small modular reactor, but is it--is
there anyone but, you know, Westinghouse, who's obviously in a
bit of a tenuous position?
Dr. Allen. So at the moment you have a number of U.S.
companies that support parts, so Westinghouse clearly, but GE,
BWXT does work, and then you've got an entire set of innovators
that we--you'll see partnerships between them and some of these
companies so there's more than just Westinghouse.
Mr. Meijer. OK. But is it fair to say it's a quite
concentrated industry at the moment?
Dr. Allen. It is. And I think the vision of the future is
that you're expanding into new products, new business models,
then that becomes a much more broad and important part of a
clean energy economy.
Mr. Meijer. No, I think--and that's where I'm excited to
see, you know, where we are right now and that, you know,
expanded approval and, you know, supporting an entrepreneurial
process so that we can diversify, what I think--getting back to
what Mr. Garcia was saying is a widespread agreement on the
need to incorporate nuclear energy into our future, kind of
carbon-free electrical generation.
I guess shifting briefly to Dr. Huff, you know, I--you
know, along with our Chairman and Mr. Casten, you know, I
cosponsored--and Mr. Gonzalez as well cosponsored H.R. 4606,
the Energizing Technology Transfer Act. Can you touch briefly
upon how the Office of Nuclear Energy coordinates with the
Department's Office of Technology Transitions (OTT), you know,
to help those reach the market? And referenced, you know,
NuScale earlier, so if that's a helpful analogy. You know, I
mean, how can we best smooth that adoption so we get it from
decades to years?
Dr. Huff. Thank you for the question. I really appreciate
that. And the Office of Technology--OTT and NE work really
closely together, especially recently. The energy in that
office is really exciting right now as we look toward a clean
energy transition.
We are working to ensure that our TCF, the Technology
Commercialization Fund, activities are incorporated in a sort
of bigger vision for the future, and we also have been working
to ensure that their best practices and ideas for technology
transition can help us in projects like NuScale to ensure that
an order book of future reactors follows our investment in the
first of a kind in these devices, not just with NuScale but
also with the ARDPs and the risk reduction awardees and ARC-20
awards. It's important for our strategy to coordinate with OTT,
and we're doing so as much as possible.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you. And then I neglected--I apologize,
Dr. Allen, I did not realize you were also a University of
Michigan grad, so I apologize for throwing a Spartan reference
your way.
Dr. Allen. Thank you. Twitter probably is going to be a lot
nicer to me now you corrected that, so I appreciate it.
Mr. Meijer. But I, you know, just appreciate the
opportunity to discuss on this, and I think, again, warm
receptivity of--among the Subcommittee on how we can best
support all of these components. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Perlmutter for five minutes of trash-talking.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And this is our
second day in a row talking about nuclear physics and nuclear
everything, so yesterday was about nuclear electricity
propulsion and nuclear thermal propulsion, which is going to be
a key component for us getting our astronauts to Mars by 2033.
I guess I go with you, Mr. Amey. I mean, obviously, we
always want to default to competition because that brings more
robust thought and innovation, but from time to time sole
source is appropriate. So I'm not--I don't have a knee-jerk
reaction against the sole source, but I do if the rules of
engagement were not followed. So if in fact people were not
following the rules--and, Dr. Huff, you think that based on
your review of the record--you weren't there at the time--you
think the sole-source approach was followed appropriately in
this instance?
Dr. Huff. That is my understanding.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK. Has there been much of an investigation
into it?
Dr. Huff. I have asked my staff to ensure that this was the
case, as well as our procurement office and contracting office,
and they of course follow all procedures and feel that it was
executed neatly.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK. All right. But I think from sort of the
perspective of others, they're--they rely on budgets that are
set by the Department. They rely on the budgets that are set by
Congress. So this is for you, Dr. Allen. The Nuclear Energy
University Program (NEUP) is an important funding mechanism for
nuclear engineering programs at universities like the Colorado
School of Mines in my district. And for Ms. Bonamici, I don't
know if she's still on the line, but the School of Mines has
access to a nuclear reactor, which is owned by the Department
of the Interior and the USGS (United States Geological Survey),
so I want you to know there are other students who have access
to a nuclear reactor, not just your people at Reed College, OK?
So the research being performed at the School of Mines and
other universities represent the lifeblood of American
innovation. However, to cover the cost of the 2019 Centrus
award, DOE withdrew nearly 1/3 of the Nuclear Energy University
Program's budget in the middle of its funding cycle. So, Dr.
Allen, as the Chair of the Nuclear Energy Department Heads
Organization, how did this episode unfold for your university
or other university nuclear programs?
Dr. Allen. Yes, great question. I think it actually caused
quite a bit of turmoil. It happened at the very last second
after people had done a lot of work. It appeared to be out of
nowhere, right? I mean, the universities would understand the
importance of the high-assay, low-enriched uranium program.
There wouldn't be an argument about that need. But the fact
that suddenly the money was pulled out to do that contract just
seemed like an issue that could have been--that it was coming,
right, the need for HALEU was known.
And so in a lot of ways I think this caused a bit of a lack
of trust between the university community and the DOE. I think
to her credit Dr. Huff is trying very hard, right, to bring
that relationship back to working well together, but it--yes,
it was a very bad, and it's caused a lot of negative
repercussions.
I will say though that I think that it's forcing a lot of
people to understand how we do the university programs, so
we'll make some good out of that bad. But at the time it was
horrible. It cutoff opportunities for faculty who had spent a
year preparing proposals.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK. Well, and I think that--I want to give
department heads, folks at DOE, Dr. Huff as much discretion as
possible, but they also have to understand with that discretion
they have a responsibility to make sure they fulfill prior
commitments. So I just appreciate the panel's testimony, and
any help you can get our astronauts to Mars by 2033 would be
appreciated because it's clear that nuclear propulsion is going
to play a role. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Amey. Congressman Perlmutter, if I may jump in on your
previous question, and it was something [inaudible] when
Congresswoman Stansbury also asked a question about--on the
competition front. And I said it earlier. Holding a competition
isn't just a check-the-box exercise, and so they could have
done everything according to [inaudible]. They could have--you
know, they put out their notice of intent to sole source the
contract. You know, they held it open for a few weeks, and then
they--you know, they did J&A. All those things checked the box
and it appears it's fine. But when you analyze these
justifications and approval for sole-source contracting, there
are some red flags that pop up.
And again, I mentioned [inaudible] proprietary products
that only one producer can then work with, and so are they
limiting competition in that way? On the defense-related issue,
I mean, I saw that that was mentioned in the justification and
approval for the Centrus contract, and that that meant it had
to be U.S.-owned and U.S.-controlled company that can only bid
on it. What was----
Mr. Perlmutter. So, Mr. Amey, my time is expired, but
you're right. Any good lawyer who wants to try to refine it
down to just one potential applicant can do that, so----
Mr. Amey. Right.
Mr. Perlmutter [continuing]. That's why we want to default
toward competition. And I agree with you on that. But I guess
what I was saying sometimes sole source is OK in my opinion.
Mr. Amey. Right.
Mr. Perlmutter. But with that, I'll yield back to the
Chair.
Mr. Amey. Thank you.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Feenstra for five minutes.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Foster and Chairman
Bowman and Ranking Members. I want to echo my colleagues'
support for nuclear energy as it is an important piece of
energy future. It is important that we make sure that we do our
due diligence when directing funding and selecting nuclear R&D
projects to make the most productive investments. And thank you
to each one of the witnesses for their testimony and sharing
their extensive research and experience with us.
Dr. Huff, over the past few decades the Office of Nuclear
Energy typically spends a large percentage of its budget on
program direction and facility operations. Why is this portion
so large compared to the DOE's other energy offices such as
fossil and renewable energy? Can such expenses be reduced in
your estimation?
Dr. Huff. Thank you for the question. We have the privilege
and honor to oversee the operations of the Idaho National
Laboratory, which is quite large comparatively to a lot of the
other national laboratories overseen by similar offices. And I
think you'll find that the vast majority of our infrastructure
work is in a security and a class level of technological safety
that require an expensive facilities management approach.
In terms of program direction, I'm actually--my
understanding is that our program direction is comparable, but
I will look into it and try to understand better the source of
this question that you have.
Mr. Feenstra. Dr. Huff, I appreciate that. And do you think
the Office of Nuclear Energy spends an appropriate amount of
funds on nuclear energy development in contrast to our
geopolitical allies and, more importantly, adversaries?
Dr. Huff. It's a wonderful question from this perspective
of, you know, where we need to go. And I'll tell you I don't
have full transparency into how much our competitors are
spending, but I would say that the implication that I've seen
on the international stage is that, you know, we will need to
work hard not to fall behind in comparison to these
competitors, so I hope that answers your question.
Mr. Feenstra. I appreciate those comments.
Dr. Allen, you may know that China brought online the
world's first gen-IV reactor, a small pebble bed reactor that
utilizes TRISO fuel and is a helium-cooled. The United States
and U.K. developed this fuel in the 1960's and 1970's and had
been pursuing these reactors. Despite over hundreds of millions
of spending on TRISO fuels and half a billion in spending on
the next generation nuclear plant in the 2000's for pebble bed
gas reactors, how has China beaten us to the punch when it
comes to this front?
Dr. Allen. I think they did some things that we're now
catching up on, right? For years if you look at the U.S.
approach, it's been very much a research-and-development
approach. So we did a lot of work to improve TRISO fuels and
things. We didn't have as sophisticated an approach toward
getting commercial deployment, right? So the Chinese made this
commitment, right? It's more of a State-run program, but
they're going to build a demo, right? Whereas here, we're
relying on our domestic commercial sort of entrepreneurial
firms to help drive that for us. I think that's smarter. I
think our industry is better at developing commercial products
than researchers like myself. But I think they took this step
of starting to see the importance of having a program that
looks at all the elements, infrastructure, early innovation all
the way up to deployment. I think we're catching up a little
bit there. We set the structures now. We just have to execute
them smartly.
And I do think, to finish your question, if you look at the
things they do, we have a lot more types of products and
things, right? Where we fail is we get ahead of them and then
we let them catch up.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes. And I tend to agree with you. And I
sometimes think our regulatory environment sort of hold us
back. And I think that can be a significant concern. I mean, do
you sort of see that also?
Dr. Allen. Well, I think that our regulatory system is good
in the sense that it forces public consultation in a very open
system and making sure we regulate. I do think that our
regulatory system gets very focused and knowledgeable in light
water reactors, right? And we're sort of starting to see that
transition to being able to do advanced reactors but it's
another area where we're needing to catch up.
Mr. Feenstra. I appreciate, Dr. Allen, your comments. And
thank you to each one of you, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Stevens for five minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Dr. Huff, when did you get to the Department
of Energy?
Dr. Huff. May 10th of this year.
Ms. Stevens. So where were you when this sole source was
going on with HALEU?
Dr. Huff. I was an assistant professor at the University of
Illinois applying for, in fact, NEUP awards in my research area
of advanced reactors and fuel cycles, which included a large
number of prepared proposals in the areas that were cut for
that Centrus activity. And I----
Ms. Stevens. And where are you--you're acting right now.
Where are you in terms of a confirmation? Have you had hearings
or do you have any insight into when you're going to get
officially confirmed, or are we waiting for an official
announcement that you're going to be the Assistant Secretary?
Apologies for not knowing this.
Dr. Huff. No nomination has been made for the Assistant
Secretary in DOE.
Ms. Stevens. Well, thank you so much for your service to
our country and for leaving a very prominent post. You know, I
say this as a Michigander, but we certainly have a lot of
respect and admiration for the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign. I've worked with many scientific researchers at that
university over the years.
And certainly I think Dr. Allen, you know, mentioned your
understanding and appreciation for the role of the universities
in this effort, and certainly your background speaks to it. And
I think my questions were intended to codify for the record
because I understand you are answering a lot for things that
happened before you arrived at the Department of Energy.
And certainly, you know, reflecting today, you know, in
2016 we observed the 50-year mark from, you know, where I call
home, the metro Detroit, Detroit area since the Detroit Edison
Fermi's nuclear plant suffered a partial meltdown caused by a
piece of floating shrapnel inside the container vessel.
And so, Dr. Huff--and also maybe Ms. Roma wants to get
involved in this, too, and thank you all for your amazing
testimonies. But how do you think the Office of Nuclear Energy
will successfully utilize this--the large increase in funds to
ensure safe engineering in the industry--in the nuclear
industry, and how do you plan to measure that success?
Dr. Huff. Safety is absolutely paramount in the context of
nuclear energy, and our consistent relationship with the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, as well as our very serious and
safety-conscious oversight of our DOE authorizations around
nuclear safety are both absolutely paramount to our forward
movement, our strategy, and our core metrics. Safety incidents
are consistently measured, watched, and responded to within my
office at the national laboratories we're involved with and
through our collaborations with industry and the universities.
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Ms. Roma. I would just briefly add to that that none of the
benefits of nuclear power, the carbon-free benefits, the
economic, the national security, none of those happen if we
can't operate plants safely. And, you know, one of the benefits
that we have in the United States is we have the best-run
nuclear fleet. We have one of the strongest nuclear regulators
in the world that is one of the most respected nuclear
regulators in the world. And for both the existing fleet and
for the emerging advanced reactor fleet, that needs to continue
to be the case in order for this to be a success.
Ms. Stevens. Great. And, Dr. Allen, you talked about in
your testimony that the Office of Nuclear Energy should include
community input and engagement from the earliest stages of
technology design to ensure that technologies being developed
will ultimately be adopted by communities. Could you share a
little bit about what that looks like and why this is so
important and any example of how work in places like Michigan,
which not only are you a professor at U of M, Dr. Allen, but
you are also a Michigan native, we're very proud of you, so,
you know, just places where, you know, similar to Michigan
are--obviously where we call home where this has been an
example. And I guess I'm at 30 seconds, so give it your best
go.
Dr. Allen. Yes, well, I think in short, right,
traditionally, the nuclear engineering field has concentrated
on technology, right? But a lot of getting any product placed
is how do people accept it, how much do they want it, what's
the value versus risk to them? And so I think we need to be
much more sophisticated from how we do design, how we talk to
communities about new technologies in a way that we just
haven't done in the past, right? And I think at every level,
early research up through deployment. And if we wait to the
last minute, we wait till the product is done, and we pick a
site, and then we start a conversation, we're less likely to be
successful.
And to give Dr. Huff credit, for the first time since I've
been around, there are research grants in these areas available
this year. So we're taking it seriously. And I think it's
important to the long-term success of our technology.
Ms. Stevens. Now, we are certainly really lucky to have Dr.
Huff doing what she's doing right now. And while I'm out of
time, count me in, Dr. Allen, on that community engagement in
any way I can be helpful to you on the ground in Michigan.
Dr. Allen. Yes, glad to engage on that. Appreciate it.
Ms. Stevens. Thanks. Thanks. And, Mr. Chair, I'll yield
back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Gimenez for five minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Huff, I believe you have extensively studied thorium
fuel cycle and molten salt reactor technology in your career.
Your predecessor in the Obama Administration, Dr. Peter Lyons,
testified to this Committee in 2014 that thorium reactors are
not an option that the United States should be pursuing. He was
also instrumental in implementing an MOU (memorandum of
understanding) between the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the
U.S. Department of Energy.
The report from the first executive committee meeting under
that MOU mentions sodium-cooled fast reactors once, gas-cooled
reactors are mentioned three times, but thorium molten salt
reactors are mentioned some 30 times. China is spending about
$3 billion on these reactors. The first of them is--should be
coming online sometime later this month. I think it's in Wuwei.
Reports suggest that China intends to export these reactors as
part of their Belt and Road Initiative. What should the DOE be
doing to respond to these developments in China?
Dr. Huff. Thank you for the question. You know, in--DOE NE
funds molten salt reactors in multiple ways. Some thorium
molten salt reactor companies are interested in that work
because the current sort of funding that we've implemented in
the context of the risk reduction awardees includes at least
one device that can be fueled by either uranium or thorium. We
do research in the fuel cycle area in molten salt reactor fuel
cycles that can leverage either uranium or thorium.
When we think about the sort of Chinese example that you
described, something I often think about--comes back to an
earlier question--but we demonstrated this kind of reactor in
the earliest days of our research reactor program in the 1950's
and 1960's and have since determined that the thorium fuel
cycle is not economic in the United States at this time. So
additional research to ensure that such a fuel cycle becomes
economic might enable those companies to move forward, but,
generally speaking, our view is that such an approach would not
be economic at this time, given the amount of supply chain
surety that we have in uranium instead.
Mr. Gimenez. But that--we shut that demonstration project
in the 1960's or 1970's, right? It was shut down, is that
correct?
Dr. Huff. Yes, sir. You'll be excited to know that one of
the risk reduction awardees is a collaboration between Southern
Company and TerraPower on a molten fluoride reactor experiment
that we're really excited about seeing revive that activity in
a new and more modern technological direction.
Mr. Gimenez. Are the Chinese doing--are they utilizing
advances in technology in the last 40 years in order to make
this more economical?
Dr. Huff. Yes, as will our risk reduction awardee project.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. And in light of the fact that they're
moving forward, if it proves to be successful, would the United
States be following suit or are we going to go some other
direction?
Dr. Huff. That's a great question that we'll have to
determine at a later time. I'll say that it's certainly the
case that there are other motivations for molten salt thorium
reactor fuel cycles that are closer to proliferation concern
that China or--you know, may be interested in and we may need
to factor that into the sort of possible motivations.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Let me--OK. Last question, when was the
last nuclear, you know, facility in the United States put into
operation?
Dr. Huff. The completion--I'd have to get the year dates.
Maybe Todd remembers the most recent when----
Dr. Allen. Yes, I think it was about--within the last
decade, right? The plant in Tennessee----
Dr. Huff. Right.
Dr. Allen [continuing]. And it had been started and then
stopped, and then they refinished it. So we had a long stretch
where we had completed all the light water reactors and we had
none and roughly--I don't have the date in front of me, but
roughly 10-ish years ago we completed one. And now we've got
two in Georgia that are getting close to completion.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, the reason I ask the question is that I,
you know, had extensive conversations with people in the power
industry, and they said--and the one in Georgia was way over
budget, way out, you know, beyond its time, and that power
companies are just not looking at a nuclear power as a viable
option in--because of whatever reason. I mean, maybe regulatory
reasons, et cetera. But we need to do a better job of
incentivizing this because this is the way that we can get that
to a zero carbon--or, you know, electricity production and
energy production in the future.
Renewables are great, but they're not predictable, and so
we need something predictable. And the only thing that I know
of that produces electricity with zero emissions that is
completely predictable is nuclear power, and so we really need
to do a better job as a country of trying to move this along.
Thank you, and I yield back my time.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we'll now recognize
Representative Gonzalez for five minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. And I want to thank the Chairs and
Ranking Members for holding this important hearing. I also want
to thank our witnesses for taking time out of their busy
schedules to join us.
As many of my friends on this Committee know, I have been
adamant that if the United States wants to claim to be a global
climate leader, nuclear energy has to be a major priority.
Here's what we know: First, nuclear generates energy with no
carbon output. In fact, the only carbon it does emit is from
the ancillary use of fossil fuels used during construction,
mining, and maintenance. When we close nuclear plants, we
aren't shifting to other sources of clean energy. In nearly
every case we shift back to fossil fuels such as natural gas,
oil, and coal. We've seen this happen in Germany, in
California, and most recently in New York.
Second, nuclear operates at a significantly higher capacity
than renewable energy sources or fossil fuels and takes up
significantly less land. We don't talk nearly enough about
that. It takes 150 times more land to produce the same amount
of energy from solar as it does nuclear. It takes 750 times
more land to produce the same amount of electricity from wind
as nuclear. All of that, the materials required, the steel, the
concrete, all the things that you worry about as an
environmentalist, five to seven times more of them are required
for wind and solar than nuclear.
And lastly, we've made substantial progress over the last
few decades in nuclear waste disposal programs. Thanks to the
opening and operation of the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant in New
Mexico, we've learned deep geological disposal is a safe
solution for nuclear waste for defense activities, but we do
need greater international and stakeholder engagement in the
future. These programs make clear that we can effectively
resolve the commercial nuclear waste challenge.
The question with nuclear is ultimately how we solve the
economics, which has been a problem. From my perspective, the
answer is rooted in establishing an incentive structure that
not only drives innovation but also ensures the new
technologies developed make it to market and are deployed, and
that's where the DOE and our universities step in.
So, Dr. Allen, I want to start with you, and I want to
thank you for your support of my legislation, H.R. 4819, the
National Nuclear University Research Infrastructure
Reinvestment Act. And I'd be remiss if I didn't also express my
gratitude for your efforts at NEDHO (Nuclear Engineering
Department Heads Organization) to develop our Nation's nuclear
workforce in advanced critical R&D.
In your testimony you mention a sort of disconnect between
industry, laboratories, and research institutions. As you know,
my bill would set up a partnership framework between these
communities to help advance the research needs of advanced
reactors. Can you speak more to the importance of these
partnerships in determining the success of DOE nuclear
programs?
Dr. Allen. Yes, thanks. Thanks a lot. And thanks for your
support on your resolution. We in the university community
appreciate that.
Yes, I think the point I was trying to make is, as we move
toward being more supportive of nuclear energy and we've been
thoughtful about how do we give access of these commercial
companies to the laboratories, how do we connect to university
research into the flow of everything else that to a certain
extent the programs we've developed, while useful elements,
don't talk to each other well, right? And that's where I think
we're lacking. And I think we could make this more efficient in
the way that we spend your funds.
And that's the point I was trying to get at. I mean, if I
look at things like the Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program
structure, it looks like it makes sense, right? You invest more
in companies that seem closer to deployment, less than others.
The questions just are then how do you flow research to them?
How do you make it easy for them to get access to our national
lab capabilities, right? And I think those are the try--the
points I was trying to make. I think the elements all make
sense. And if you compare where we are now to where we were 5
years ago, we are moving ahead so much faster, right? It's
really just a question of do we get sophisticated in the way we
execute programs that equals the programs that we're
developing?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. And I appreciate that. I think the goal
is not only we are doing better but we need to do three times,
four times, five times as well. I almost have an endless
appetite for this.
Dr. Huff, I only have a minute left, so rather than ask a
question, I'm just going to kindly request that your staff
and--that you and I get a chance to sit down, and I'd love to
just hear your perspective more on how we as Congress can
support your work at the DOE. I think it's enormously
important. Last--or yesterday we were in a hearing--and I see
Mr. Casten is still on. He mentioned Ontario as having 90
percent renewable energy, which is great. Sixty percent of that
baseload is nuclear. And, you know, I think if we're going to
hit our climate targets, if we're going to hit our targets and
do it in a way that's responsible, nuclear has to be at the
forefront. It just does. I don't see any other way around it.
So I kindly request a meeting. Our staff will follow up with
yours, and I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And so before we bring this
hearing to a close, I want to thank our witnesses for
testifying before the Committee. You know, this--you know, the
message that I think--I hope came clearly through is how much
there is real bipartisan enthusiasm for making sure that we
have a healthy and well-executed program of nuclear research
and deployment. And I, too, will look forward to a briefing on
the specific items of interest for--coming from my office.
And so the record will remain open for two weeks for any
additional statements from the Members or any additional
questions that anyone on the Committee may ask of the
witnesses.
So the witnesses are hereby excused, and the hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
