- A REVIEW OF THE DECADAL SURVEY FOR ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS IN THE 2020s

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW OF THE DECADAL SURVEY
FOR ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS
IN THE 2020s

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS
SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 1, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-39

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-149                     WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                VACANCY
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. DON BEYER, Virginia, Chairman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              BRIAN BABIN, Texas,
AMI BERA, California                     Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MO BROOKS, Alabama
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BILL POSEY, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          YOUNG KIM, California
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. HALEY STEVENS, Michigan, Chairwoman
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida,
PAUL TONKO, New York                     Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         VACANCY

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

December 1, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Don Beyer, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Haley Stevens, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Statement by Representative Michael Waltz, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    16
Written Statement............................................    18

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    19

Witnesses:

Dr. Robert C. Kennicutt, Co-Chair, Steering Committee, Committee
for A Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020,
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
Laureate Professor, University of Arizona, Professor of Physics
and Astronomy, Texas A&M University
Oral Statement...............................................    20
Written Statement............................................    23

Dr. Fiona A. Harrison, Co-Chair, Steering Committee, Committee
for A Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020,
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
Harold A. Rosen Professor of Physics, California Institute of
Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34

Mr. William Russell, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    44
Written Statement............................................    46

Discussion.......................................................    66

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Robert C. Kennicutt, Co-Chair, Steering Committee, Committee
for A Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020,
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
Laureate Professor, University of Arizona, Professor of Physics
and Astronomy, Texas A&M University............................    88

Dr. Fiona A. Harrison, Co-Chair, Steering Committee, Committee
for A Decadal Survey on Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020,
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
Harold A. Rosen Professor of Physics, California Institute of
Technology.....................................................    89

Mr. William Russell, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, Government Accountability Office.................    98

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Don Beyer, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
Paula Szkody, President, American Astronomical Society.......   102

A REVIEW OF THE DECADAL SURVEY
FOR ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS
IN THE 2020s

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
joint with the Subcommittee
on Research and Technology,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 11:02 a.m.,
via Zoom, Hon. Don Beyer [Chairman of the Subcommittee on Space
and Aeronautics] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. With a pretend gavel, this hearing will
come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare recess at any time. Before I want to--deliver my
opening remarks I wanted to note, not surprisingly, that today
the Committee is meeting virtually. And a couple of other
reminders to the Members about the meeting, first, keep your
video feed on as long as you're present. If you have to come
and go, just turn the--yes, the video off, and then come log
back in. You're responsible for your own microphones. We're not
going to micromanage you. Also, please keep them muted unless
you're speaking. Finally, if you have documents that you wish
to submit for the record, please e-mail them to the Committee
Clerk, whose e-mail address was circulated prior to the
hearing, and I'm sure all of your staff has that also.
So good morning, and welcome to today's hearing on ``A
Review of the Decadal Survey for Astronomy and Astrophysics in
the 2020's.'' Welcome to our esteemed panel of witnesses. I'm
very excited that you're here, and I really look forward to
hearing from you. This is a joint hearing of the Subcommittee
on Space and Aeronautics and the Subcommittee on Research and
Technology. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) and the National Science Foundation (NSF) jointly lead
this Nation's astronomy and astrophysics programs, one from
space, one from the ground, so it only makes sense that we
would jointly conduct this hearing. And I really want to thank
Chairwoman Haley Stevens from Michigan for her collaboration on
this joint hearing, and on everything else.
``We live in a time of extraordinary discovery and progress
in astronomy and astrophysics.'' That's the opening--the
opening quote to the Decadal Survey, and a recognition that a
fascinating future is on our horizon, one that could lead us to
understanding the interconnections within the cosmic ecosystem
across diverse structures ranging from the tenuous gases at the
boundaries of galaxies, to the interiors of stars, to our
planetary systems. Our Nation's investments in astronomy and
astrophysics research and development have led to profound
breakthroughs. Examples of discoveries over the past decade,
which many of us on the Science Committee have enjoyed in
almost first person, the first detection of gravitational
radiation from astronomical sources, the discovery of thousands
of planets beyond our solar systems, or exoplanets, and
precision measurements of the Milky Way's supermassive black
hole, including a photo.
The universe and the astronomical phenomena comprising it
are vast. The quantities of study are virtually infinite. This
is why the National Academies' once a decade surveys are so
important. They focus the community's recommendations for
scientific inquiry and prioritize the means of pursuing them,
as well as the necessary investments required. So I'm delighted
that both co-chairs of the National Academies astronomy and
astrophysics decadal survey are here with us to discuss the
report's important findings and recommendations. Their work in
developing a scientific consensus is essential to our ability
to support the Nation's astronomy and astrophysics programs in
our role as authorizers, and even appropriators. It's the
decadal survey that guides us as we seek to ensure the health
and vibrancy of the discipline, the balance of programs that
constitute agency activities, and the vision of those who
study, investigate, and theorize on some of the most profound
questions of our time--and I'm really pleased that in this
regard the decadal survey examines the status of the profession
too. Expanding access to and diversity and inclusion in this
community is a key to achieving the ambitious goals that this
decadal survey lays out. As you know IQ is spread across our
entire human race, but we don't always get--lure it out from
places that are that are underrepresented. The Subcommittee I
chair involves the space-based aspect of the decadal survey,
and NASA's role in it. NASA's on the cusp of realizing a major
decadal priority with the upcoming launch later this month of
the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), 2 decades in the making,
and the Nancy Grace Roman Telescope, the old WFIRST, also a
decadal priority, is making significant progress as well.
I'm interested to hear what the decadal committee has
learned from NASA's history of large-scale observatories, and
its recommended new approach to flagship missions with the
Great Observatories Missions and Technology Maturation Program.
Ultimately we're going to need an acronym for that. While both
space and ground-based activities are essential to realizing
the decadal survey, transformational science and the goals of
understanding dark energy, dark matter, and potentially
habitable worlds don't recognize a space or ground-based
division, so I'm looking forward to hearing from our witnesses
on what the report recommends to reduce those divisions and to
facilitate synergies across agency activities.
Finally, I want to thank the community of astronomers and
astrophysicists who contributed to the decadal survey, the
amazing number of white papers, and all the steering committees
and panels whose hard work, including through the pandemic,
brings us this landmark report. Your efforts not only guide the
future of the discipline, you inspire the next generation, many
of whom will become our STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) leaders through the gateway of exploring our
Universe and the science of astronomy and astrophysics.
I'd now like to ask for unanimous consent to enter into the
record a letter from the American Astronomical Society. And
seeing no objections, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Beyer follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing on ``A Review
of the Decadal Survey for Astronomy and Astrophysics in the
2020s.'' I also want to welcome our esteemed panel of
witnesses. We are so pleased you are joining us today.
This is a joint hearing of the Subcommittee on Space and
Aeronautics and the Subcommittee on Research and Technology.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the
National Science Foundation jointly lead this nation's
astronomy and astrophysics programs, one from space, and one
from the ground, so it only makes sense that we would jointly
conduct this hearing. I want to thank Chairwoman Haley Stevens
for her collaboration on this joint hearing.
``We live in a time of extraordinary discovery and progress
in astronomy and astrophysics.'' That is the opening to the
Decadal Survey, and a recognition that a fascinating future is
on our horizon--one that could lead us to understanding the
interconnections within the cosmic ecosystem across diverse
structures ranging from the tenuous gases at the boundaries of
galaxies, to the interior of stars, to planetary systems.
Our nation's investments in astronomy and astrophysics
research and development have led to profound breakthroughs.
Examples of discoveries over the past decade include:

The first detection of gravitational radiation
from astronomical sources;

The discovery of thousands of planets beyond our
solar system or ``exoplanets''; and

Precision measurements of the Milky Way's
supermassive black hole.
The Universe and the astronomical phenomena comprising it
are vast. The questions of study are virtually infinite. That
is why the National Academies' once a decade surveys are so
important. They focus the community's recommendations for
scientific inquiry and prioritize the means of pursuing them,
as well as the necessary investments required. I'm delighted
that both co-chairs of the National Academies astronomy and
astrophysics decadal survey are here to discuss the report's
important findings and recommendations.
Their work in developing a scientific consensus is
essential to our ability to support the nation's astronomy and
astrophysics programs in our role as authorizers. It's the
decadal survey that guides us as we seek to ensure the health
and vibrancy of the discipline, the balance of programs that
constitute agency activities, and the vision of those who
study, investigate, and theorize on some of the most profound
questions of our time. In that regard, I'm pleased that this
decadal survey examines the status of the profession. Expanding
access to and diversity and inclusion of the astronomy and
astrophysics community is a key to achieving the ambitious
goals that this decadal survey lays out.
The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that I chair
involves the space-based aspect of the decadal survey, and the
National Aeronautics and Space and Administration's role in it.
NASA is on the cusp of realizing a major decadal priority with
the upcoming launch of the James Webb Space Telescope, an
observatory that has been over two decades in the making. The
Nancy Grace Roman Telescope, also a decadal priority, is making
significant progress as well. I am interested to hear what the
decadal committee has learned from NASA's history of large-
scale observatories, and its recommended new approach to
flagship missions with the Great Observatories Missions and
Technology Maturation Program.
While both space and ground-based activities are essential
to realizing the decadal survey's recommendations,
transformational science and the goals of understanding dark
energy, dark matter, and potentially habitable worlds don't
recognize a space or ground-based division. With that in mind,
I'm looking forward to hearing from our witnesses on what the
report recommends to reduce those divisions and to facilitate
the synergies of cross-agency activities.
In closing, I want to thank the community of astronomers
and astrophysicists who contributed to the decadal survey, and
the National Academies steering committee and panels whose hard
work, including through the pandemic, brings us this important
report. Your efforts are not only guiding the future of the
discipline, they are also inspiring the next generation, many
of whom will become our STEM leaders through the gateway of
exploring our Universe and the science of astronomy and
astrophysics.

Chairman Beyer. So let me now recognize my good friend, who
represents the Johnson Space Center, from Texas, the Honorable
Mr. Babin, for his opening statement. Brian?
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
you, and our Ranking Member, and all of--Subcommittee
counterparts that are here today, and I also want to thank our
distinguished witnesses. The National Academy of Sciences
decadal surveys are an important part of our Nation's space
science program. They assess the current state of a specific
space science field, and they offer recommendations for the
executive branch to implement, and to manage, and for Congress
to fund and oversee. The recently released report ``Pathways To
Discovery In Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020's'', also
known as Astro2020, represents a multi-year engagement with the
best and the brightest in our Nation's astronomy and
astrophysics communities.
This same process informed the development of numerous
ground and space-based observatories in the past, including the
Very Large Array (VLA), the Chandra X-Ray Observatory, the Very
Long Baseline Array, the Hubble Space Telescopes--Scope, the
Spencer Space Telescope, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the
James Webb Space Telescope, the Nancy Grace Roman Space
Telescope, and the Vera Rubin Observatory, to name just a few.
These observatories help us to understand the universe, and
reveal the fundamental science that makes up science and time.
They're marvels of discovery and engineering that demonstrate
American ingenuity and industry. In keeping with this
tradition, the Astral 2020 decadal proposes an ambitious
program for the future.
Aspirational, and even audacious, goals are important,
because great nations do great things. But astronomy and
astrophysics are also areas that are well suited for
cooperation, not just competition, as they benefit all of
humanity, and not just America. The Academy panel addresses the
important balance of cooperation and leadership, and also lays
out a compelling case for a portfolio of ambitious flagship
missions, and a robust baseline of smaller missions,
technology, maturation, and research work that underpins the
entire community. They also made a concerted effort to take
cost estimating into consideration, including off-ramps and
recommended prioritizations, if further cost overruns or
funding shortfalls do occur.
This is important, because, as we've seen over the last two
decadal surveys for astronomy and astrophysics, cost overruns
and delays impact on the rest of the whole enterprise. The
health of our astronomy and astrophysics enterprise is
important to the Nation's overall industrial and scientific
base. It takes time, and decades of investments, to create a
skilled and knowledgeable work force, robust supply chains,
infrastructure and institutions to support these cutting edge
technologies that push the state-of-the-art. These same people,
facilities, contractors, and institutions also support our
national security, and contribute to our economic and our
technological future.
But the health of this enterprise is undermined by cost
overruns and schedule slips that not only delay the start of
new flagship missions, but also potentially erode research and
analysis funding, and postpone the development of smaller,
lower cost missions that serve as a pipeline for early career
scientists. Neither of the flagships recommended by the
previous two decadal surveys have even flown yet. With any
luck, Webb will launch later this month, but Roman recently
exceeded its cost and schedule baseline, and is not scheduled
to launch until 2027.
Unfortunately, this isn't a new problem, as the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) has listed NASA Acquisition
Management on its high risk series since its inception in 1990.
NASA, NSF, and DOD (Department of Defense) all have research
and development and acquisition policies designed to address
this challenge. GAO and agency Inspectors General have produced
lessons learned, recommendations, and best practices. As we
look toward the next decade, we should recognize that program
management and execution are just as important to the space
science sector as our people, our infrastructure, and our
institutions. I'm excited to learn about what the community has
in store for us in the coming decades. The launch of every new
telescope, and construction of every new observatory, holds the
promise of rewriting our textbooks, and inspiring the next
generation of scientists. I want to thank the witnesses for
their important work, and I look forward to their testimony,
and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

The National Academy of Sciences' decadal surveys are an
important part of our nation's space science program. They
assess the current state of specific space science fields and
offer recommendations for the executive branch to implement and
manage, and for Congress to fund and oversee. The recently
released report, ``Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and
Astrophysics for the 2020s'' (also known as ``Astro2020''),
represents a multi-year engagement with the best and brightest
in our nation's astronomy and astrophysics community.
This same process informed the development of numerous
ground and space-based observatories in the past, including the
Very Large Array, the Chandra X-ray Observatory, the Very Long
Baseline Array, the Hubble Space Telescope, the Spitzer Space
Telescope, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the James Webb
Space Telescope, the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, and the
Vera Rubin Observatory to name a few.
These observatories help us understand the universe and
reveal the fundamental science that makes up space and time.
They are marvels of discovery and engineering that demonstrate
American ingenuity and industry. In keeping with this
tradition, the Astro2020 decadal proposes an ambitious program
for the future. Aspirational and even audacious goals are
important because great nations do great things. But astronomy
and astrophysics are also areas that are well suited for
cooperation, not just competition, as they benefit all of
humanity and not just America.
The Academy panel addresses the important balance of
cooperation and leadership and also lays out a compelling case
for a portfolio of ambitious flagship missions, and a robust
baseline of smaller missions, technology maturation, and
research work that underpins the entire community. They also
made a concerted effort to take cost estimating into
consideration, including off-ramps and recommended
prioritizations if further cost overruns or funding shortfalls
occur. This is important because, as we've seen over the last
two decadal surveys for astronomy and astrophysics, cost
overruns and delays impact on the rest of the enterprise.
The health of our astronomy and astrophysics enterprise is
important to the nation's overall industrial and scientific
base. It takes time and decades of investments to create a
skilled and knowledgeable workforce, robust supply chains, and
infrastructure and institutions to support these cutting-edge
technologies that push the state of the art.
These same people, facilities, contractors, and
institutions also support our national security and contribute
to our economic and technological future.
But the health of this enterprise is undermined by cost-
overruns and schedule slips that not only delay the start of
new flagship missions, but also potentially erode research and
analysis funding and postpone the development of smaller lower-
cost missions that serve as a pipeline for early-career
scientists. Neither of the flagships recommended by the
previous two decadal surveys have flown yet. With any luck,
Webb will launch later this month, but Roman recently exceeded
its cost and schedule baseline, and isn't scheduled to launch
until at least 2027.
Unfortunately, this isn't a new problem, as the Government
Accountability Office has listed NASA Acquisition Management on
its High-Risk Series since its inception in 1990. NASA, NSF,
and DoD all have research and development and acquisition
policies designed to address this challenge. GAO and agency
Inspectors General (IG) have produced lessons learned,
recommendations, and best practices. As we look towards the
next decades, we should recognize that program management and
execution are just as important to the space science sector as
our people, infrastructure, and institutions.
I am excited to learn about what the community has in store
for us in the coming decades. The launch of every new telescope
and the construction of every new observatory holds the promise
of rewriting our textbooks and inspiring the next generation of
scientists. I want to thank the witnesses for their important
work and look forward to their testimony.

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Chairman Babin, very much.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Chairman Beyer. Let me now introduce Chairwoman Haley
Stevens from Michigan.
Ms. Stevens. Well, thank you, Chairman Beyer, from the
Commonwealth of Virginia. I'm from the State of Michigan, but
it's great to be with the Chair of the Aerospace Subcommittee
on this particular topic. It's a real unique honor to be
chairing this hearing with you. And, of course, we are grateful
to our distinguished panel for joining us today, and we thank
everyone for this incredible body of work. The review of our
goals for the coming decade are just going to have an enormous
potential for the fields of astronomy and astrophysics. Some
might remember last term, in May of 2019, the Full Committee
held a very exciting hearing to celebrate the first ever image
of a black hole made by the NSF-funded Event Horizon Telescope.
This was one of our better hearings, and I had the privilege of
being there, and meeting with the members of the scientific
team that captured the image prior to the hearing, and we were
all there with the enthusiasm of the scientists, and it was
just was truly infectious.
So breakthroughs like the Event Horizon image just play an
immeasurable role in inspiring students to pursue STEM studies,
to bring people together, to help us reimagine, you know, our
own society, and our own work, and we can't help but be
enthralled by the stunning images in astronomy and the
implications for how we continue to understand our place in the
universe. And I came away from that feeling inspired and
reenergized, and continue to bring that to this Committee's
role in advancing U.S. science and engineering.
In that same discussion, we touched on a range of issues
facing the astronomy community. We heard about the importance
of investing in research infrastructure, from large scale
telescopes to smaller scale instrumentation, and the people and
the partnerships that play a role in that work. A breakthrough
discovery like that would have not been possible without
international collaboration and the talent of early career
researchers. We also discussed the challenges related to the
management of big data, and the importance of investing in
theory and simulations.
And on the Research and Technology Subcommittee, we have a
particular interest in the recommendations for the National
Science Foundation from this study, and the ground-based
facilities that are needed for astronomers to address priority
science questions. We have tremendous scientific opportunities
before us, and I believe that this study has charted an
exciting, and yet achievable, path for achieving big goals. I
also appreciate the strong focus on programmatic balance woven
throughout the report. It makes little sense to invest billions
of dollars in research facilities if we don't also invest in
students and researchers who can turn those capabilities into
new knowledge.
Another important focus for today's discussion will be
understanding the needs of the astronomy community. I was
pleased to see a particular focus in this report on the future
of the astronomy workforce, with an emphasis on addressing
barriers to diversity and inclusion. Under the leadership of
Chairwoman Johnson and Ranking Member Lucas, STEM diversity has
been a cornerstone issue for this Committee. We remain eager to
learn more about the vision of the community, and what you--the
goals you that have set for yourself, and to better understand
how Congress can help you realize these goals. You have done
your part, now it is our turn to address the needs, to bring
the agencies together, and continue to look forward to a very
vibrant future, one that addresses the material needs, the
scientific needs, and the ways in which we can harness
collaborative research efforts. So thank you so much, and I'll
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stevens follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Beyer. It's an honor to be cochairing
this hearing with you. Good morning and thank you to our
distinguished panel for joining us today.
This hearing will be an important review of our goals for
the coming decade, which have enormous potential in the
astronomy and astrophysics fields.
In May 2019, the full Committee held a hearing to celebrate
the first ever image of a black hole made by the NSF funded
Event Horizon Telescope. I had the privilege of meeting with
members of the team that captured the image prior to the
hearing, and the enthusiasm of the scientists was truly
infectious.
Breakthroughs like the Event Horizon image can play an
immeasurable role in inspiring students to pursue STEM studies.
We can't help but be enthralled by the stunning images in
astronomy and the implications for how we understand our place
in the universe. I came away inspired and reenergized about
this Committee's role in advancing U.S. science and
engineering.
In that same discussion, we touched on a range of issues
facing the astronomy community.
We heard about the importance of investing in research
infrastructure, from large scale telescopes to smaller scale
instrumentation, and in people and partnerships. A breakthrough
discovery like that would not have been possible without
international collaboration and the talent of early-career
researchers.
We also discussed the challenges related to the management
of big data and the critical importance of investing in theory
and simulations.
As the Chair of the Research and Technology Subcommittee, I
have a particular interest in the recommendations for the
National Science Foundation and the ground-based facilities
that are needed for astronomers to address priority science
questions.
We have tremendous scientific opportunities before us, and
I believe you have charted a bold yet sustainable path for
achieving them.
I also appreciate the strong focus on programmatic balance
woven throughout the report. It makes no sense to invest
billions of dollars in research facilities if we don't also
invest in the students and researchers who can turn those
capabilities into new knowledge.
Another important focus of today's discussion will be
understanding the needs of the astronomy community. I was
pleased to see a particular focus in this report on the future
of the astronomy workforce, with an emphasis on addressing
barriers to diversity and inclusion. Under the leadership of
Chairwoman Johnson and Ranking Member Lucas, STEM diversity has
been a cornerstone issue for this Committee.
I am eager to learn more about the vision the community has
set for itself over the next decade and to understand what
Congress can do to help realize it. You have done your part,
now it's on Congress and the funding agencies to make it
happen.
Thank you, I yield back.

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Chairperson Stevens, very much.
And now, finally, we'll hear from Ranking Member Waltz from
the--Mr. Waltz, you're----
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Chairman Beyer, and Chairwoman
Stevens, Ranking Member Babin. I too am pleased to be here for
this joint Subcommittee hearing to review the National
Academies recommendations, priorities on their survey on
astronomy and astrophysics, Astro2020. We all know, but I
always think it's worth restating, that the National Science
Foundation is the Federal steward for ground-based astronomy in
the U.S., and--supported some tremendous achievements in
astronomy and astrophysics. These include the detection of
gravitational waves at the LIGO (Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory) Observatory, which proved--
actually proved part of Einstein's Theory of Relativity. It
launched a new era of multi-messenger astrophysics, and earned
the 2017 Nobel Peace Prize--2019 the Event Horizon Telescope
Project captured the first even image of a black hole,
providing further confirmation of Einstein's Theory of General
Relativity.
And as I expect we'll hear and discuss today, many of NSF's
most interesting astronomy projects are yet to come. The Vera
C. Rubin Observatory in Chile has the potential to advance
every field of astronomical study, from the inner solar system,
to the large-scale structure of the universe. And the DKIST
(Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope) is the--is also the
telescope--is also expected to come online soon in Hawaii. It
will produce the most detailed images of the Sun ever taken by
a ground-based device. As we look to the future, I would be
remiss if I did not also take a moment to speak on the legacy
of the Arecibo Observatory (AO) in Puerto Rico, which
experienced an unexpected and catastrophic collapse exactly 1
year ago today.
Before its collapse, countless discoveries were made at
Arecibo over its nearly 60-year history, including winning the
1993 Nobel Peace Prize in Physics, and I, along with
Congresswoman Gonzalez-Colon, and several other Members, had
the opportunity to visit Arecibo this past summer. We saw the
extensive damage and ongoing cleanup, but what really stood out
to me was the importance of the facility to the community in
Puerto Rico, and the increasing--and to increasing diversity in
STEM, as Chairwoman Stevens just referenced.
And while we were there, we joined several local high
school and STAR Academy students for lunch. These were just
amazing kids, and as a supporter of increasing diversity in
STEM, it was great to see so many young women in particular,
all native Spanish speakers, and each student shared their
experience conducting hands-on research projects at the
observatory, and their plans for pursuing STEM degrees after
high school. In short, they blew me away, made me feel a lot
dumber, but were really some of the most impressive students
I've talked to in a long time.
And the trip made clear, I think, to all of us that Arecibo
is an important complement, and critical to this Committee's
bipartisan tradition of promoting diversity in STEM, including
the MSI STEM Achievement Act that the Chairwoman and I ushered
through the House this Congress. So I strongly believe that to
meet our true scientific and technological potential we need an
inclusive and diverse work force that draws on the full talent
pool available in this country, and, sitting down with these
students, I saw this happening in real time, and achieving
these goals at Arecibo. And the observatory's engagement in the
community, through STEM education and outreach, should be
applauded, exemplified, and supported by this Committee.
I was pleased to see that the Astro2020 survey recognizes
that Arecibo has a future role in U.S. astronomy, although I
have concerns that the United States, like we have in so many
other areas, has ceded leadership in radio astronomy to the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP). For those who don't know, they
now have the largest radio telescope in the world, known as
FAST (Five-Hundred-Meter Aperture Spherical Radio Telescope).
The U.S. should not, obviously, rely on the capabilities of the
CCP to excel in radio astronomy, so I look forward to working
with the NSF as they continue to examine the future of Arecibo,
and I hope we can accelerate that examination, and make some
decisions soon.
Like Arecibo, the NSF's astronomy program focuses on
questions going forward the NSF must evaluate. I think how it
supports existing and new facilities, including identifying
facilities that may be nearing the end of its life cycle, and
then examining how we balance those commitments, and operation
and maintenance, with funding individual research grants that
will support the next generation of Nobel Prize winning
astronomers. So I want to thank the survey's co-chairs for
participating, along with GAO. I look forward to hearing how we
can continue our commitment to the fundamental nature of
research, and understanding the universe. I thank you. I yield
back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waltz follows:]

Good Morning Chairman Beyer, Chairwoman Stevens, and
Ranking Member Babin. I am pleased to be here for this joint
subcommittee hearing to review the priorities and
recommendations made by the National Academies for the decadal
survey on astronomy and astrophysics, also known as ASTRO 2020.
The National Science Foundation (NSF) is the federal
steward for ground-based astronomy in the U.S. and has
supported some tremendous achievements in astronomy and
astrophysics. These include the detection of gravitational
waves at the LIGO Observatory, which proved part of Einstein's
theory of relativity, launched a new era of multi-messenger
astrophysics and earned the 2017 Nobel Prize in Physics. In
2019, the Even Horizon Telescope project captured the first-
ever image of a black hole, providing further confirmation of
Einstein's theory of general relativity.
As I expect we will hear today, much of the NSF's most
interesting astronomy projects are yet to come. The Vera C.
Rubin Observatory in Chile has the potential to advance every
field of astronomical study--from the inner Solar System to the
large-scale structure of the universe.
The Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST) is also
expected to come online soon in Hawaii. It will produce the
most detailed images of the sun ever taken by a ground- based
device.
As we look to the future, I would be remiss if I did not
also take a moment to speak on the legacy of the Arecibo
Observatory in Puerto Rico, which experienced an unexpected and
catastrophic collapse a year ago today. Before its untimely
collapse, countless discoveries were made at Arecibo over its
nearly 60-year history--including winning the 1993 Nobel Prize
in Physics. I, along with Congresswoman Gonzalez-Colon, and
several other Members had the opportunity to visit Arecibo this
past summer.
We saw the extensive damage and ongoing clean-up. But what
stood out to me most was the importance of the facility to the
community in Puerto Rico and to increasing diversity in STEM.
While there we joined several local high school and STAR
Academy students for lunch. As a supporter of increasing
diversity in STEM, it was great to see so many young women, and
all were native Spanish speakers. Each student shared their
experience conducting hands-on research projects at the
observatory and their plans for pursuing STEM degrees after
high school. In short, they blew me away.
The trip made clear to me that Arecibo is an important
compliment to this Committee's bi-partisan tradition of
promoting diversity in STEM, including the ``MSI STEM
Achievement Act'' that the Chairwoman and I ushered through the
House this Congress.
I strongly believe to meet our true scientific and
technological potential, we need an inclusive and diverse
workforce that draws on the full talent pool available in our
country. By sitting down with these students, I saw a program
achieving those same goals at Arecibo. The Observatory's
engagement with the community through STEM education and
outreach should be applauded and exemplified.
I was pleased to see that the ASTRO 2020 survey recognizes
that Arecibo has a future role in U.S. astronomy, though I have
concerns that we have now ceded leadership in radio astronomy
to the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and their Five-hundred-
meter Aperture Spherical radio Telescope, known as FAST.
The US should not rely on the capabilities of malign
foreign actors like the CCP to excel in radio astronomy. As
such, I look forward to working with the NSF as they continue
to examine the future of Arecibo.
Like Arecibo, the NSF's astronomy program faces questions
going forward. The NSF must evaluate how it supports existing
and new facilities, including identifying facilities that may
be nearing the end of its life cycle. It must also examine how
it balances these commitments with funding individual research
grants that will support the next generation of Nobel prize-
winning astronomers.
I would like to thank the survey's co-chairs for
participating in today's hearing, along with GAO. I look
forward to hearing how we can continue our commitment to
researching the fundamental nature of the universe.
Thank you and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Ranking Member Waltz, very much.
I'm sure you were just as smart as they were when you were that
age.
Mr. Waltz. No, I wasn't, not even close. But they were
quite impressive. Thanks.
Chairman Beyer. That's wonderful. If there are other
Members who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added to the record at this point. Just
please send them to the Clerk.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning.
Thank you, Chairman Beyer and Chairwoman Stevens, for
holding this hearing, and welcome to our distinguished
witnesses. We are fortunate to have both co-chairs of the
decadal survey before us today. I know we are all eager to hear
about the vision for the future and what astronomers hope to
learn in the next decade about the Universe and humanity's
place within it. I also look forward to discussion of the human
and professional side of astronomy and research. Improving
access, diversity, and inclusion are critical to the success of
scientific research. I am glad, therefore, that the decadal
survey spent time on these issues.
The National Academies' decadal surveys are widely
respected and highly influential. The astronomy and
astrophysics community pioneered the National Academies'
decadal survey process in 1964. It is a testament to the value
of that process that we are here today, discussing the seventh
survey. I congratulate the community on reaching this
milestone. Each survey is a monumental effort, with the input
and involvement of hundreds of scientists. The effort leads to
an independent, peer-reviewed, consensus set of recommended
science goals and new programs. Astronomy investments at NASA,
NSF, and DOE in the coming decade will be shaped by those
recommendations. The surveys ensure that our Nation's science
programs are guided by the most compelling science questions
and ambitions of the scientific community.
We in Congress spend a lot of time conducting oversight of
our federal science programs, particularly when those programs
encounter challenges. This is an important role for Congress,
as is ensuring the balance of activities necessary for the
health of the discipline. We want our Nation's R&D programs to
be managed effectively and maximize the scientific return on
taxpayer investment.
However, it is also important that we not lose sight of the
reason we are here. Why does the U.S. pursue such ambitious,
complex programs in the first place? In the last decade alone,
astronomers made the first measurements of gravitational waves.
Astronomers also discovered that nearly every star in the night
sky likely hosts one or more planets. Finally, our investments
in astronomy infrastructure enabled the direct image of a black
hole in a nearby galaxy. Discoveries like these and the myriad
others, large and small, from astronomical research teach
humanity about the universe around us. They also inspire
generations to be curious, to explore, and to innovate. What's
more, the technological boundaries that astronomers push in
computation, optics, and detectors often contribute real
societal benefits.
I again want to welcome our expert witnesses, and I look
forward to their testimony.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Beyer. So at this time I would like to introduce
our witnesses.
Dr. Robert Kennicutt is a Professor at the Steward
Observatory at the University of Arizona, and in the Department
of Physics and Astronomy at Texas A&M University. His research
interests are primarily observational extragalactic astronomy
and cosmology. He's served on various committees at the
National Academies, including the Committee on Astronomy and
Astrophysics, and the Task Group on Space Astronomy and
Astrophysics. He also currently serves as the Co-Chair of the
National Academies' Committee for a Decadal Survey on Astronomy
and Astrophysics 2020--hence your invitation today. We're very
pleased to have the Co-Chair with us. Dr. Kennicutt received
his Ph.D. in Astronomy from the University of Washington.
Dr. Fiona Harrison is a Professor of Physics, and Chair of
the Division of Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy at the
California Institute of Technology. Dr. Harrison's primary
research interests are in experimental and observational high
energy astrophysics. She served as Chair of the National
Academies' Space Studies Board, was a member of the James Webb
Space Telescope Independent Review Board, and chaired the
National Academies' Committee on an Assessment of the
Astrophysics Focused Telescope Assets Mission Concepts. She
also serves as a Co-Chair--she's the other Co-Chair--of the
National Academies' Committee for A Decadal Survey on Astronomy
and Astrophysics 2020. So we have both of the big dogs on this
really, really important survey. Dr. Harrison has her Ph.D. in
Physics from the University of California at Berkeley.
And finally, we have Mr. William Russell. He's the Director
in GAO's Contracting and National Security Acquisitions team--
so he's the one who holds everyone accountable. He oversees a
portfolio of issues related to NASA, DOD weapons systems,
cybersecurity, protection of critical technologies, DOD
industrial base and supply chain integrity, defense
contracting, and the use of the Defense Production Act to
support the Federal response to COVID-19. Mr. Russell has a
Master's Degree in Foreign Affairs from the University of
Virginia, simply known as The University here in the
Commonwealth, and a Bachelor's Degree in Political Science from
Virginia Commonwealth University.
As the witnesses should know, you each have 5 minutes for
your spoken testimony. Your written testimony can be, and
probably is, much longer, and that will be included in the
record for the hearing. When you've completed your spoken
testimony, we will begin with questions, and each Member will
have 5 minutes to question the panel. So let's begin with Dr.
Robert Kennicutt. Dr. Kennicutt, the floor is yours.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ROBERT C. KENNICUTT,

CO-CHAIR, STEERING COMMITTEE,

COMMITTEE FOR A DECADAL SURVEY

ON ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 2020,

NATIONAL ACADEMIES OF SCIENCES,

ENGINEERING, AND MEDICINE,

LAUREATE PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA,

PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY,

TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY

Dr. Kennicutt. Mr. Chairman, Madam Chairwoman, Ranking
Member Babin, Ranking Member Waltz, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today to
speak to you. ``The Decadal Survey for Astronomy and
Astrophysics in the 2020's'' was charged to develop and
recommend a broad scientific vision and plan for space and
ground-based astronomy and astrophysics over the coming decade.
The report is a combination of a 3-year community-based
exercise, informed by the work of 13 expert panels, and 860
community authored white papers. It lays out a scientific
agenda, addressing some of the most fundamental and profound
questions in our exploration of the cosmos, along with a
recommended program in investments aimed at answering those
questions.
Along the way, difficult choices had to be made, because
the wish list of ideas and projects proposed to us exceeded by
severalfold the resources available. We thus have tempered the
ambition with realism by setting firm priorities and guidance
for the agencies, while also providing flexibility for them to
adapt to changing landscapes over the decade.
Mr. Chairman, we do live in an extraordinary period of
discovery in astronomy and astrophysics. Six of the Nobel
Prizes for physics awarded over the past decade involved
astronomical data in subjects ranging from planets around other
stars, to dark energy, and the birth of our universe. This rich
Nobel harvest will be difficult to sustain, but there's every
reason to believe that the pace of discovery will continue
unabated over the coming decade. Our survey identifies three
major areas which are especially ripe for breakthroughs, and
I'll describe the first two.
The first goal is pathways to habitable worlds, the quest
to identify and study other planets in the universe, including
potentially habitable and life-bearing planets like our own. To
date, more than 4,800 planets have been identified, including
potential Earth analogues. One of the most profound questions
that we as humans can ask is, are we alone? Could life exist on
planets orbiting other starts besides our Sun? Today, thanks to
investments in technology, including the chronograph on the
Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, we are poised to develop a
space mission that can image some of these other worlds
directly, and measure the atmospheres of the--those pale blue
dots, whatever color they turn out to be, searching for
molecules produced by life.
Accomplishing that goal is challenging. Detecting a
distant, Earth-like planet against the glare of a star like the
Sun, requires high contrast imaging at the level of 10 billion
to one, but the goal is within our reach, and we recommend the
development and maturation of such a mission as our top large
space priority. In the meantime, a new generation of ground-
based Extremely Large Telescopes, or ELTs, with apertures of 20
to 40 meters, should be able to image habitable zone planets
around fainter stars than the Sun, where the contrast
requirements are lower. And we recommend NSF partnership in the
U.S.-led ELT projects as our top large ground-based priority.
The next of our science goals, unveiling the drivers of
galaxy growth, addresses the fundamental question of our
origins, the formation of the stars, planets, galaxies, and the
universe itself. We now realize that these formation processes
are tightly interconnected in a kind of grand cosmic ecosystem.
The seeds of galaxies were planted during the first moments of
the Big Bang, and modern numerical simulations can retrace the
gravitational growth of those seeds into galaxies from 300,000
years after the Big Bang to--until today. The galaxies, in
turn, are ecosystems of their own, with matter condensing to
form stars, and central supermassive black holes, balanced by
feedback of energy and matter from those stars and the black
holes, which refuel the formation cycle, and reshape the
galaxies.
Later this month the James Webb Space Telescope will embark
on its quest to directly retrace this history of cosmic star
and galaxy formation from the first objects formed, to the
present day. Following Webb, the same large space and ground-
based telescopes already described for imagining exoplanets
will provide transformative observations over the manner--
energy flows powering this growth in galaxies. Other insights
will come from deep radio observations of galaxies, and the
next generation Very Large Array (ngVLA), far infrared (IR)
observations of star and planet forming clouds, and X-ray
observations of the galaxies and their super black--massive
black holes.
That concludes my remarks. Thank you again for the
opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kennicutt follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Dr. Honeycutt--Kennicutt, thank you very
much. We'll now move on to Dr. Harrison. Professor, your--floor
is yours.

TESTIMONY OF DR. FIONA A. HARRISON,

CO-CHAIR, STEERING COMMITTEE,

COMMITTEE FOR A DECADAL SURVEY

ON ASTRONOMY AND ASTROPHYSICS 2020,

NATIONAL ACADEMIES OF SCIENCES,

ENGINEERING, AND MEDICINE,

HAROLD A. ROSEN PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS,

CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Harrison. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Chairwoman,
Ranking Member Babin, Ranking Member Waltz, and Members of the
Subcommittees. I'm really grateful for the opportunity to tell
you about our survey, and I'm going to pick up where Rob left
off, and that's to tell you about your third priority science
area, new windows on the dynamic universe.
So this really captures the broad range of science that's
enabled by observing the sky in new ways that have only become
possible in the last 10 years. One of the most dramatic
scientific events that has been alluded to already is the first
detection of gravitational waves by LIGO in 2015, and this was
from two black holes that, 1.3 billion light years ago, merged
into one. And this even, unbelievably, was detected by sensing
minute, tiny ripples in the fabric of space and time itself
that was created in this merger.
So gravitational waves in general are produced by very
dense objects, black holes and neutron stars, when they orbit
around each other, and eventually merge. And if one of these
objects happens to be a neutron star, light can accompany the
gravitational wave signal. And so, in one watershed event in
2017, light was seen from such an event all the way from radio
waves up to the gamma rays. And studying these events, and the
complementary messengers of gravitational waves and light, will
reshape our understanding of topics as diverse as the orbit--
origin of carbon in our bones, the heavy elements like in your
wedding ring, so the history of the expansion of the universe
since the Big Bang, and the physics of black hole event
horizons.
So searching for these light signals that it--and also
searching for light signals that accompany detections of
elusive, almost massless high energy neutrinos, which are
detected by the Antarctic Ice Cube Observatory, is another
opportunity to combine fundamentally new and different kinds of
information to study the most energetic particle accelerators
in the universe.
So, actually, immediately capitalizing on the gravitational
wave and neutrino opportunities doesn't require a large mission
or telescope, but rather programs that consist of suites of
coordinated small and medium-scale observatories that can
quickly train themselves on the region where these events
happen, and quickly study the light that come from these
transient phenomena. And the same suite of--facilities can also
be powerful for following up explosive events that will be
discovered in droves with the Vera C. Rubin Telescope when it
comes online in the next few years.
So another opportunity in new windows is to make very
sensitive observations of the relic radiation from the Big Bang
itself. This is the cosmic microwave background. And what we're
looking for is the imprint of gravitational waves that are
produced in the very, very earliest moments of rapid expansion
in the universe, a period known as inflation. This will
certainly be a Nobel Prize, if it's discovered, and this can be
achieved with the CMB-S4 (Cosmic Microwave Background--Stage 4)
Observatory, which is a moderate-scale joint Department of
Energy (DOE)/NSF effort.
So while these large projects provide major new
observational capabilities, it's already well recognized by
this Committee that achieving a broad scientific program, being
able to respond nimbly to new scientific discoveries, this
requires a whole range of mission scales. Small and medium-
sized projects can be developed and deployed on 2-year time
scales, harnessing the ingenuity of the entire community. They
can deploy new technologies rapidly, and serve as test beds for
future large strategic endeavors.
So our report envisions robust ways for achieving and
strengthening this programmatic balance by recommending that
NSF expand its mid-scale programs, and that NASA emphasize
continued strong support for its competed Explorer program, and
also add a competed line of probe scale missions that serve as
intermediates between the smaller explorers, and the large
strategic missions.
And so finally, the survey identifies important ways to
foster the development of human capital, the research
infrastructure, and future technology. Developing and
diversifying a scientific work force is a pressing need that's
already been identified, and bridge programs help students from
all backgrounds get the skills and knowledge they need to
pursue advanced degrees. Also, supporting individual
investigators is essential, and here we emphasize increasing
grants at the NSF, and also, finally, early stage technology
development is essential for our future. And so I thank you
again for the opportunity to share the highlights from the
decadal report.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Harrison follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Harrison, very much. And
finally we'll hear from Mr. Russell from the GAO. Mr. Russell?

TESTIMONY OF MR. WILLIAM RUSSELL, DIRECTOR,

CONTRACTING AND NATIONAL SECURITY ACQUISITIONS,

GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Russell. Chairman Beyer, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking
Members Babin and Waltz, and Members of the Subcommittees, I'm
pleased to be here today to discuss the 2020 Decadal Survey on
Astronomy and Astrophysics. Decadal surveys are a key input
NASA uses to determine its science missions. Three major
projects in NASA's portfolio, the James Webb Space Telescope,
the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, and Sphere X, are
derived from past surveys. These telescopes are pivotal to NASA
achieving its science mission, such as seeking to understand
the universe, and our place in it.
As Congress, NASA, and the science community consider
future projects, it'll be important that new programs are
managed in a manner that minimizes cost overruns and schedule
delays. NASA's telescopes and other science projects will
always have inherent technical design and integration risks
because they are so complex, specialized, and often push the
state-of-the-art in space technology. But too often our reports
find that management and oversight problems, which can include
poor planning and optimistic cost estimating, are the real
drivers behind cost growth and schedule delays. For example,
James Webb's launch date has been delayed by over 7 years, and
costs have nearly doubled to almost 10 billion. Acquisition
management remains a longstanding challenge at NASA, and in our
March 2021 high risk update, we found that NASA still needs to
do more to reduce acquisition risk and demonstrate progress,
especially with costs and scheduled performance on large and
complex programs entering the portfolio.
NASA recognizes these challenges, and is taking steps to
identify and address areas contributing to this acquisition
risk. For example, in March 2021, we found that NASA had taken
steps to improve transparency in monitoring the project costs
and schedules. Today I'd like to highlight three lessons from
our reviews of NASA's major projects that can be applied to
future efforts as NASA considers this decadal study.
First, NASA could better manage costs and scheduled
performance for some of its large flagship projects. NASA's
most costly and complex missions have had cascading effects on
the rest of the portfolio. For example, James Webb's cost
growth had an outsized effect on the rest of NASA's major
acquisition portfolio, and required NASA to identify more than
1.4 billion in additional resources from other efforts, such as
the Science Mission Directorate Account, to offset these costs.
In essence, NASA had to trade future missions and research to
address Webb's resource needs.
Second, NASA can better minimize risk in its programmatic
decisions. NASA leadership has, at times, made programmatic
decisions that compound technical challenges. These decisions
include establishing insufficient cost and schedule reserves,
approving baselines that do not fully follow best practices,
and proceeding with immature technologies.
Last, NASA can continue to regularly and consistently
update cost and schedule information. NASA took a positive step
in 2019 by updating its joint cost and schedule confidence
level policy to help ensure that estimates are realistic, and
projects are thoroughly planning for anticipated risks. NASA's
most expensive projects will also update their estimates more
frequently as risks change. It will be important for NASA to
fully implement this policy moving forward so decisionmakers
have realistic and up to date estimates as projects move
through their development.
In closing, the most recent decadal survey continues to
encourage NASA to pursue transformative capabilities, including
a new space telescope. As NASA considers the survey's
recommendations, there's an opportunity to learn from the
challenges of Webb, and other projects, and help better
position future space telescopes for successful outcomes. We
look forward to continuing to work with NASA in this--and these
Subcommittees, and addressing these important issues. Chairman
Beyer, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Members Babin and Waltz, and
Members of the Subcommittees, this completes my prepared
remarks, and I look forward to responding to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Mr. Russell, thank you very much. We'll now
move on to questions from the Members of Congress. I have the
privilege of going first, to be followed by Ranking Member
Babin, and then Chairwoman Stevens. I only have nine questions
for you in my 5 minutes, so let me begin with Dr. Harrison.
The--in the written testimony you talked about how new
messengers and new physics will exploit the new observational
tools of gravitational waves and particles. Have we actually
found a gravitational particle yet, a graviton, or are we
just----
Dr. Harrison. Well, we----
Chairman Beyer [continuing]. We're just hoping that we'll
find one?
Dr. Harrison. Yes, we have not. In fact, the particles
we're alluding to, of course, are the high energy neutrinos,
but it's a forefront area of physics to study quantum gravity,
and try to understand the nature of the graviton. So
gravitational wave observations do place some limits on how
fast they travel. We think very, very close to the speed of
light. Whether it's exactly the speed of light, LIGO may tell
us.
Chairman Beyer. But----
Dr. Harrison [continuing]. Combined with light may tell us.
Chairman Beyer. But given the wave/particle duality, you
haven't given up looking for a graviton?
Dr. Harrison. No.
Chairman Beyer. OK, good, good--Dr. Kennicutt, I read this
wonderful book by Emma Chapman called ``First Light: Switching
On Stars at the Dawn of Time'' earlier this year, and she
talked about how they--the science was able to put together
these cosmic webs of dark matter, and that where the dark
matter webs--where there were dense overlaps was where the--you
would think of galaxies beginning. How do you measure dark
energy, and how will you see these webs? What kind of tools are
available for that?
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes, what you said is exactly right. I mean,
the--this is simulated numerically. Most of the dark matter
dominates the total mass of particles several times more than
ordinary matter, so early in the growth of the structures it's
the dark matter that forms the structures, but the ordinary
matter of which it condenses in the galaxies follows along for
the ride, and so we can trace the structure directly through
the distribution of galaxies in the sky. We're also beginning
to be able to do it through a technique of gravitational
lensing, which maps the dark matter directly.
They--that part of the physics is very well understood, and
the goal of the ecosystems is to--the physics of the gas, what
happens to the gas after that, is the hard part. And the models
make predictions, but the physics isn't fully understood, and
so that's where the cutting edge is, and that's what we aim to
study over the next decade.
Chairman Beyer. Well, it'll be fascinating and fun, I'm
certain. Mr. Russell, in the survey it talks about commencing
mission and technology maturation of a far IR and an X-ray
large strategic mission, both scoped to have implementation
costs in the three billion to five billion range. How are we
going to do these--this great observation stuff with three to
five million when James Webb costs 10 million?
Mr. Russell. That's the key point, Chairman Beyer. I think,
you know, as you saw with James Webb, the initial estimates
were a billion to 3.5 billion, and here we are, hopefully
launching later this month, you know, at about 10 billion in
the cost. So I think the technology maturation efforts proposed
in the decadal make a lot of sense. You know, our own lessons
learned and best practices suggest that if you can get
technologies to TRL (Technology Readiness Level) 096, which is
where you can demonstrate a prototype in a relevant
environment, that's--gives you all the markers for successful
outcomes going forward into implementation. So, to the extent
that those maturation efforts can lead to that kind of
technology development, that could be a good thing. But we'll
have to keep an eye on the costs, you know, three to five
billion. Having good, realistic cost estimates behind some of
those as they proceed through their development will be
important.
Chairman Beyer. Yes.
Dr. Harrison. Chairman Beyer, may I add something brief?
Chairman Beyer. Yes, please, Dr. Harrison.
Dr. Harrison. Yes, I think part of what the survey really
said is you need a new phasing between decadal surveys and
telling a mission--telling NASA they should adopt a mission.
And so this sets a cost target of three to five, and there's a
review, and if they don't meet that cost target, then they
don't get recommended by, you know, the follow up process. And
so this is a new mechanism that we're trying to try to ensure
that missions are initially scoped correctly for what a decadal
survey feels they should be. In the case of the large UVOIR, we
recognize that's a very--you know, that's a Webb-scale mission,
but in these other cases, that's the point of the maturation
program.
Chairman Beyer. Great. A very helpful explanation, thank
you very much. My time is up, so let me recognize the good
Congressperson from Texas, Mr. Babin.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Chairman Don, I appreciate you. Mr.
Russell, I'd like to address the first question to you. The
2020 decadal survey recommends a new $11 billion space
telescope. The 2000 decadal survey recommended the James Webb
Space Telescope, that has yet to launch. The 2010 decadal
survey recommended the Roman telescope, which is still in the
early stages of development. Both telescopes have incurred
significant cost schedule increases. Are there any lessons to
be learned to NASA that--you know, that we should keep, NASA
should keep in mind for future space telescope efforts, and
what best practices should NASA adhere to if it pursues this
large, complex program?
Mr. Russell. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, if you could? Yes, sir.
Mr. Russell. Certainly. Just a couple of quick takeaways.
One, NASA's already embedded into its policy doing more of
those joint cost and schedule confidence levels. Those give you
good point in time estimates you can use to calibrate changes
that are going to be needed for risks that have occurred on the
program. That's a good step, so if NASA could pay attention,
and focus its efforts on any future projects to do those in a
timely way, that's good. Also, to have realistic costs and
schedule baselines as they're deciding on programs to go into
implementation as another lesson learned. Sometimes we've seen
overly optimistic cost estimates, which can, you know, lead to
cost overruns later on.
Mr. Babin. Sure.
Mr. Russell. And then, briefly, making sure you have good,
mature technologies when you baseline those programs, and if
not, have some off-ramps and backups in case those technologies
don't mature as anticipated.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. And now, Dr. Harrison, I'd
like to talk about a possible space telescope gap risk. The
recommendations contained in Astro2020 span not only the coming
decade, but it will also likely influence the following decade
as well. And while we anxiously await the launch of JWST later
this month, I'm reminded that it was recommended by the 2000
decadal survey, and the Roman telescope was recommended by the
2010 decadal survey as a quick way to achieve fantastic
scientific goals, given the delays to JWST. We are now seeing
delays to even Roman.
Understanding that these are complicated undertakings, and
there is a risk to recommending a multi-decade mission, when
we're decades behind on our current programs, and if it weren't
for multiple Hubble servicing missions that fixed initial
problems, and extended the life of the mission longer than
anticipated, we would be experiencing a gap in that flagship
astronomy mission as well, right now. How should the community
mitigate the risk of an extended gap in flagship astronomy and
astrophysics missions if Hubble becomes inoperable, and the
current or future missions experience further delays, or even
failures, and what impact would that gap have on the U.S.
astronomy and astrophysics community? Briefly--if you'd--
briefly, if you'd give us your opinion----
Dr. Harrison. Yes, so very briefly, that's a wonderful
question, and it's one the survey struggled with greatly. And,
you know, our--look, this--the opportunity to find habitable
worlds, and find life outside of our solar system, is so
compelling, but it is a large mission, and we said, don't adopt
it now. NASA, do not start it now. Take five, six, if it's
needed, 7 years to co-mature it, really get the costs under
your, you know, belt. Understand it, and then adopt it. That's
to mitigate the risk of the large overruns, which is very
damaging to the program.
How are we going to fill that gap in between? And that's
why we have these probe missions. They're capped at 1.5 billion
to NASA. They will--they can launch on decade time scales
because they will be more focused, they will have mature
technologies, and that will enable us to really keep the
progress of capable space observations----
Mr. Babin. OK.
Dr. Harrison [continuing]. While we're developing the large
mission.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am, thank you very much. And now, to go
to our Aggie professor there, Mr.--Dr. Kennicutt. The survey
recommended an unprecedented level of NSF investment that would
provide 1.6 billion, split between the consortia constructing
the Giant Magellan Telescope (GMT) and the 30-Meter Telescope,
or TMT. Is China still a partner in TMT, and if so, is it still
responsible for polishing the mirrored segments? And then I
have a follow up question about what impact would a formal
commitment from the U.S. Government toward TMT construction,
not just use, have on China's ability to develop advanced
mirrors and optics for their national security purposes, and
how could the TMT consortium ensure that U.S. funding doesn't,
does not, advance Chinese military capabilities, or subject
U.S. technology to theft or exploitation by the CCP?
Dr. Kennicutt. I realize I have to answer quickly. To my
understanding, they formally remain a partner in the TMT
project. Understand that Fiona and I are involved in GMT and
TMT institutions. We had--we have stayed away from those
projects. I don't--I share your--personally your views that
this cannot benefit military applications in the future, but I
think that's an issue that the NSF would have to resolve with
the project. It's not something--it was outside of the scope
of--we thought we were charged to take up.
Mr. Baird. OK. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you very much, Congressman. Let me
now recognize Chairwoman Stevens.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you. Dr. Kennicutt, I'm very excited
about the scientific opportunities by the large scale ground-
based facilities, and just want to make sure we're
understanding the immense cost of operating them. So your top
priority recommendation, the Extremely Large Telescope Program,
would require about $32 million per year in operations funding
from the National Science Foundation. The survey highlights the
NSF's approach for funding facility operations and construction
as maybe an area for concern. So could you walk us through that
a little bit? We've got you on mute.
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes.
Ms. Stevens. There we go.
Dr. Kennicutt. I'm unmuted now, right? Yes, thank you for
that question. I really appreciate the opportunity. The problem
you identify is a really big one for the NSF, one they
recognized as the number--as we build more of these facilities,
the cost of operating and maintaining all of them has slowly
been creeping up, and the fraction--there's a concern that the
fraction of the NSF allocation for astronomy and astrophysics
is being taken up to the point that those costs are eroding
support for grants, programs, technology development, and so
on.
And so all of the projects we recommend have what we call
decision rules, conditions that apply, and a recommendation we
make that applies to every ngVLA, ELTs, and CMBS-4 is that
when--as NASA--as NSF, excuse me, contemplates these new
missions, they have to consider the full cost implications of
building them, and develop a plan for the case of ELTs. Where
will that $32 million a year----
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Dr. Kennicutt [continuing]. Come from? And it's--their
current total budget is on the order of 300 million, so it's
not intended to be insurmountable, a showstopper, but it's a
problem that's been eroding away, and just has to be addressed.
And----
Ms. Stevens. Yes, and we're----
Dr. Kennicutt. Go ahead.
Ms. Stevens. Yes, and we're talking about a, you know, 30
percent to the--you know, NSF increase for the Astrophysics
Division, and obviously, you know, the need and the pressure
for that, and the top recommendation for ground-based frontier
facilities is a Federal investment in at least one, but ideally
both of the Extremely Large Telescope Projects, namely Thirty
Meter and the Magellan--and the Giant Magellan. And so in--
they're similar in size, and have similar capabilities, but--
and maybe Dr. Harrison can get in here too, but--along with
you, Dr. K, you know, just any explanation about the benefits
of having both telescopes operating in concert, and what would
be lost if only one was supported.
Dr. Kennicutt. Fiona, would you like to take that?
Dr. Harrison. Why don't you go ahead and start, and I'll
fill in.
Dr. Kennicutt. Sure. Yes. So there are a number of benefits
to both. For one thing, there's only probably 20 to 25 percent
of the time available on either one, because they've already
signed up a large number of other partners. And so, if you can
get involved in both, you essentially double the amount of
observing time, number of nights a year that the U.S. community
will be able to observe on these telescopes. Also, having
access to the northern--southern hemispheres means no event in
the sky will go unobserved, and also there are benefits of
complementary instrumentation on the, you know, synergies
between the two in coordination. Those are the main reasons for
favoring two. But if only one project proves to be viable, then
we've recommended NSF pursue as big a share of time on the one
that is there as possible.
Dr. Harrison. Yes, I don't have anything to add, but----
Ms. Stevens. And so we're going to have the capabilities of
the combination of these telescopes, and we've got another one
under construction in the European Southern Observatory too, so
does that--is that the same sort of thing, Dr. K, where we're
going to get the--you know, the ability to capture these
images, you know--any other relevance in terms of that
comparison with the European----
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes. This is an area where Europe has gone a
bit ahead. They--theirs is a somewhat larger telescope, 39
meters. It probably--it's suffered its own delays due to all
sorts of reasons, will probably commission ahead, but the
amount of science to be done on these telescopes is immense.
Europe had the same debate when the two CAT telescopes were
built 25 years ago, should they build their four eight-meter
telescopes? Now there are 18, I believe, CAT class telescopes
in the world, and it's difficult to get time on essentially all
of them.
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Dr. Kennicutt. But----
Ms. Stevens. Yes. Well, that's great. Well, thank you both
so much, and--and to everyone, and, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens. Ranking
Member Waltz is up next, if he is present. Give him a second.
If not, let's move, then, to Congressman Meijer. Peter, the
floor is yours.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for all of
our witnesses who are here today, and for the opportunity to
dive deeper into an area that I will confess I only had
rudimentary knowledge of before joining this Committee. But I
think, you know, as Mr. Waltz was saying about Arecibo, and
some of the challenges we have in terms of being able to
compete in this realm with China, to be able to continue to
gain upon the advances that have been made in decades past, and
make sure that that growth is exponential going forward, I
think this is a very relevant, timely, and important topic for
us to be renewing.
A few questions for either Dr. Harrison or Dr. Kennicutt.
The decadal survey highlights, you know, a concerning issue
with the way NSF funds its programs, as it budgets for the
constructions and the operations through separate funding
streams. We've seen this funding method financially limit NSF's
ability to fund research grants and other science programs when
those construction costs run high, and obviously even before
the current inflationary environment we're in right now, it's
always the challenge of that projection on where costs will be
relative to expectations. How do you believe NSF can create a
more balanced funding mechanism that can give both
predictability, and make sure that, you know, future costs are
better anticipated?
Dr. Harrison. Rob, do you want to take that, or do you want
me to?
Dr. Kennicutt. Go ahead, Fiona. Why don't you take--I
take--this turn.
Dr. Harrison. Yes. So, you know, there's always been a
structural issue at the National Science Foundation, in that
construction and operations are very separate lines, and so
it's hard for a survey to really understand all the
implications of changing that mechanism. For example, you could
build operations into the congressional line that funds
construction, but that has its pluses and minuses. There may be
other mechanisms. So we feel that the agencies, working with
the National Science Board and Congress, need to evaluate those
mechanisms, and come up with a solution, but we don't dictate
that solution.
And so I think you're absolutely right, it's anticipating
more accurately the construction costs, which I believe the NSF
is making progress with, and also anticipating the operations
costs, and building them in in a sensible way, either to the
astronomy budget, or to the MREFC (Major Research Equipment and
Facilities Construction), the line that funds the construction.
And I think either of those is viable.
Dr. Kennicutt. Congressman, could I add a bit to that?
Mr. Meijer. Please.
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes. I think the situation is a bit
different with NSF. I think the history of construction costs
shows that actually their projects tend to meet--come on board
for cost much better than many of the NASA flagships, so the
real problems are somewhat different. One is the very long
lifetimes of their facilities. Also--so facilities tend not to
be shut down in as large a race as a space mission, of course,
where they degrade more rapidly. One recommendation we make is
to follow the lead of NASA. NASA reviews its operating missions
every 3 years in what they call the senior review. NSF did this
about 10 years ago as--what they called a portfolio review.
We've encouraged them to hold reviews of their whole suite of
operating facilities more often so they could be--looked and
compared in a kind of competitive environment. And that, we
hope, might help alleviate the problem over the long run.
Mr. Meijer. I mean, and the point on the longevity of these
assets I think is very well taken, especially the need to be
focusing, then, on, you know, enduring and preventative
maintenance so that that lifetime could be extended, especially
as some of these platforms are able to be, you know, further
modified, upgraded to reflect advances that we have.
My time is running a little bit short, but I guess any kind
of last words on this question when it comes to, then,
incorporating preventative maintenance, you know, assume--
presumably into an operation schedule? But would it be, you
know, most helpful to have those periodic reviews to get that
across that asset class? Or just any thoughts you might have.
Dr. Harrison. No, I think funding there, because I have a
space mission, and we undergo these regular 3-year senior
reviews, and that does look not only at what improvements and
enhancements are needed, what maintenance is needed, and how
could budgets be streamlined by--perhaps for older
observatories? Is it appropriate to take a little more risk?
And so I think that's the balance that those portfolio
reviews--or regular reviews bring.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congressman Meijer. I now
recognize Dr. Foster, but before doing that, just note that we
probably have time for a second round, so you don't need to
cram all nine questions into the 5 minutes, if you need to.
Congressman Foster?
Mr. Foster. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
that, and intend to capitalize on that. First, I want to second
Dr. Harrison's endorsement of having multi-messenger and
targets of opportunity be a big part of this. You know, I got
my Ph.D. thesis building a proton decay detector, the first of
the giant underground detectors, and doing Planck-scale
physics, and then ended up--and the--our sensitivity to
supernova was sort of a standing joke among all the grad
students. And then, lo and behold, in 1987 the--you know, the--
well, actually, we finally got the radiation from a supernova
that went off 160,000 years ago, and so we saw in our
underground detector the neutrinos, and at the same time the
optical astronomers saw the optical signal, and learned a lot
about supernova. And so it's good that you maintain the
flexibility and the agility that you get from these multiple
maybe smaller things, so I definitely endorse that.
Now, when you're doing things like decadal surveys, it's an
easier thing to design if the United States is the only show in
power, and it's not anymore. And so this makes you sensitive
not only to cost and schedule delays, basically, in the U.S.
program, but in having correct predictions of when, you know,
scientific competitors will actually do these things, because
you can mess up either way. If you accept at face value the
schedules for competing experiments, you may be under-
ambitious, because you'll just say, well, we can't possibly
complete with that. Now, I can certainly point to things in my
career where that mistake has been made. And so how do you
evaluate not only your realistic, you know, cost and schedule
estimates, but those of the EU, Japan, and other competitors?
Where do you get that input from?
Dr. Harrison. Rob, do you want to take a first----
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes, I'll start. It's a great question. You
know, a question we're often asked is why didn't we give really
specific timelines and roadmaps direct to NASA, for example. Do
this mission in 2023, and the next one in 2027, and so on, and
it's for the very reasons you describe. The landscapes change.
Funding landscapes, international landscapes change, and so on,
so what we try to do is lay out broad road maps and guidelines,
and leave the details to them.
Fortunately, this time, at least for space, Europe just
completed its own exercise. It's called Voyage 2050, and
they've laid out a set of priorities. They announced their
outcome just as we were finishing ours, so--but, in fact,
there's some projects in common. There will certainly be
collaborations. Little known--well over half of the NASA
portfolio of missions involved international partners, and we
hope that will continue.
Part of the issue of the gap that was raised earlier,
before the next big flagship, is that the U.S. is a partner in
the LISA (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna) Gravitational
Wave Observatory and the Athena X-Rays, which are all European-
led, but with partnerships from NASA. I'll stop there, and see
if Fiona wants to add anything.
Dr. Harrison. Yes, well, I'll just go direct to your point.
You know, would you make a mistake by just giving up because,
you know, Europe's doing it? And I think that the ELT is a
perfect case in point, because, yes, Europe is pursuing a large
telescope, in fact larger than the ones we've envisioned.
Should you just say, OK, even though this is an area where the
U.S. has led, we're just going to let Europe do the, you know,
big thing, and we'll go off and find some other, you know,
corner? No, absolutely not. This is the forefront. This is the
vision. We know that by being inventive and innovative with
instrumentation technologies, we build these telescopes, we can
keep refreshing them in creative ways that keep us absolutely
competitive with the European efforts.
And it's not just the competition. I imagine the way this
will evolve is Europe will choose particular instruments on
their telescope, and we'll choose different ones on ours, and,
you know, this pushes the forefront of science cooperatively
worldwide.
Mr. Foster. OK. Yes. So it's complicated, and then you
can--so thank you for taking a swing at that. And it gets even
more complicated when you have less transparent competitors,
like China, enter into it, where you simply don't have the
level of communication you have with the Europeans. Anyway--so
I thank the Chairman for the second round of questions that I
anticipate, and at this point I'll yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Foster, very much. Next,
if--our Ranking Member Waltz is with us, so, Congressman Waltz,
the floor is yours.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. And, Dr. Kennicutt, the first
question I want to throw your direction. In the middle of the
survey, and as I mentioned in my opening statement, a year ago
today the Arecibo Observatory experienced an unexpected and
catastrophic loss and collapse, excuse me. My understanding's
the Survey Steering Committee assessed the impact of Arecibo's
loss on the key science questions and programs. Are there
future opportunities for continued utilization of the Arecibo
site for radio astronomy, and can you discuss the potential
opportunities for the future of Arecibo?
Dr. Kennicutt. Absolutely. The loss occurred at a very
awkward time for the survey, to the extent there was no way you
could actually do a full review, of course, of all the
possibilities. But we did look very closely, with help from our
radio panel, at the scientific impacts. We think there is a
bright future for Arecibo. The example that we think is most
attractive is as a major part of the ngVLA, the next generation
VLA site. As you probably know, the next--the VLA currently is
based in New Mexico. New Mexico isn't big enough to hold the
ngVLA. The ngVLA will cover the entire country, at least the
major part of the northern--or the--of our hemisphere, and
already there were plans, preliminary plans, to site some of
the dishes and so on there. That would provide front and center
what will be the cutting edge of radio astronomy in the coming
years. The other element we think is very important is the
outreach efforts, all of the community engagement, because the
community values what Arecibo brought there, and we want to see
that preserved. I don't know if that answers all of your
question, sir.
Mr. Waltz. No, it does. I wanted to get Dr. Harrison's
perspective on the loss as well, I mean, as we know, as the
most powerful--or it included the loss of the most powerful
planetary radar in the world, and it affects our capabilities--
again, you know, correct me if I have a misunderstanding, but
it affects our capabilities to accurately map surface planets
and predict orbits for potentially hazardous asteroids. And so
I think you mentioned--you just got at the issue, but, Dr.
Harrison, I wanted to get your take as well on which existing
instruments have similar sensitivity capability and
availability to fulfill the role that AO had, and how does the
Committee suggest we continue our planetary defense actions
against near Earth objects?
Dr. Harrison. Yes, that's a great question. And so first
let me say that our remit was astronomy and astrophysics, and
so we didn't have as part of our charge to look at the other
aspects like planetary defense. And, you know, Arecibo, of
course, had a very broad range of things it was doing. Our task
was to look at the area, the impact on astronomy and
astrophysics, and--so I'm afraid I'll have to not answer the
first--that part of your question.
But just say--as far as astronomy and astrophysics go, you
know, Arecibo was key in timing pulsars, which is another way
to detect gravitational waves, and--so that will be a gap in
our capability, but increased investments in the Green Bank
Telescope to do that, and international cooperation, we hope
will tide us over until the point where we have the next
generation VLA, which is absolutely essential for keeping our
leadership in radio astronomy.
And so, you know, in--with the focused lens of astronomy
and astrophysics, we both feel like the Arecibo site is
essential. It--you know, it's very well protected for radio
noise, and, you know, siting an ngVLA element there is highly
attractive, and--so I'll stop there.
Mr. Waltz. No, thank you. No, I appreciate that. And just
in the few seconds I have remaining, Dr. Kennicutt, can you
just elaborate on the outreach piece that I think is so
important? I just can't overemphasize how I really, you know,
in many ways think I saw the--not just the diversity, but the
future of our country, in many ways, with the students that I
met there. So this--how important is Arecibo for that kind of
nexus between education, community, and developing STEM?
Dr. Kennicutt. Well, I envy you. I--I've heard about the
center for years. I've never been there myself, so I really--
but your----
Mr. Waltz. We'll make sure you get an invitation. I'll
speak to----
Dr. Kennicutt. OK.
Mr. Waltz. You'll be hearing from their Congresswoman, I
think, very soon.
Dr. Kennicutt. It--the--first of all, there's a whole
section of our report, of course, that recommends that our
profession do a better job with engaging with the communities
that host our key observational sites. This is an ideal
example, where the community has embraced--they have the
outreach center that attracts--I don't have the numbers for
you, of course, the number of visitors, but it's a combination
of the--just the number of people, but it's the impact on young
people, and particularly just targeting a demographic--a part
of the community where we are still underrepresented, and this
is just a perfect example of what needs to be done to diversify
our profession. And to--it would be a pity to see it go, and it
is such high impact for such low cost.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. I'm over my time. I appreciate the
indulgence, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Chairman Beyer. Absolutely, Congressman. Thank you so much.
If Congresswoman Stansbury is with us? I know her--she's still
logged in. And, if not, Congressman Ellzey? If Jake is with us?
I know we have his office, if not him. We had Mr. Brooks there
for a minute. OK. With the consent of Chairwoman Stevens and
Dr. Foster, we'll move to a second round. And if our folks show
up again, we'll--we will thus introduce them. So let me begin.
Dr. Harrison, you guys talked about cosmological inflation,
which I think is, like, one of the coolest things since sliced
bread. How--I'd love for you to just talk a little bit more
about--No. 1, how do you even begin to measure it or think
about it, and No. 2, if our universe ends at--say as far as
light has gone, you know, in the last 14 billion years, is it
wholly possible that cosmological inflation has taken place in
other places, and is still taking place now?
Dr. Harrison. Sure. Well, let me address the first
question, which is how do you even begin to think you can
detect this bizarre moment, the earliest moments in the
expansion of the universe, where, you know, the expansion was
so rapid it's faster than the speed of light in--if you think
about it, in certain ways. But it's amazing, it's thought
that--and this period is absolutely necessary, by the way, to
explain the absolute smoothness of the universe when we look
back at the cosmic microwave background. So we have good reason
to believe it existed.
And we think when it happened, it created gravitational
radiation, which would interact with the surface and the
universe that we see when we look at the cosmic microwave
background, and that would produce a particular pattern of that
cosmic microwave background light in what's called its
polarization, that if you can see that, it has a very
distinctive signature. That will be the smoking gun that
inflation occurs, and actually analyzing the pattern, and its
level, will tell you a lot about inflation. And it's absolutely
amazing, astounding, to me that there's the opportunity to
probe back beyond the last surface we can actually see.
And on your question of--I think you're getting at is--are
there multiverses? Could this have occurred? I'm--you know,
that's not my area of expertise. I know that, yes, people
theorize this, but maybe Rob has an opinion.
Chairman Beyer. Just the level one multiverse.
Dr. Kennicutt. It's not my area of expertise either. It's
very highly speculative. On the other hand, inflation is an
absolutely fundamental tenet of our current cosmology. If these
V-modes are detected, to confirm it, you've confirmed one of
the cornerstones of not--of the cosmology, which includes
cornerstone of physics as we know it. If those modes aren't
detected, if they aren't there, then it means there's something
really fundamentally off in physics. So hence, you know, why
this has Nobel implications.
Dr. Harrison. Right. Back to the drawing board, in other
words.
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes.
Chairman Beyer. So, Rob, one of the things in your guys'--
you talked about the neutrino observations are important in
understanding, and the IceCube--Generation Two is making
important advances, but it's beyond the charge of the decadal
survey to recommend it. Well, were you essentially de-
emphasizing the IceCube survey, or----
Dr. Kennicutt. No. It's simply the logistics of the
survey--there were two projects presented to us, IceCube--
Generation Two, also further technology development for future
gravitational wave observatories. Those programs are funded out
of the NSF Physics Division. We were asked by the NSF to assess
the importance of those projects for astronomy and
astrophysics, which we did, but they will compete in the--for
funding with all the rest of--you can--you know, condensed
matter physics, nuclear physics, nuclear physics, and
everything else. And--so we can't put ourselves in a position
to tell the physicists just do the astronomy things. That's the
only reason----
Chairman Beyer. OK.
Dr. Kennicutt [continuing]. For why we can't. It's not a
backhanded compliment whatsoever. It's a statement of our
charge.
Chairman Beyer. Thanks. One of the things that comes up
again and again is data across the Federal Government. I
introduced the National Secure Data Act a month or so ago, I
think with Dr. Foster, to try to get all these different
databases, and we were thinking, you know, NOAA, and Census,
and IRS (Internal Revenue Service), et cetera, but what about
NASA and NSF, and the work you're doing? How interoperable are
those databases, and what could we do to contribute to that?
Dr. Kennicutt. Fiona, would you like to take that one?
Dr. Harrison. Well, why don't you address it for the NSF
side, and then I can say something about NASA?
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes. They--the--they're actually--astronomy,
I think, is a leader in creating public datasets, and this
contributes to the internationalization of astronomy. The--it's
integrating--globilizing the whole enterprise. NSF does a very
good job for the data from its national facilities, by and
large, but for the telescopes that are operated by universities
and institutions, more work needs to be done to make those data
accessible and available in a form that is digestible readily
by the community.
Fiona will address NASA in a moment. There is a big
challenge now with the multi-messenger astronomy, and being
able to access across the two, but I'll let her take it from
here.
Chairman Beyer. And Dr. Harrison----
Dr. Harrison. Well, I don't know if you want me to--I'd be
happy to stop, if you're----
Chairman Beyer. Yes, let me--let's--we'll come back. I'd
love to hear what you have to say about it, but I feel an
obligation to move on to Congressman Ellzey, who's with us
again. Jake, the floor is yours for questions, if you would
like it.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, I am good at this
time. I appreciate it.
Chairman Beyer. Then let's move on to our Ranking Member,
Dr. Babin, for a second round.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it. Good
to have a second round. I would like to address a question to
Dr. Harrison. Section 508 of the NASA Transition Authorization
Act of 2017 directed NASA to work with the National Academies
to develop an exoplanet science strategy. What impact did this
have on the recently released decadal survey?
Dr. Harrison. Yes. So it was highly impactful. What this
report did was it--it did an in depth study across
opportunities in exoplanets, and also considering astrobiology,
and it had findings about what would be the, you know,
forefront areas. And so this was really our starting point,
along with our own panels. And so we took that report very
seriously, and, in fact, you'll see some of our top
recommendations mirror what they said, which is top priority
really is to look for signatures of other--of life on other
planets, here's the road map that we think is required. And we
adopted many--not all, but many of their recommendations. So
yes, it was highly influential for us, and I think a good model
going forward for the agencies to ask--in complicated areas to
ask that--National Academies to do preparatory studies, which
just help the surveys.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you so much. And, let's see, the next
question I would have would be to--addressed to Mr. Russell.
The Great Observatories Mission and Technology Maturation
Program proposed by the 2020 decadal survey is intended to
invest early in technology maturation efforts to reduce risk
and decrease the likelihood of cost and schedule issues with
the telescope development. How should these activities be
accounted for, should they be included in the program baseline
commitment for costs, and schedule estimating, and tracking, or
is this a way to remove program content from the underlying
project to make it appear to cost less than it really does? I
would like to see what you think about that.
Mr. Russell. Yes, thank you for that question.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Russell. Certainly I think the--there's a lot of
promise in that maturation effort, and--to the extent that it
can delivery technologies that are at a sufficient maturity
level. Usually we look for TRL-6 by preliminary design review.
That's going help strengthen the NASA projects going forward.
But in terms of accounting for some of those costs, you know,
we've seen some good practices, I think, with the Roman Space
Telescope, the Corona instrument. There was a recognition that
it might be easier to manage it as a technology demonstration,
and that's what NASA has done, and they're effectively tracking
those costs.
But then we've seen other examples, for--with the space
launch system, where it might be good for the next block, Block
1B. We recommended that they set a separate baseline, because
it's such a significant effort that they separately track and
provide oversight of some of those key efforts.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you very much. And, Mr. Chairman, I
think that concludes my questioning, so I'll yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you. Thank you, Ranking Member Babin,
very much.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
Chairman Beyer. I'll let the--let--OK. Let me recognize now
Congressman Foster from Illinois. Dr. Foster.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I'd like to
follow up for a moment on the Chairman's question involving
gravitons. It's my impression that, you know, LIGO, and similar
projects, are looking not really for the quantum nature of
gravity, but since--looking essentially at the classical limit,
that, you know, these are quantum states with enormous quantum
numbers, and just coherent states with, you know, huge--and are
there--first off, is that a correct impression, and are there
efforts anywhere that have a realistic chance of getting at the
quantum nature of gravity at this point, or is that still
looking out of reach?
Dr. Harrison. Yes, I'm happy to take a crack at that. Yes,
absolutely, you're completely correct. I think what I was
saying about LIGO is the one, you know, measurement it can make
is the speed of travel of the graviton----
Mr. Foster. Sure.
Dr. Harrison [continuing]. And is that close to the speed
of light? And that's, obviously, an important measurement, but
it's not getting at the fundamental nature of quantum gravity.
And yes, actually, rather amazingly, there are efforts related,
in fact, to things that come out of quantum sciences efforts,
quantum information, quantum matter intersecting with--physics
that are developing new theories that can actually be tested,
searching for the quantum nature of gravity. And I'm not an
expert, but I know that, for example, there's an effort in DOE
to build a very sensitive interferometer that can actually look
for some effects of quantum gravity theories at the very low
energy scale. So it's a very active field.
Mr. Foster. OK.
Dr. Harrison. It's been a big mystery in physics, as you
well know, for----
Mr. Foster. Yes, well, for forever, you know, and so----
Dr. Harrison [continuing]. Forever, yes.
Mr. Foster [continuing]. So we still need a great new idea
to get at the graviton.
Dr. Harrison. We do.
Mr. Foster. All right, back to the prosaic here. Yes, Dr.
Kennicutt referred to what appears to be a sort of trend for
larger cost growth in NASA-based experiments than in NSF-
based--or NSF/DOE-based, and I wonder, is that just
attributable just to the difference in difficulty of operating
in space, or are there structural--maybe this is a question for
Mr. Russell, that--are most of the, you know, really large cost
growth that we've seen in experiments due just to the things
that wouldn't happen if it wasn't in space?
Mr. Russell. Certainly the environment of space is very
difficult, and a lot of what NASA is doing with their science
mission is one of a kind. You know, James Webb's Space
Telescope's a good example, pushing the edge of possibility. So
I think where we focused is you're always going to have that
risk, and your acquisition process is really intended to manage
that risk, but not eliminate it. So just things like having
sufficiently mature technology to really determine your
requirements, make sure you have resources that match those
requirements before you start, you know, bending metal----
Mr. Foster. Yes.
Mr. Russell [continuing]. And building things.
Mr. Foster. So it's more complicated than just space versus
non-space----
Mr. Russell. Exactly.
Mr. Foster [continuing]. So that it's--OK. That there are
maybe management differences? And when you're looking at sort
of decadal survey level of thing, very often there is
competition between space-based and ground-based ways to do the
same physics or astronomy. And so, when that happens, you're
talking about--you know, if you're going to say, OK, we're
going to take this project out of space-based, and move it to
ground-based, or vice versa, you're actually going up through
this Committee, in terms of, you know, moving authorizations
from one potential pot of money, and one agency to another. How
do you deal with that? Do you operate something like--we have
this pot of money that we're going to spend on the ground, and
this pot of money that we're going to spend in space, and just
use those as input to your deliberations, or do you actually
make recommendations that involve, you know, moving, you know,
ground-based versus space-based monies around?
Dr. Kennicutt. Generally when we--we are given, of course,
separate budget profiles for the agencies which we have to
meet, so in the last steps, those budget analyses are
segregated. It's not often that we have competing missions on
ground and space aiming at the same thing. In this case there--
in the case of cosmic ray background, we did have proposals on
both sides, and we just----
Mr. Foster. I think there were competing dark energy
proposals, if I recall correctly, for ground-based versus
space-based----
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes.
Mr. Foster [continuing]. Operations, and, you know----
Dr. Kennicutt. So we asked the--the first test is always
asking--you use the input from the science panels. You know, we
do--the steering community does a scientific assessment of the
two options very often. There's that--there's always
differences in what you're going to get from the two, and often
it's a matter of deciding the phasing. But Fiona, do you--
perhaps you have to----
Dr. Harrison. Well, yes, just very----
Dr. Kennicutt. Um-hum.
Dr. Harrison [continuing]. Quickly. We take the
complementarity of ground and space observations into account
when we make recommendations, and if we look at the, you know,
question to find life sought--life outside of our solar system,
there the EL--the very large telescopes on the ground, and the
space-based thing are absolutely complementary, because on the
ground you can do the small stars, in space you can do the Sun-
like stars. And you can't do the smaller stars from space, you
can't do the Sun-like stars from ground. You need to have a
whole gamut to answer this question. And so we consider
complementary like--complementarity like that. We're trying not
to replicate capabilities.
So, for example, in our Time Demand Program, we say, NASA,
do in space those time demand things that you have to do in
space, X-rays, gamma rays, that can't get through the
atmosphere. On the ground, do the optical, do the infrared.
Mr. Foster. Yes. Thank you. Because, you know, our
Committee needs a more systematic way, in the cases where you
have to move the balance of effort between space-based and non-
space based, and we actually--you know, I don't see a clear
picture of what that mechanism might be. Thank you, my time's
up, and yield back.
Chairman Beyer. And, Congressman Foster, if you want to
stay for another round, we have them captured for the moment,
and we're in the Zoom where it happens right now. Let me
recognize Congresswoman Stansbury from New Mexico. Melanie, if
you have questions for our distinguished panel?
Ms. Stansbury. Yes. Good morning, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for convening this very important and interesting
discussion this morning. In my community, and across New
Mexico, we are so privileged to have the ability to step into
our backyards, and look up at the night sky, and see exactly
what has inspired countless generations to study the cosmos,
and get where we are today, able to peer into the far reaches
of the universe, and study objects that are light-years away,
and able to see and understand extraordinary events that help
us understand the universe, and our place in it.
New Mexico has been home to advanced astronomers dating
back millennia, from the ancestors of our indigenous
communities who were guided by the stars in creating great
cities and trade networks, to the generations of physicists and
astronomers who have worked to understand our place in the
universe, including those who have worked on the Very Large
Array in Central New Mexico, the Sunspot Observatory in
Southern New Mexico, and laboratories and universities across
the State.
So as we look forward to the next generation, and the next
decade of studying space, and what it can teach us about our
place here on Earth, the Next Generation Very Large Array in
particular will help to fuel discovery to help to create jobs,
and to inspire countless New Mexicans to pursue a career in
science. So I'm particularly interested in the Next Generation
VLA, and the plans to upgrade and merge this facility with
antennas across the country in order to increase our capacities
in radio astronomy for decades to come.
Like the current Very Large Array, the Next Generation VLA
will contribute to new discoveries well into this century, and
if we follow the guidance that's laid out in the decadal
survey, we'll also be able to ensure that space research and
discovery truly reflects and benefits all of our communities
across race, gender, and community lines. While the Next
Generation Very Large Array will directly create 200
manufacturing jobs, many of which will go to New Mexicans, the
project also provides aspiring scientists with the opportunity
to train and conduct research with some of the most
sophisticated equipment in the country, and in the world. And
students visiting the VLA, such as myself as a youngster, will
also be inspired to pursue careers in STEM, and help to fuel
the next generation of discovery.
So I look forward to supporting this Committee's work to
advancing priorities from the decadal survey, and to empower
the scientific community to continue to expand our
understanding of the universe. And, as New Mexico's space
research and commercial industry continues to grow, I'm excited
about the groundbreaking work that will come out of our
communities, and how it can contribute to our understanding of
the cosmos.
So with that in mind, I just want to ask a quick question
to Dr. Kennicutt. I am very interested in--as I noted--in the
survey's recommendations for the Next Generation VLA, and I'm
wondering if you can talk to us a little bit about the
significance of the expansions of this network, and also some
of the scientific discoveries that may be advanced by this
facility?
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes. The--this telescope will be
transformational for radio astronomy. It will have anywhere
from 10 to 100 times the scientific power sensitivity of the
current VLA, depending on, of course, how you measure things.
The kinds of science it will enable is--we've talked about
imaging planets around other stars, invisible light and in the
infrared. In radio wavelengths, you can image planetary--
planets in the process of formation. And actually, in the
proposal, it's in visage--by taking radio images over time, you
will actually be able to watch the development, motions, planet
formation literally in action, just as one example.
In the case of the ecosystem science, we talked about--part
of the feedback that shapes galaxies is radio jets emitted from
these supermassive black holes, and ngVLA will map those with
unprecedented sensitivity and resolution. I'll stop there,
because I know your time's limited, but happy to follow up.
Ms. Stansbury. Um-hum. Yes, I think----
Dr. Harrison [continuing]. Very briefly add that I'm really
excited about it for the new windows, because one of the most
astounding things about this gravitational wave merger of
neutron stars was that there was radio waves the VLA was able
to monitor over time, which showed us that there are jets of
particles going nearly the speed of light emitted in this
merger, and that's--to see these at the distances of the, you
know, upgraded gravitational wave observatories, it's going to
take the ngVLA.
Ms. Stansbury. Wow. It's amazing, and I just--I'm so
excited about the work that will be spawned by this survey, and
all of the incredible work that all of you do. And for any of
you that'd like to come down and see the VLA, it's really quite
an amazing thing to behold. It stretches across the mesas of
New Mexico, and is helping, as was noted, to fuel our
scientific discovery of the outer universe, so come and visit
us. Thank you, everyone.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congresswoman Stansbury, very,
very much. Again, let me offer Congressman Ellzey--Jake, if you
want to jump in at all, you're welcome.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I didn't have a
question for any of these folks. I just wanted to say thank you
for spending some of your day with us. I grew up in the 1980's.
I grew up reading science fiction 2001, 2010: Contact. I'm
fascinated by this. It's an honor to be on a panel with Dr.
Foster, who won the Rossi Prize for the things that we're
talking about today.
And if I asked any questions, it would just merely show
that I'm a political science major, and not a scientist, but I
think that what you're--the work that you do is extremely
important. It's work only the Federal Government can do on a
national level, and furthermore, it's work only that the U.S.
Government can afford to do. So it's extremely important--the
work you do is important in ways that most of us can't even
imagine right now. While I don't have any questions, I've
appreciated everything that you've said, and it's a fascinating
topic. It's disappointing that we're a little bit behind
timeline, a lot behind timeline, on some of these projects, but
great science is going to come from it.
I look forward to meeting you all in person at some point,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Foster, it's a pleasure to be on this with you, and thank you
all very much for your time. I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congressman, very much, but it
is the political scientists that authorize and fund all this.
We need those too.
Mr. Ellzey. Well, I might add that my uncle, Lawrence
Ellzey, is a Professor of Physics at UTEP (University of Texas
at El Paso), and Dr. Foster I don't know if you ever--
Congressman Foster, I don't know if you've ever met him, but
I'm very proud to be on this, and I spoke with him that I'd be
on this panel today, and he said, you're not qualified to be on
this panel. But here I--so, anyway, thanks again.
Mr. Foster. Well----
Chairman Beyer. I mean, you----
Mr. Foster. Well, my daughter, in fact, lives in El Paso,
and so I will make it a point of visiting next time we're
there.
Chairman Beyer. Sure. And you're more than qualified to
serve on this panel. I have three short questions before
passing off to Dr. Foster again. No. 1, in your written
testimony you talked about how the cadence of one probe mission
per decade is realistic. You're looking at cost--and it seems
to me there have been a lot more than that just in the last
decade. For example, we have DAVINCI, and VERITAS about to go
probe Venus, and--why just one per decade?
Dr. Harrison. So we were referring strictly to astrophysics
probes, and this is a program that we imagined would mirror
what's done in planetary science with the discovery missions,
which are probe class in the same way we imagine. And so we'd
like to expand this incredibly successful model to astronomy
and astrophysics. And, you know, the one per decade really--you
know, if you look at NASA's great observatories that were
alluded to and--in the opening remarks, you know, these really
had a whole range of scales, from what we would call probe
class up to flagship class, and so, you know, achieving this
broad range of capabilities really is going to be enabled by
adding this line. And so, again, we were just referring
strictly to astronomy and astrophysics, which has never had a
competed class of missions at that scale before.
Chairman Beyer. And one more thought, you--you know, with
the Mauna Kea Telescope was all interrupted by the protests
over how indigenous people were built into it, and you all
were--developed a community astronomy model of engagement. Is
there anything that we can do here in Congress in a bipartisan
effort to help with those community astronomy laws? I mean,
should there be?
Dr. Harrison. Rob, do you want to take that one?
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes. It's--you know, it's an excellent
question that I don't' have an immediate answer for. That
recommendation was largely aimed at our professional community.
Subjects like archaeology obviously have very--have activities
on cultural sites--sensitive cultural sites that are--you know,
are very sensitive, and those professions have developed sort
of codes of interaction that help. We don't think every new
project should be reinventing the wheel, and that's the nature
of our recommendation. I think something--endorsement or--from
Congress could be very helpful, but I'd have to think about it
a little longer, to be quite honest with you, sir. It's a
really, really good question.
Dr. Harrison. Yes. I mean, and if there are things--we'd be
happy to follow up with you after the hearing if things come
up.
Chairman Beyer. All right. Yes, thank you--I'm running the
office by myself too while we're--OK. Thank----
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes. Well, to fill--one--of course, if the
NSF does become a partner in the 30 Meter Telescope Project,
and Mauna Kea is still a site under consideration, of course,
Federal Government will have a role, of course. You know, it
will have to meet certain, you know, guidelines, you know,
broadly interpreting environmental impact, and cultural impact,
and so on. So I think that is an area where, you know,
government involvement will be critical. But I----
Chairman Beyer. It's----
Dr. Kennicutt [continuing]. That's a rather lame answer, I
suspect.
Chairman Beyer. No, no, it's fine. That was a lame
question. So--if--my last trivial question, Dr. Harrison, when
you're talking about inflation theory, and how it--you had this
uniform background radiation, so it--actually, like, it's
perfectly background--uniform, or else we wouldn't have had the
galaxies form. So one of the interesting speculations is was it
the original quantum variations at the very beginning that
created enough variation to give us the rest?
Dr. Harrison. That is indeed at the heart of it. And when I
said smooth, yes, obviously not perfectly smooth, but if you
look at the cosmic microwave background, the fluctuations are
really tiny. And it mean somehow that whole surface was in--
contact at some point, and that's sort of what leads to the
idea of inflation. But you're right, I mean, it's absolutely
astounding that those tiny, tiny little fluctuations somehow
grew to the amazing density variations----
Chairman Beyer. Um-hum.
Dr. Harrison [continuing]. We see today in the universe.
And that is--you know, I don't know, Rob, you can chime in, but
it--to me it just--it's amazing. Tremendous progress has been
made in numerical simulations, and understanding dark matter's
essential role. But yes, the seeds of these tiny fluctuations
probably came from inflation.
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes, in one part, and--less than one part in
100,000. And if not for the quantum nature of matter, we
wouldn't be here. It's just--it's quantum fluctuations that
grew. Those were the seeds. It's amazing. I----
Chairman Beyer. Well, I want to argue to Bill Foster is way
rarer than one part in 100,000, so let me give you the final
word, Dr. Foster.
Mr. Foster. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. Let's--actually,
I'd like to speak a little about the issues about optical and
radio interference, and the degree in which these may become
mission threatening, to the extent that you may have to start
incorporating them into your decadal planning. You know, one of
the projects that you recommend is prioritizing the Cosmic
Microwave Background--Stage 4 Observatory, CMB-S4, which is the
next generation ground-based cosmic microwave background
measurement. This project is of some parochial interest, since,
although it is a collaboration among a large number of
institutions, there are some--several in Illinois, like Argonne
National Lab, Fermilab, University of Chicago, and University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaigne.
Now, earlier this year the full Science Committee had a
hearing on spectrum needs for observations in Earth and space
science, and the hearing mostly focused on weather science, but
it really highlighted how anytime you're doing noise-limited
measurements, you have to worry a lot about man-made
interference. This has also become an issue with these
satellite constellations that are now being talked about and,
in fact, being launched. And so, you know, at what point does
that become something that you have to--you're going to need a
model for how the public, the world public, will behave, and
whether we're really going to be willing to, you know,
sacrifice the performance of our cell phone system for
scientific purposes?
You know, how do you--well, first of all, how close to
being a critical issue is that, where you can say, this is a
great experiment, but it's just not going to be possible 10
years from now? Are we anywhere near that point?
Dr. Kennicutt. Should I start, and then you take--I think,
you know, in the radio, this problem has been around for
decades, and the NSF in particular, coordinating with other
international bodies, has done an excellent job of regulating.
It's one of reason we have these radio quiet sites in Arecibo,
and Green Bank, and Socorro, and----
Mr. Foster. Yes.
Dr. Kennicutt [continuing]. And some----
Mr. Foster. Yes. I have to say, it just sounds like heaven
to be in one of these places where no one is allowed to have a
cell phone.
Dr. Kennicutt. That's right. But now the problem is--well,
5G, of course, is eroding more and more of the spectrum itself.
It--but the satellites are everywhere. That's--that--if the
satellites start broadcasting in these frequencies, that is the
real game changer. And--Fiona can address the optical satellite
constellations in a moment, but it's way above our pay grade to
know how you regulate it.
As you say, this impacts human--if you were absolutely
strict, and it's also international. It does no good at all for
one country, you know, us to set rules if every other country
in the world, of course, has satellites flying over us that
follow a different set. So I think this is one reason we think
government action, whether it's through the Federal executive
agencies, or through Congress, is absolutely essential, and we
think our best role is to empower the NSF, NASA, to the extent
it may need to be involved, to providing you with the
information that's needed. And----
Mr. Foster. Yes, so at least we can quantify, here is the
damage to science, as opposed to----
Dr. Kennicutt. Exactly.
Mr. Foster [continuing]. What is deployed.
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes.
Mr. Foster. And I think you rightly point out it's an
international issue.
Dr. Kennicutt. Yes. And it's----
Mr. Foster. And I'm very encouraged the Biden
Administration is really focused on engaging internationally on
a number of fronts, and it's clearly----
Dr. Kennicutt. I should answer your--it's not catastrophic
yet, but if current trends continue, it could be----
Mr. Foster. Well, OK. Now--yes, what about optical?
Dr. Harrison. Yes. So, you know, the most recent issue was
things like the Starlet Network from SpaceX, which aims to
provide, you know, cell phone coverage all over the globe
through very, very large arrays of satellites. And the issue
here is that, especially at dawn and dusk, you get glint off of
them, and you see them as streaks of light. In fact, you can go
out--you know, if you're in a dark spot--I live in L.A., so I'm
not, but you can see these streaks very prominently.
And the Vera Rubin Telescope is struggling with this a lot,
because their wide field surveys will be contaminated with
these streaks, and they have to figure out how to deal with it.
There are mitigating things to do. In fact, there was a hearing
in which Elon Musk sort of listened in, and they did try to
paint them black, but, you know, this is global problem.
And going back to Representative from New Mexico's point,
this could change the way we as human experience the night sky,
right? What does it mean if you go to the desert, and you look
at the horizon, and you see these streaks of light, and that
dominates over the stars and the sunset. And so this is a
problem, I think, that, again, you know, Congress and
legislation is going to have to--and international cooperation
is going to have to try to deal with. And I think it--again,
it's not catastrophic yet. The Vera Rubin Telescope has found
ways to deal with it, at least at the levels there are--they
are now.
And I realize that time is up, but I just very quickly want
to point out planetary protection has had similar challenges.
This is--you know, spacefaring nations that send probes to the
planets don't want to contaminate them with, you know, microbes
or things that might be interpreted by a future generation as
life. And that's coordinated through the--CoStar. And so there
are models where, you know, there is cooperation to try to
protect our precious scientific resources.
Mr. Foster. Yes. So I think just collaborating with your
international colleagues to at least quantify the damage, so
that policymakers understand the tradeoff they're making, and
not just sort of stumble blindly into it. Anyway, my time is
expired. I yield back, and thank the Chairman for a very good
hearing, and our witnesses as well.
Chairman Beyer. Yes. Thank you, Dr. Foster, very much. And
we are currently at the end. I just--before we bring the
hearing to a close, I just want to thank you for--this is my
favorite hearing of my seven years. And thank you so much for
reading the 835 papers that went into putting the decadal
survey together, thank you for co-chairing it. Mr. Russell,
thank you for keeping us all on track, and spending within our
limits, or something like that. And the record will remain open
for two weeks for additional statements from the Members, and
for any additional questions the Committee may want to ask the
witnesses. So, with that, the witnesses are excused, the
hearing's now adjourned, and we're formally over. Thank you all
very much, it was truly wonderful. And good luck. We look
forward to seeing you in 10 years, when we've accomplished
everything in your survey. Thank you.
Dr. Kennicutt. Bye.
[Whereupon, at 12:55 p.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Don Beyer

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
