- THE FUTURE OF FORECASTING: BUILDING A WEATHER-READY NATION ON ALL FRONTS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF FORECASTING:
BUILDING A WEATHER-READY NATION
ON ALL FRONTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 14, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

45-792 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                VACANCY
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

October 14, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Chairwoman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Witnesses:

Dr. Louis Uccellini, Assistant Administrator for Weather Services
and Director of the National Weather Service (NWS), National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    17

Mr. Cardell Johnson, Acting Director, Natural Resources and
Environment, U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)
Oral Statement...............................................    30
Written Statement............................................    32

Mr. John Werner, President, National Weather Service Employees
Organization (NWSEO)
Oral Statement...............................................    53
Written Statement............................................    56

Mr. Erik Salna, Associate Director for Education and Outreach,
International Hurricane Research Center, Extreme Events
Institute, Florida International University
Oral Statement...............................................    64
Written Statement............................................    66

Discussion.......................................................    75

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Louis Uccellini, Assistant Administrator for Weather Services
and Director of the National Weather Service (NWS), National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)..................   116

Mr. Cardell Johnson, Acting Director, Natural Resources and
Environment, U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO).......   125

Mr. John Werner, President, National Weather Service Employees
Organization (NWSEO)...........................................   126

Mr. Erik Salna, Associate Director for Education and Outreach,
International Hurricane Research Center, Extreme Events
Institute, Florida International University....................   128

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives
International Association of Emergency Managers--USA Council.   134

Report submitted by Representative Sean Casten, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``July Temperature Update: Faustian Payment Comes Due,''
James Hansen and Makiko Sato...............................   137

Report submitted by the Government Accountability Office
``National Weather Service--Additional Actions Needed to
Improve the Agency's Reform Efforts''......................   141

Letter submitted by American Property and Casualty Insurance
Association (APCIA)............................................   195

THE FUTURE OF FORECASTING:
BUILDING A WEATHER-READY NATION
ON ALL FRONTS

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 14, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson [Chairwoman of the Committee]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Johnson. OK, good morning. The meeting will come
to order, and without objection, the chair is authorized to
declare recess at any time.
Before I deliver my opening remarks, I wanted to note that
today, the Committee is meeting virtually. This hearing will
come to order. Without objection, the chair is authorized to
declare recess at any time, and before I deliver my opening
remarks, I wanted to note that today, the Committee is meeting
virtually.
I wanted to announce a couple of reminders to Members about
the conduct of this hearing. First, Members should keep their
video feed on as long as they are present in the hearing.
Members are responsible for their own microphones. Please also
keep your microphones muted unless you are speaking. Finally,
if Members have documents they wish to submit for the record,
please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose email address
was circulated prior to the meeting.
Good morning, and thank you to all of our witnesses for
joining us here today.
In April 2011, a tornado outbreak tore through Mississippi,
Alabama, and neighboring States. Over 300 lives were lost. This
was despite an average lead time of over 20 minutes before the
tornados arrived. What went wrong? The answer lies largely in
the way risk was communicated to communities, and how they
responded. These tragedies spurred the National Weather Service
(NWS) to begin implementing its plan to build a ``Weather-Ready
Nation.'' The vision was to make communities ready, responsive,
and resilient to such threats.
Over eight years later, October 2019, a tornado outbreak
tore through the South-Central USA. An EF-3 tornado hit the
Dallas suburbs and became the costliest tornado in Texas
history. However, unlike the tornados from 2011, there were no
life-threatening injuries or deaths. While luck certainly
played a role, the real difference was the ability of the
Weather Service forecasters to communicate the risk so that
communities could prepare. This is called Impact-Based Decision
Support Services, or IDSS. IDSS is just one of the many
improvements that have been made at the National Weather
Service over the past decade.
The Weather Service has built important relationships with
its core partners. These include emergency managers, academia,
the private sector, and State, local, and Tribal governments.
These partners work hand-in-hand with Weather Service
forecasters to provide the public with critical, actionable
weather and climate information. Developments in science and
technology are propelling us into the future of weather
forecasting. Additionally, the Weather Service's forecast
accuracy has improved markedly.
We owe much of this progress to our distinguished witness,
Dr. Louis Uccellini. Dr. Uccellini will be retiring as Director
of the National Weather Service at the end of this year. He has
served our country for 43 years. For the past 32 years, he has
been at the National Weather Service. And for the past nine
years, he has served as its Director. He has had an impressive
career, and whoever succeeds him as Director will have very
large shoes to fill.
But despite the successes of the Weather Service under his
tenure, there is still work to be done. Over the past decade,
there have been numerous external reviews of Weather Service
work force and operations. Each report outlined areas of
improvement and growth, and some issued recommendations. We
will discuss some of the recent Government Accountability
Office (GAO) reports on the Weather Service today. I commend
the Weather Service for its willingness to address the findings
of these reports and continuously working to improve.
World-class scientists are the beating heart of the Weather
Service. However, over the past decade, there has been a high
vacancy rate, especially among meteorologists. This has led to
stress, fatigue, and reduced morale. The Weather Service has
taken steps to address work force issues, but more work must be
done. I cannot emphasize enough that the Committee would like
to see these vacancies filled, and they must be filled soon.
Today, we'll discuss progress at the Weather Service and
where there is still room for growth. We'll examine how to best
position the Weather Service to provide robust IDSS across the
country. And we'll discuss what additional resources the
Weather Service may need to ensure that we are a truly Weather-
Ready Nation.
I hope today's hearing will serve as a roadmap for the next
Director of the National Weather Service, and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning, and thank you to our witnesses for joining us
here today.
In April 2011, a tornado outbreak tore through Mississippi,
Alabama, and neighboring states. Over 300 lives were lost. This
was despite an average lead time of over 20 minutes before the
tornados arrived. What went wrong? The answer lies largely in
the way risk was communicated to the communities, and how they
responded. These tragedies spurred the National Weather Service
to begin implementing its plan to build a ``Weather-Ready
Nation.'' The vision was to make communities ready, responsive,
and resilient to such threats.
Over 8 years later in October 2019, a tornado outbreak tore
through the South-Central U.S. An EF3 tornado hit the Dallas
suburbs and became the costliest tornado in Texas history.
However, unlike the tornadoes from 2011, there were no life-
threatening injuries or deaths. While luck certainly played a
role, the real difference was the ability of the Weather
Service forecasters to communicate the risk so communities
could prepare. This is called Impact-Based Decision Support
Services - or IDSS. IDSS is just one of the many improvements
that have been made at the National Weather Service over the
past decade.
The Weather Service has built important relationships with
its core partners. These include emergency managers, academia,
the private sector, and State, local, and Tribal governments.
These partners work hand-in-hand with Weather Service
forecasters to provide the public with critical, actionable
weather and climate information. Developments in science and
technology are propelling us into the future of weather
forecasting. Additionally, the Weather Service's forecast
accuracy has improved markedly.
We owe much of this progress to our distinguished witness,
Dr. Louis Uccellini. Dr. Uccellini will be retiring as Director
of the National Weather Service at the end of the year. He has
served our country for 43 years. For the past 32 years, he has
been at the National Weather Service. And for the past 9 years,
he has served as its director. He has had an impressive career,
and whoever succeeds him as Director will have very large shoes
to fill.
But despite the successes of the Weather Service under his
tenure, there is still work to be done. Over the past decade,
there have been numerous external reviews of Weather Service
workforce and operations. Each report outlined areas of
improvement and growth, and some issued recommendations. We
will discuss some of the recent Government Accountability
Office reports on the Weather Service today. I commend the
Weather Service for its willingness address the findings of
these reports and continuously working to improve.
World-class scientists are the beating heart of the Weather
Service. However, over the past decade, there has been a high
vacancy rate, especially among meteorologists. This has led to
stress, fatigue, and reduced morale. The Weather Service has
taken steps to address these workforce issues, but more work
must be done. I cannot emphasize enough that the Committee
would like to see these vacancies filled, and they must be
filled soon.
Today, we'll discuss progress at the Weather Service and
where there is still room for growth. We'll examine how to best
position the Weather Service to provide robust IDSS across the
country. And we'll discuss what additional resources the
Weather Service may need to ensure that we are a truly Weather-
Ready Nation.
I hope today's hearing will serve as a roadmap for the next
Director of the National Weather Service. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses, and I yield back.

Chairwoman Johnson. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lucas, our
distinguished Ranking Member of the Committee, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairwoman Johnson, for holding
today's hearing, and thank you to all of our witnesses for
offering your insight into our Nation's weather forecasting
future.
As you know, improving our forecasting abilities and making
our forecasts even more useful has been a high priority for me
as Ranking Member of this Committee, and I appreciate Dr.
Uccellini sharing his commitment and has dedicated his career
at the National Weather Service to better serving the public.
On a daily basis, the National Weather Service tools and
services produce critical information to businesses across the
country. Around this time of year in Oklahoma, NWS forecasts
alert farmers and ranchers to the first frost of the season,
helping us plan for weeks ahead. Towns and cities rely on
forecasts to plan for inclement weather, and forecasts issued
by local weather offices provide lifesaving information in the
event of severe weather.
In recent years, NWS has focused on efforts to become a
``Weather-Ready Nation.'' This was primarily done by
implementing Impact-Based Decision Support Services where the
National Weather Service forecast offices provide forecast
advice to local officials before and during a weather-related
emergency. These efforts have improved communication with the
public, helping families better understand the effects a
weather event can have on them personally. Dr. Uccellini and
the National Weather Service have also focused on the
implementation of the National Blend of Models, a method which
improved the speed and accuracy at which meteorologists can
issue alerts. By bringing together both the NWS and non-NWS
numerical weather prediction data, an accurate and consistent
model can be a starting point for forecasters across the
Nation.
But despite the many successes of the National Weather
Service, no government office is perfect, and challenges always
remain. At the forefront of my mind is how NOAA (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) and NWS can more
efficiently utilize and engage in commercial data buys to
improve our Nation's weather models. As made evident by the
National Blend of Models, a U.S. weather model cannot achieve
their full capacities without the support of private weather
enterprise.
Another challenge we are facing is inspiring and training
the next generation of STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) and meteorology students. Improving our
models, data, and information won't help us if there are no
professionals to utilize them in the next decade. That is why I
am pleased to welcome Mr. Erik Salna, Associate Director of
Education Outreach for the International Hurricane Research
Center (IHRC) at Florida International University (FIU), to the
witness panel. As a Weather-Ready Nation Ambassador, and
someone who works closely with university students, he can
offer a unique perspective on the future of forecasting in our
Nation, especially when it comes to engaging the community and
the next generation work force.
Before I close, I want to thank Dr. Uccellini for his
decades of service to the Federal Government. After a 43-year
career in public service, he'll be retiring at the end of the
new year--at the start of the new year, I should say. This
change in leadership makes now an opportune time to reflect on
the progress we've made and what challenges the National
Weather Service should tackle next.
I hope to use today's hearing to learn from all of our
expert witnesses on what the next challenges might be, and with
that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Johnson, for holding today's hearing.
And thank you to all our witnesses for offering your insight
into our nation's weather forecasting future. As you know,
improving our forecasting abilities and making our forecasts
even more useful has been a high priority for me as Ranking
Member of this Committee. I appreciate that Dr. Uccellini
shares this commitment and has dedicated his career at the
National Weather Service to better serving the public.
On a daily basis, NWS tools and services produce critical
information to businesses across the nation. Around this time
of year in Oklahoma, NWS forecasts alert farmers and ranchers
to the first freeze of the season, helping us plan for the
weeks ahead.
Towns and cities rely on forecasts to plan for inclement
weather. And the forecasts issued by local weather offices
provide lifesaving information in the event of severe weather.
In recent years, NWS has focused on efforts to become a
Weather-Ready Nation. This has primarily been done by
implementing Impact-based Decision Support Services, where NWS
forecast offices provide forecast advice to local officials
before and during a weather-related emergency. These efforts
have improved communication to the public, helping families
better understand the effects a weather event may have on them
personally.
Dr. Uccellini and NWS have also focused on the
implementation of the National Blend of Models, a method which
improved the speed and accuracy at which meteorologists can
issue forecasts. By bringing together both NWS and non-NWS
numerical weather prediction data, an accurate, consistent
model can be a starting point for forecasters across the
nation.
But despite the many successes of NWS, no government office
is perfect, and challenges always remain. At the forefront of
my mind is how NOAA and NWS can more efficiently utilize and
engage in commercial data buys to improve our nations' weather
models. As made evident by the National Blend of Models, U.S.
weather models cannot achieve their full capabilities without
support from the private weather enterprise. Another challenge
we are facing is inspiring and training the next generation of
STEM and meteorology students. Improving our models, data, and
information won't help us if there are no professionals to
utilize them in the next decade.
That is why I am pleased to welcome Mr. Erik Salna,
Associate Director for Education and Outreach for the
International Hurricane Research Center at Florida
International University, to the witness panel.
As a Weather-Ready Nation Ambassador and someone who works
closely with university students, he can offer a unique
perspective on the future of forecasting in our nation,
especially when it comes to engaging the community and the next
generation workforce.
Before I close, I'd like to thank Dr. Uccellini for his
decades of service to the federal government. After a 43-year
career in public service, he will be retiring at the start of
the new year. This change in leadership makes now an opportune
time to reflect on the progress we've made and what challenges
NWS should tackle next.
I hope to use today's hearing to learn from all of our
expert witness on what the next challenges might be. With that,
Madam Chair, I yield back.

Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Lucas.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time, I'd like to introduce our witnesses. First,
the esteemed Dr. Louis Uccellini. Dr. Uccellini is the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Assistant
Administrator for Weather Services, and Director of the
National Weather Service. In this role, he is responsible for
the day-to-day civilian weather operations for the United
States, its territories, adjacent waters, and ocean areas.
Prior to this position, he served as the director of National
Centers for the Environmental Prediction, the NCEP, for 14
years. He was responsible for directing and planning the
science technology and operations related to NCEP for nine
centers. He was the director of National Weather Service's
Office of Meteorology from 1994 to 1999, chief of the National
Weather Service's Meteorological Operations division from 1989
to 1994, and section head for the mesoscale analysis and
modeling section at the Goddard Space Flight Center's
Laboratory for Atmospheres from 1978 to 1989.
Our next witness is Mr. Cardell Johnson. Mr. Johnson is an
acting director of GAO's Natural Resources and Environment
Team. He oversees work on the Federal Government's management
of public lands and water resources, including national parks
and forests, mineral resources, coastal and marine resources,
endangered species, water supply, and National Weather Service
programs. Prior to joining GAO, Mr. Johnson served as the
director of quality assurance at USAID's (United States Agency
for International Development's) Office of Inspector General
where he developed organization's first quality assurance
framework. He also worked at the EPA (Environmental Protection
Agency) as a senior budget analyst and director of performance
improvements at EPA's Office of Inspector General.
Our third witness, Mr. John Werner. Mr. Werner is president
of the National Weather Service Employees Organization (NWSEO),
as well as the lead forecaster of the Weather Forecast Office,
the WFO, in Mobile, Alabama. He has served as the NWSEO
president for the past two years, in addition to serving as
lead forecaster of WFO Mobile. He also managed the office of
hydrology program and other program areas including radar,
marine, and aviation. Prior to joining the NWS, Mr. Werner
served 24 years as a meteorologist in the United States Air
Force, where he held numerous positions, including the
following: chief of Weather Station Operations, the Air Force
Special Operations Command, Directorate of Weather's Aerospace
Scientist, and chief environmental simulations team at the Air
Force Combat Climatology.
Our final witness is Mr. Erik Salna. Is Mr. Gimenez here?
OK. Well, would you like to introduce him?
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you so much. I really appreciate it, and
thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to extend my warmest welcome to Mr. Erik Salna, the
associate director of education and outreach for the Extreme
Events Institute at the International Hurricane Research Center
at Florida International University in Miami. FIU is a top-tier
research university located in my district in Miami, and that
has over $237 million in annual research activity. Mr. Salna
personally has over 25 years' experience as a broadcast
meteorologist, providing live continuous coverage for
hurricanes, tornados, and flooding. At FIU, Mr. Salna has
focused on education and outreach that helps reduce the impact
of natural hazard events.
I had visited the IHRC and seen firsthand their impressive
research on storm surge, economic loss modeling, and wind
engineering. In fact, their Wall of Wind is just one of the two
NSF- (National Science Foundation-) supported facilities
dedicated to wind research. Mr. Salna is also a full member of
the American Meteorological Society, the National Weather
Association. He earned an M.S. in meteorology from Northern
Illinois University, and a B.S. in physical geography with an
emphasis in meteorology from the University of Illinois.
I look forward to hearing from Mr. Salna and how FIU can
help assist Federal agencies improve weather forecasting in not
only the near future, but also in future for our children and
grandchildren.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much.
Now, as our witnesses should know, you will have five
minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will
be included in the record for the hearing [inaudible] spoken
testimony, we'll begin questions and each Member will have five
minutes to question the panel.
We will start with Dr. Uccellini.

TESTIMONY OF DR. LOUIS UCCELLINI,

ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR WEATHER SERVICES

AND DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE (NWS),

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC

ADMINISTRATION (NOAA)

Dr. Uccellini. Thank you, Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking
Member Lucas, and Members of this Committee. It is my honor to
testify before you today on the current status of and future
opportunities for the National Weather Service.
To say I have seen significant change at the Weather
Service would be an understatement. I entered the National
Weather Service Meteorologic Operations Division in 1989. At
that time, paper weather maps were still being used at the NWS
operational centers, and at the center I came in to, there was
no digital capability.
Fast forward to today. We operate in a completely digital
environment, accessing data from the entire weather enterprise,
and providing advance numerical prediction guidance from a
seamless suite of model systems ranging from short-range
forecasts to seasonal predictions, covering the domain from the
sun to the sea.
The National Weather Service makes its life and property
saving missions through the provision of weather, water, and
climate services. A mission statement that includes analysis,
forecast warnings, and now Impact-Based Decision Support
Services delivered by our forecasters from Guam, the southwest
Pacific Island States, to the middle Atlantic Ocean, and from
Alaska to the Caribbean. That's about 1/3 of the Northern
Hemisphere. We have made remarkable progress in predicting
extreme weather and water events, now out to a week in advance
in some instances.
But as we learned from the horrific 2011 severe weather
events, we also need to go beyond forecasts and warnings. We
have to address the last mile to connect this information to
decisionmakers, emergency managers, and public safety officials
before, during, and after extreme events.
From the tragic events in 2011, the concept of the Weather-
Ready Nation emerged and is now embraced by not only the
Weather Service, but the entire weather enterprise, and
especially as we approach an impending severe weather event, we
all work together. We work to ensure that accurate and
consistent products and services are provided to all public
safety officials at all government levels, and we work together
to save lives and property based on information we provide that
is tied directly to their life-saving decisions. This is done
through the impact bases and support services that specifically
go to the public safety officials, [inaudible].
Our success to build a Weather-Ready Nation is illustrated
by a noted decrease in fatalities during extreme events, and
testimonials from our partners which are included in my written
testimony. This demonstrates how we have embraced the Weather-
Ready Nation and the IDSS concepts, and that success is based
on the trusted relationships with emergency managers and other
public safety officials developed over the past 10 years.
At the same time, you have helped us make enormous
structural changes to the National Weather Service budget
planning and execution process. Together, we created the six
portfolios aligned with executing the field forecast process,
accelerating science and technology advances into the National
Weather Service from a larger research community, and the
private sector, and addressing our critical facility needs. The
entire budget process is designed to support and advance our
people in the field in order to meet our mission.
We also work hard to streamline the hiring process and
increase our staffing levels to a point now that we haven't
seen since 2015, with an increase of nearly 150 staff since
2017. We have also placed a renewed emphasis for our work force
to better reflect the communities we serve.
Our research and modeling has kept pace and in some cases
led the rest of the world, but we got a long way to go. Our
push forward with a unified forecast system is well on its way.
We created it, the Earth Prediction Innovation Center, EPIC, to
accelerate that [inaudible] process, that research to operation
process, and we've also been improving our dissemination system
and developing a National Blend of Models as a first step in
the forecast process that will help the forecasters get the
gridded products out faster and unlock time directed toward the
IDSS.
So, on the eve of my retirement, I can say that I'm leaving
the Weather Service in a better place than I found it. I have
briefed you on many issues over the years, and I've watched as
your confidence in us has returned and deepened. Your support
of the National Weather Service is invaluable, and we will need
that support even more now as we move into the future marked by
more extreme events, fueled by the changing warmer climate,
such as the record recent rainfalls, flooding, extended and
flash droughts, the wildfires, extreme heat, extreme cold, and
of course, the destructive hurricanes making landfall along the
Gulf and Atlantic Coasts, and the severe weather outbreaks that
have devastated rural and suburban communities, all of which
points to the increasing importance of the Impact-based
Decision Support Services, which we have now just recently
added to the National Weather Service Mission Statement.
Serving our Nation and leading the Federal Government's
finest, most dedicated work force has been my privilege and
profound honor. I will be watching the National Weather Service
with respect, pride, and gratitude for everything the most
dedicated employees in the Federal Government bring to their
job every day, and with a big thank you for what you do to
empower them.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Uccellini follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much.
Now, Mr. Johnson.

TESTIMONY OF MR. CARDELL JOHNSON, ACTING DIRECTOR,

NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT,

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE (GAO)

Mr. Johnson. Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and
Members of the Committee, good morning, and thank you for the
opportunity to discuss our work on the National Weather
Service's reform efforts and staffing challenges.
While the National Weather Service has substantially
followed many leading practices for effective reform, these
efforts could benefit from additional actions and continued
attention. My statement today discusses opportunities for the
agency to enhance leadership focus and attention, and to better
involve employees and key stakeholders in the reform efforts. I
will also discuss longstanding human capital challenges that
may hinder the agency's reform efforts.
So, the first opportunity for improvement is enhancing
leadership focus and attention. The National Weather Service
stood up a Program Management Office to oversee the
implementation of agency reforms; however, the agency's
approach to staffing the office has not provided it with the
capacity to effectively implement the reforms. Key leadership
and staff positions are rotational or part-time. In 5 years, 7
officials rotated through the director role. Also, some staff
found it difficult to balance workload from competing
priorities. This rotational and part-time staffing model
resulted in rework, disruption to projects, and increased risk
of reforms failing. According to one senior official, these
reforms are one of the most important things National Weather
Service is doing, but no one is assigned to do it.
So, we recommended the agency revise its approach to
staffing the Program Management Office (PMO) to improve
leadership and staff continuity, and capacity for its reform
efforts.
The second opportunity to improve reform implementation is
better involving employees and stakeholders in the process. The
concern here is that some staff did not feel that the agency
was being transparent about the reforms, and there are also
concerns that the agency has not sufficiently communicated with
staff in the field about the reform efforts, and there are
concerns that these reforms could lead to office closures and
job losses. Our previous work found that failure to adequately
address issues related to people and culture can lead to
reforms being unsuccessful. Therefore, we're recommending that
the National Weather Service develop a two-way communications
strategy that outlines how the agency will listen and respond
to employees' concerns about the reform efforts.
In addition to implementing these opportunities for
improvement, the National Weather Service will need to address
its human capital challenges. Vacancies and hiring are
longstanding issues that could affect the agency's capacity to
implement these reforms. In 2017, we found that vacancies and a
lengthy hiring process led managers and staff to take on
additional responsibilities, work additional forecasting
shifts, and adjust or cancel leave plans. And as a result of
this, officials indicated that managers and staff experienced
stress and reduced morale, all of which may impact successful
reform.
So, in conclusion, we do recognize that the National
Weather Service has taken steps to reform its operations and
workforce. Further addressing leadership and staff continuity,
capacity, and broader staffing challenges, as well as
effectively engaging employees and key stakeholders, would
strengthen the agency's reform efforts and, by doing so, move
the agency closer to achieving its vision of creating that
Weather-Ready Nation that is responsive and resilient to
extreme weather events.
Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and Members of
the Committee, this concludes my oral statement, and I'm happy
to respond to questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Voice. You're still muted, Ms. Johnson.
Chairwoman Johnson. So sorry. I was wondering why I got no
response.
Thank you very much, Mr. Johnson. We'll go now to Mr.
Werner.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JOHN WERNER,

PRESIDENT, NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE

EMPLOYEES ORGANIZATION (NWSEO)

Mr. Werner. Good morning, and thank you, Chairwoman
Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and Committee Members.
As you know, the National Weather Service Employees
Organization represents 3,300 employees at over 160 National
Weather Service offices nationwide. These are the folks
responsible for the preparation and delivery of the Nation's
forecasts, warnings, and Impact-based Decision Support Services
that save lives, protect property, and enhance the national
economy 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, all year long.
Now, despite an ever-expanding mission, the National
Weather Service has close to 500 fewer employees than it did 10
years ago. Most of our vacant employees are operational and
classified as emergency essential. These empty seats lead to
serious consequences. Service assessments conducted by the
Weather Service following 13 major storms that occurred between
2008 and 2018 found that the ability of the National Weather
Service to protect lives during these events was compromised
due to already inadequate staffing at weather forecast offices
or river forecast centers.
Now, according to a 2015 study conducted by McKinsey and
Company, the workload of most forecast offices exceeds the
available meteorologist workforce. In May 2017, the GAO
released a study requested by Members of this Committee which
revealed that the vacancy rate in National Weather Service
operational units has reached a point where employees are
unable at times to perform key tasks. They further found that
staff experienced stress, fatigue, and reduced morale resulting
from their efforts to cover for vacancies due to lack of time
off and loss of training. According to the GAO, the National
Weather Service managers admit that employees are demoralized
because they had to cover the workload for multiple vacancies.
Since the GAO and McKinsey studies were conducted,
understaffing at National Weather Service has not improved. The
chart that will be displayed shows that the number of non-
managerial, non-supervisory employees on board over the past 10
years according to the data the National Weather Service
routinely provides to us, the latest data depicted here is from
July of this year. We did receive updated numbers yesterday
after we had submitted this graph. So, as of September 25,
there has been a slight increase to 3,400 from the numbers that
we have been provided.
[The chart follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Werner. The National Weather Service Employees
Organization has from the outset pushed for and supported the
concept of Impact-based Decision Support Services. Going
forward, we just need to appropriately resource it to sustain
it. Adequate staffing is critical to meeting the current and
growing demands for our Decision Support Service to key
partners in emergency management community at all levels of
government.
One initiative reported by management to free up more
forecaster time is the use of the National Blend of Models
(NBM) as a starting point for our gridded database. We are
unsure at this time how much processing time this may save, if
any. We believe the challenge with using the NBM as a starting
point is to ensure the forecast is not degraded by the loss of
local weather expertise that our experienced forecasters add to
the process.
As widely reported in the media, National Weather Service's
current dissemination and information infrastructure has proven
to be unreliable. We are, though, encouraged to see that the
House Appropriations Committee recommended a funding increase
of close to $37 million in the Fiscal Year 2022 budget to
improve dissemination. A robust and stable infrastructure is a
must.
Another factor which may hinder the building of a Weather-
Ready Nation is the unequal distribution of experienced
forecasters and employees, and employees departing from the
National Weather Service due to the lack of mobility. Both of
these are a result of the implementation of the 2019 GS
(General Schedule) 5-12 Meteorologist Career Ladder
Progression. The focus has been placed on just filling
vacancies with new hires, and not enough on maintaining a
healthy experience balance among the meteorologist staff at
offices who have had a large turnover during the past couple
years. And we need to strive to maintain current employees,
many of whom are frustrated due to lack of opportunity to move
to a more desirable location, and many are now considering
careers outside of the National Weather Service.
In closing, I would like to thank this Committee for its
support of employees that the National Weather Service
Employees Organization represents. Aside from our significant
resource and process challenges, I truly believe that the
National Weather Service, along with the rest of NOAA, is a
fantastic organization with an unparalleled mission, supported
by employees whose dedication and passion are second to none.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Werner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much.
And our final witness is Mr. Salna.

TESTIMONY OF MR. ERIK SALNA,

ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR FOR EDUCATION AND OUTREACH,

INTERNATIONAL HURRICANE RESEARCH CENTER,

EXTREME EVENTS INSTITUTE,

FLORIDA INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY

Mr. Salna. Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. Ranking Member, and
Congressman Gimenez, and Members of the Committee. It is an
honor to be with you today representing Florida International
University, Miami's public research university. We are excited
to share our insights as a Weather-Ready Nation Ambassador.
Investments from the State of Florida and Federal partners,
including NOAA and the National Science Foundation, have
advanced our research at FIU. NSF has designated the Wall of
Wind, which replicates a Category 5 hurricane, as one of the
Nation's eight major experimental facilities under the Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure Program, and we are
privileged to have the National Hurricane Center and the
National Weather Service Miami Office on our main campus here
in Miami.
Our International Hurricane Research Center, or IHRC, was
designated the very first Weather-Ready Nation Ambassador in
south Florida in 2014. Here is a brief snapshot of how Weather-
Ready Nation has made an impact in south Florida.
To begin with, Weather-Ready Nations are NOAA's boots on
the ground. IHRC education and outreach takes hurricane
mitigation and preparedness into the community through National
NOAA Weather Service partnerships. This includes high
visibility public education events like the Eye of the Storm
and successful hurricane exhibits at the Museum of Discovery
and Science in Fort Lauderdale, and our Spanish-language
hurricane website, huracanes.fiu.edu, which speaks to the
country's changing demographics, and partnering with the
National Hurricane Center on the Hurricane Awareness Tour, and
our K-12 programs prepare our youngest and next generation of
Weather-Ready Nation Ambassadors. This includes teacher
workshops and the Wall of Wind challenge, which inspires
students to pursue STEM degrees by challenging teams to develop
innovative and mitigation concepts which are then tested at the
Wall of Wind.
Now, many top research universities like FIU are Weather-
Ready Nation Ambassadors, and we literally take our science to
the people. At FIU, our research has a purpose. Either we
reduce risk, or risk will reduce us. Through NHC's joint
hurricane test bed, FIU's CEST (Coastal and Estuarine Storm
Tide) storm surge model is helping the center storm surge
forecasting, and we are collaborating to develop a coastal
forecast system in the Caribbean region. We work with NOAA's
Hurricane Research Division and the Environmental Modeling
Center on improving hurricane forecast models, specifically
rapid intensification. And alongside USAID, we are also focused
on disaster risk reduction in Latin America and the Caribbean.
So, building a Weather-Ready Nation is a team effort. FIU's
success as a Weather-Ready Nation Ambassador comes from a
multi-partner approach, working together with NOAA and the
National Weather Service. And as we move forward, here are some
thoughts on how we can work with Congress and NOAA to
strengthen the future Weather-Ready Nation. Continued
collaboration in investments can enhance weather forecasting
research, including hurricane tracking intensity, to improve
warnings; storm surge modeling research to improve public
evacuations; and social science research to improve the linkage
between National Weather Service products and public
understanding. The best forecast in the world is useless if the
public doesn't respond or hasn't taken the needed actions to
protect itself.
Also, future work force. At FIU, we believe that our
demography is our destiny, and that of the country. NOAA has a
great opportunity to collaborate with existing research
university partners, in particular urban public minority-
serving institutions like FIU, to recruit a highly skilled and
diverse work force. Communicating weather readiness to diverse
and more digital audiences. NOAA and its Ambassadors must reach
broader, more diverse audiences. The FIU Spanish language
website is just one example. In vulnerable populations, embrace
building a Weather-Ready Nation for all by addressing
vulnerable populations' needs and resource inequities.
At the end of the day, it's all about people, families, and
livelihoods. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you
today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Salna follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you so very much. At this time, I
would like to ask the unanimous consent to submit a letter for
the record from the President of the International Association
of Emergency Managers in the support of the National Weather
Service, and of Dr. Uccellini's tenure of the Weather Service.
Without objection, so ordered.
First questions will begin, and I will recognize myself for
five minutes.
Dr. Uccellini, what concrete steps has the National Weather
Service taken to address gender and racial diversity gaps in
the work force?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, we have certainly have renewed our
focus on the issues, not only from a Weather Service
perspective, but from a NOAA perspective. And we're actually
showing success in that regard in the number of women and
minorities that we're bringing into the National Weather
Service. And you know, we're actually not happy in the sense
that the--we always strive to do better in these areas, so I
think it's important to focus on what we're doing now to
improve and to retain.
This is also another important issue for both women on--in
the National Weather Service and minorities. We're seeing
retention rates that are, quite frankly, in the minority area
that are not acceptable. So, we're working those issues as
well.
Chairwoman Johnson. Well, thank you.
Why is having a robust, dynamic, and diverse work force
critical for advancing weather forecasting?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, we certainly embrace the notion that
we need to look like the communities we serve, and the Nation
itself is becoming more diverse. I think everybody recognizes
that. Important to us, we have large segments of the United
States in which Spanish might be a primary language, so we have
to deal with those issues. We have our urban environments that
are particularly vulnerable to heat, as an example, and
pollution. We need to better focus on that and work with the
communities that suffer from that.
Now, having stated that, we showed a lot of success in
areas over the past 20, 25 years in working with indigenous
people, the native Alaskan communities, the tribal nations, the
Southwest Pacific Island States. So, we believe we have a
foundation to work from to address the issues as they are
emerging today.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you.
Any witness would like to comment? OK.
The National Weather Service initiated a series of reforms
in 2017 to help it achieve a strategic vision of building a
Weather-Ready Nation. Two of the main goals are to free up
staff time and improve service to partners. These initiatives
are in various stages of completion. The 2021 GAO report makes
recommendations to the National Weather Service on its reform
activities, the Evolve Program and the National Blend of
Models.
Mr. Johnson, do you think that is the most important step
the Weather Service needs to take to implement these reforms?
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you for that question.
We would say that successful reform is rooted in having
leadership and staff continuity and capacity, as well as
effective communication. So, the most important step that the
National Weather Service can take is to provide that leadership
and staff continuity and capacity to the Program Management
Office that oversees the implementation of these reforms. That
continuity and capacity is going to ensure that the
organization has the tools, skills, and resources to see these
reforms through.
And at the same time, the National Weather Service would
need to effectively engage its employees and key stakeholders.
That will help employees and stakeholders understand the nature
of the changes, gaining their buy-in and ownership of them. So,
yes, the important step is having that continuity and capacity
and effective communication.
Chairwoman Johnson. OK.
Many of the Weather Service's staff and hiring and
operation issues discussed in the GAO report are longstanding.
What do you think has been hindering the Weather Service in
making more progress?
Mr. Johnson. Well, to be fair, you know, these reforms--
implementing agency reforms is pretty difficult and hard to do,
and it's just going to take some time.
But with that said, there are two issues, staffing and
transparency. With respect to staffing, the National Weather
Service has longstanding challenges with work force capacity
and continuity. Our work has identified increasing vacancy
rates, a lengthy hiring process, and challenges with staff
balancing workload. So, we point for the need for the Weather
Service to complete a work force analysis to address those, and
the National Weather Service has actually recognized this and
they have this on their plan to do.
And again, I would go back to--with respect to
transparency, the need for effective engagement with
stakeholders. So, what we've heard is that, you know, the
National Weather Service has taken steps to communicate
information. I do want to be fair with that. But the staff that
we've talked to, they said that receiving email updates or
posting information to the internet page is just not really
sufficient for the massive amount of change that's taking
place, and they're concerned about the potential impact. So, we
would recommend to address that, they develop a transparent
two-way communication strategy that outlines how they're going
to listen and respond.
So, those two things, the transparency and the staffing, if
they address those, we believe that they will be able to move
forward. Thank you.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. My time is
expired.
I now recognize our Ranking Member of the Committee, Mr.
Lucas, for five minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Uccellini, it's always been a pleasure having you
testify before this Committee, and you and I have worked
together on the best policies to improve weather forecasting
for the better part of a decade. So, I want to take a wide
angle and kind of look backward before looking forward, and you
can be as specific as you'd like.
But my question is what has the Weather Act of 2017 meant
to the weather community?
Dr. Uccellini. I think the Weather Act has been the most
important legislation and indication of support from this
government in my entire career in the meteorological community,
which spans 50 years. We embrace the Weather Act and all five
titles, all five segments of it, to move not only the Weather
Service forward, but the larger enterprise forward, including
the other components of NOAA, the research satellite components
especially. It's just been an enormous foundational basis for
moving forward since it came out in April of--I believe it was
2017. It's just been tremendous.
One of the examples is the recognition that our job doesn't
end with the forecast and warning, and authorized us to provide
the Impact-based Decision Support Services over all government
levels. We have embraced that, and to the point--I would say
that our work force has embraced it, and we've been very
transparent with our work force on this.
I should note that I've visited more than 120 offices, and
other leaders within the Weather Service are right up there
next to those numbers as well, engaging with the work force for
hours both in the office and over dinner, which goes on for
hours because we are trying to be transparent here. And this
IDSS has been a critical reform in going beyond the forecast
and warning and engaging these decisionmakers, and I believe we
need to continue on that track.
So, in the Weather Act and research, the commercial aspect,
the private sector, the tsunami aspect, the seasonal and sub-
seasonal, all of the above, it's been a tremendous boost for us
moving forward.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Doctor, and I appreciate those
comments because we live in a very cynical time, both in
Congress and the general public, but the fact is we do good
work and this Committee did good work in 2017. I appreciate
your acknowledgement.
Now, that said, looking from this point forward, what are
you observations about what is missing from the Weather Act, or
what's still needed within the weather community to maximize
our forecasting abilities? Look forward now.
Dr. Uccellini. Well, the--we're living in a time when we
can see it. We can visualize that the impacts of these systems
and the intensity of these weather systems are increasing.
We're seeing it in the fire aspect. We don't have fire seasons
anymore; we have fire years. They burn hotter and they move
faster. The extreme heat, extreme cold, the flooding, the
rainfall rates. I mean, we're seeing rainfall rates in what we
call extra tropical latitudes where the United States sits
itself, we're seeing rainfall rates that haven't been observed
before, hourly rainfall rates. That last flood in New York City
that flooded subways is the first time that I've been able to
find that subways have been flooded from rainfall. They've been
flooded from surges off of the ocean.
So, we are living in times where the demand for what we do
is going to grow, and it's going to be essential for people to
respond to these types of events. This is a research issue. The
research community has to be involved. It's an operational
issue with respect to the technology and science we have to
bring into our operations to address these types of systems
that have not been observed before. And then we have the social
science issue that connects our forecasts and warnings to
decisionmaking and accounts for the risk factors.
I mean, we're confronted with how do you communicate these
impacts on something that people haven't observed before? OK.
That's a big task to get people to respond, and that's not only
on us. It's on the public safety officials at every government
level that have to work these issues.
Mr. Lucas. Well, Doctor, I'll simply conclude by saying
thank you for your decades and decades of public service. There
are good people in all branches of Federal Government, and
you're a classic example.
With that, I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much.
We will now move to the staff to recognize Members in
proper order.
Staff. Ms. Bonamici is recognized.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, and thank you, Chair
Johnson and Ranking Member Lucas, and thank you to our
witnesses. As someone who's spent a lot of time working on the
Weather Research and Forecasting Innovation Act of 2017 with
Mr. Lucas and others, I appreciate your question, Mr. Lucas,
and I also appreciate your response, Dr. Uccellini.
That being said, in 2018 I did join my Committee colleagues
in requesting a study from the GAO regarding the National
Weather Service's efforts to reform and modernize under the
Evolve Program. In its most recent study published in response
to our request, the GAO found that the National Weather Service
had adhered to practices for effective reform, but has not
adequately implemented several recommendations including a
communication strategy that listens and responds to employee
concerns about the Evolve Program. So, according to the study,
NWS officials planned on finalizing a communications strategy
by the end of Fiscal Year 2021, which ended a few weeks ago.
So, Mr. Werner, will you please explain further detail how
the lack of a clear two-way communication strategy has affected
members of the National Weather Service Employees Organization,
what improvements you would like to see, and the benefits of a
more effective two-way communications strategy?
Mr. Werner. Thank you, Congresswoman Bonamici. There's a
lot to unpackage in that.
I think we have started communicating some over the past
year, but there has been a distinct lack of transparency, and
you understand if you go ahead and do something in a vacuum at
the top level, it's a mile high and then you come down with a
great idea, maybe it doesn't translate well into the field. I
think it's a benefit to get this energy, you know, come up with
visions, come up with ideas, but let's integrate the whole
process from the field offices to the regional level to the
national level, so everybody's kind of on the same page. Where
do we want to go, but what's the best way to implement this so
it'll actually work?
We talk about the NBM, the National Blend of Models, being
a timesaver. Well, we have a region out there who's been using
a Blend of Models for 10 years in the extended forecast.
Another region has been using it for five years. So, these are
not things that haven't been tried at the grassroots level to
try to go ahead and improve the forecast, and to improve time.
So, communication transparency is absolutely important, and I
think everyone knows if you do--if the information is not
flowing, then the rumors start and the conspiracies start. We
need to go ahead and have that open dialog, and be transparent.
What do we want to do, and then let the employees decide how
are we going to do that? Let them be involved.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much.
Mr. Werner. I hope that answered your question.
Ms. Bonamici. Yes, it did. I appreciate that. Thank you so
much, and I look forward to further information about how
changes will be implemented.
And so, I have another question. In the past three decades,
we know the United States has sustained more than 300 weather
disasters, costing the Nation more than $2 trillion, and
climate change has increased the severity and frequency of
these extreme weather events. In the Pacific Northwest, my home
in Oregon, we experienced record-breaking heatwaves that killed
hundreds of people, including here in my home State. Clearly,
accurate and accessible forecasts are more important than ever,
and though technological improvements have increased the
accuracy of forecasts and warning, there are still reliability
issues.
So, in March of this year, the NWS's network crashed and
impeded public access to its lifesaving services, as well as
the NWS chat function that's used by thousands to discuss
hazardous events in real time.
So, Dr. Uccellini, last year NOAA released its cloud
strategy which outlines the administration's goal for
accelerating cloud-based service integration. So, will you
please explain the progress and the timeline for integration of
the National Weather Service data into a commercial cloud
platform, and elaborate on the extent to which these
information system upgrades will prevent future outages and
failures?
Dr. Uccellini. OK. So, first of all, I want to thank the
Hill for providing extra resources in the Fiscal Year 2021
budget, a $1.5 million increase in our dissemination effort. We
were finally able to get the plan through the system and up to
the Hill that we've been developing over the last several
years, and that does include a cloud smart approach to how we
are advancing capabilities.
With respect to--I think perhaps you are referring to the
part of our dissemination program which involves the chat, the
ability to chat not only within the Weather Service, but with
our partners outside, a very critical function. And with the
resources, we've--we're not only dealing with the transition of
what has been the legacy system developed many years ago, which
was not transportable into the new technology. So, we used the
resources to transition that and we're about a month away from
the first abilities to run the chat on the new system.
But we're also in parallel--and this gets you to the
cloud--we're working with the--to a competitive process the
slack demo now is ongoing, which is cloud-based, and we, you
know, we have about another--we just started in October with
the demo. We'll go another several weeks and then assess, and
then make decisions from that assessment. We take a very--as I
think Cardell Johnson was point to, we take a very systematic
approach to any changes in our operational systems with our
users fully engaged, as we're doing with this demo, including
the emergency management community, and especially the
emergency management community, but others also in the
community.
So, that's an example. We're also transitioning functions
that have been on a dissemination platform that perhaps can be
moved onto other platforms, and our first effort in that
involves the multi-radar multi-spectrum development efforts,
and we showed success in that and we're now considering other
functions as well as the resources are made available. These
transitions of operational systems do take resources, and we
take a very careful approach with this.
So, those are examples----
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Dr. Uccellini.
Dr. Uccellini. We certainly--OK. I'm sorry.
Ms. Bonamici. Dr. Uccellini, my time is expired, but as I
yield back, I want to thank you so much for your years of
service. You've had an illustrious career, and we all
appreciate your work and wish you the very best.
I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Uccellini. Thank you.
Staff. Mr. Posey.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much.
Staff. Mr. Posey is recognized.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, and thank you, Chairwoman Johnson,
for holding this meeting. Dr. Uccellini, thank you so much for
your years of dedicated service, wonderful, wonderful service.
As it stands now, NOAA's ocean service and the National
Centers for Coastal Ocean Science are the de facto leaders for
harmful algal blooms forecasting. Now, they've developed an
algal bloom monitoring system for locating, monitoring, and
quantifying algal blooms in coastal and lake regions across the
country.
My question is what role does the National Weather Service
play in harmful algal blooms forecasting, especially when it
comes to the effect that severe storms like hurricanes have on
algal blooms conditions and movement?
Dr. Uccellini. So, one of the things we do is we partner
with the National Ocean Service (NOS) that actually runs the
forecast models for the bays, the coastal areas, and the
harmful algal bloom. We work with them in terms of providing
the computing capacity, for example. They run those models on
what is looked as the weather operational models, and the
reason is that they need weather parameters from our own models
to actually drive components of their prediction system. After
the forecasts are made, we have positioned the relevant
forecast offices--and this has been, you know, embraced by--
especially in the local offices--embraced by the work force in
those offices to serve as service outlets, in a sense, and work
very diligently with the partners at NOS and with the people
receiving the information that make decisions like along the
Gulf Coast in Florida, and also in Lake Erie.
So, there are ``operational systems'' that we work with our
partners at NOS and deliver those forecasts and work with the
decisionmakers accordingly.
Mr. Posey. Well, thank you.
Can you think of the National Weather Service's ability to
do more for harmful algal blooms forecasting? Can you think of
what else we might be able to do?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, the science and the abilities actually
lie in the National Ocean Service and in the Oceanic and
Atmospheric Research Group, OAR, for example, the Great Lakes
Environmental Research Lab. We work with them as they're
developing these new advances, and I can say that we learn from
them. It's really been one of the learning experiences as to--
for me, and recognizing that the harmful algal bloom in
freshwater lakes, for example, like Lake Erie can actually be
more toxic than what happens along the coast. And I know in
Florida, you have that combination of Lake Okeechobee water and
the Gulf water coming together, and providing these blooms over
a 2-, 3-month period.
So--but from a science perspective, we rely on those other
components. From a service perspective, we are working with
them to make sure that we can get the connectivity with the
local decisionmakers that need this information. Whether it is
the water, whether it's the fish, the shellfish folks,
whatever. So, it's really a true partnership within NOAA that's
bringing this expertise and this ability through the service
pipelines into the communities.
Mr. Posey. How important is it to understand coupled ocean
atmosphere interactions for weather forecasting?
Dr. Uccellini. Oh, it's very--it's one of the main factors
we have to work toward to improve ourselves in the future. It's
not just the atmosphere for us, it's the entire earth system.
It's earth system science, and the ocean atmospheric coupling
is an incredible component of that.
My colleague, my leader at OAR, Craig McClain, handed me a
bumper sticker that says ``If you like your 7-day weather
forecast, thank an oceanographer.'' I have that in my office
that I've not been in for about--I would say now 82 weeks.
So, but it is true, and I've been the co-chair for the
World Meteorological Organization for the effort to bring the
ocean and atmospheric communities together as organizations to
address these issues into the future. So, it's not just in the
United States, it really is truly a global issue. We've got to
bring a coupled approach in the entire earth system forward to
advance our forecast capabilities.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much. I see my time is expired,
and I yield back. Thank you.
Staff. Mr. Bera is recognized.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, and I want to thank the Chairwoman and
the Ranking Member for having this hearing. Obviously, in my
home State of California, and my home district, and in Northern
California, in the Sacramento region, we've been dealing with
devastating wildfires, as the whole West Coast and the Western
United States has, and unfortunately, it's becoming the norm.
Maybe this is a question for Dr. Uccellini.
You know, one of the causes of these fires are the high
winds that are coming through Northern California, which is
leading to electricity shutoff decisions, et cetera. Could you
talk a little bit about how NOAA and the National Weather
Service--the role that they play in providing some of that
information for these shutoff decisions, which really do affect
large blocks of Northern California, and what additional
research we might be able to support to provide better
decisionmaking on these shutoff decisions?
Dr. Uccellini. OK. Well, we do provide our forecast--we
make it available to all components of the commercial sector,
and, of course, the public safety officials, government
officials, that have to make tough decisions. And, you know,
that's our forecast information directly from the models, our
forecast information directly from the National Blend of
Models, and the forecasts that come from the local offices,
which are all consistent, and they all get more of a tailored
approach to the community. However, many of the--if not all of
the utility companies now either have their internal
meteorological groups, or they have private sector firms that
provide information, and those private sector firms we work in
partnership also to ensure consistency in what we're putting
forward.
So, with respect to the decision process that the utilities
make, they have the information stream to them, and one of the
things that I can say as an enterprise, as a community, we're
able to make these forecasts for extreme events and extreme
wind events out--you know, with a greater level of accuracy and
certainty out to a week in advance. So I can imagine that
there's a tremendous lead time and risk assessment that's going
on inside those utility companies to make those decisions, but
we're not part of that decision process. We're providing the
information into it, and they tailor it and make those
decisions. But I would say that, as an entity, the lead time
and accuracy for these forecasts has been actually pretty
remarkable.
Mr. Bera. Right. And, you know, maybe for any of the
witnesses, also my home district--obviously Sacramento
historically has been a very flood-prone region, and, you know,
you wouldn't know it today if you went to Folsom Lake, which,
you know, it's a big reservoir, we're living through, you know,
probably one of the worst droughts certainly in the 30 years
that I've lived up here. From a predictive model, how do--how
far in advance can we--and, again, maybe this again is for Dr.
Uccellini, how far in advance can we predict what the weather
season, you know, coming up is going to be like, and how do we
integrate that with, you know, global data as well in other
countries?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, what we are seeing in our discussions
with the National Academy of Sciences, for example, from June
2020, and other engagements with the scientific community, we
not only have an operational prediction challenge when you're
getting into these extended time periods, we have what we call
a predictability challenge, in that there are--you know,
there's a level of predictability that rapidly declines even as
you get into two weeks and beyond.
So with precipitation it's particularly--that's a factor of
the atmosphere that really loses predictability fairly quickly.
And one of the big challenges that we all face, whether--you
know, speaking from the research community or the operational
community, is how to engage whatever predictability there is in
the signals that we have, whether it's directly from the
numerical models, or from tracking these large-scale patterns,
like the Madden-Julian Oscillation, or the Enzo Pattern in the
Pacific, the El Nino/La Nina Patterns, we can use those, and we
can bring past experiences to those, but from a hard core
predictive approach, we realize that there's a lot of
uncertainty involved in using that information.
So--but the users demand it. I mean, you know, society is
trying to make decisions based exactly on what's happening in
your State, and your water supply, so we're bringing the
information as best we can, with the level of uncertainty
involved, but clearly stated, to those users to make the
difficult decisions.
Mr. Bera. But I--I see my time has expired, so I'll yield
back. Thank you again for your service, Dr. Uccellini.
Dr. Uccellini. OK.
Staff. Mr. Weber is recognized.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, I appreciate that. Dr. Uccellini--
this is for you, Dr. Uccellini. You heard it already said, it's
a tribute basically to you and your leadership that many, many
companies and organizations have signed up to serve as
Ambassadors in support of having a Weather-Ready Nation. So
suffice it to say, I guess, your expertise and leadership
created help--created and helped coin the term ``Weather-Ready
Nation''. Of course, we're in Texas, where we have just about
every weather phenomenon there is. I don't know that we're--we
ever get all that ready. Sometimes we get fooled, but--you
understood that--nonetheless, you understood this was an
opportunity program for increased engagement and partnerships
with the private sector weather forecast companies with members
of America's weather and climate industry, and they
wholeheartedly supported the Weather-Ready Nation program.
Dr. Uccellini, if you could take this time to speak to the
partnership between NWS and the private sector weather
forecasters, and how they work closely with the National
Weather Service toward building that Weather-Ready Nation?
Could you speak to that, please, sir?
Dr. Uccellini. Yes, I'd be glad to. We recognize that
addressing the public safety--for the Weather Service to
address the public safety mission--and you've heard comments
now from the GAO, and from NWSEO. It'd be--you know, we don't
have the resources to even optimally deal with all the issues
there. So you'll see private sector firms that even work--are
now working with us, like, through the chat function,
collaborate, actually, or pass through our warnings at times
now that they didn't even 5 years ago, because we all are
recognizing the need to work together for a consistent
messaging. And the private sector then will take that and
tailor it to specific customers across the wide berth of
activities, agriculture, energy, you know, water supply, et
cetera. So I just think--or transportation.
I just think that that partnership is essential. We can't--
we cannot do this alone. When we designed the Weather-Ready
Nation as a strategic goal, and brought, you know, a vision on
how to get to that goal, the first thing we heard back from the
National Academy of Public Administration, when they reviewed
it, based on a congressional language, they said, hey, this is
a great strategic outcome. You can't do it alone, all right?
You're going to need other agencies, you're going to need the
private sector, we need the academic community. We're getting
into social science to be able communicate risk, all of the
above. So this is--the success of this program will depend on
our partnerships.
And if I might add, I can tell you from the--a global
perspective, the private/public partnership in the United
States is looked on as the gold standard of the world. Other
parts of the world are wondering how we do it, quite frankly.
So I'll just say that one of the other reasons I embrace it,
that--because we can't do it all. One of the other reasons I
embrace it is that it's a job creator. I watch the students
come out and get jobs, and it's really delightful to see that.
Thank you.
Mr. Weber. Yes. Well, thank you for that. You're to be
commended for your service, and I will say that we are taking
applications for retirees here in Texas.
Dr. Uccellini. I'll think about that.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, and I yield back, Ms. Chairman.
Staff. Ms. Stevens is recognized.
Ms. Stevens. Great. Thank you so much for this very
important hearing, and--it really touches to the core of
something that we have experienced and dealt with here in
Michigan in a very visceral way, which is--in metro Detroit we
have been hit with storm, after storm, after storm for the
balance of months, oftentimes without any ability to have
warning. Thunderstorms that turn into tornadoes, thunderstorms
that turn into super cells, basements that have been flooded,
disaster declarations, small businesses that were just
beginning to reopen and had to close again, unbelievable power
outages, and certainly very pertinent as we're on the heels
of--or just getting ready to pass some incredible
infrastructure and sustainability legislation.
But relevant to today's hearing is this ability to predict,
and certainly I want to put the onus on all of you, right? And
it's how can we better predict the super cell storm, rapid high
winds that just knocked over our big, beautiful trees in the
city of Farmington and Farmington Hills, neighbors telling me,
we didn't even get a warning. But more so I want to ask, and
maybe this is a question for Mr. Salna as well as Mr. Cardell
Johnson, just given that you are digging at this, are there
tools and technologies that will enable us to better predict?
Is there training we should be putting in place at the county,
or at the local level in particular, when--certainly I've been
hearing Dr. Uccellini talk about some of these challenges with
the National Weather Service, but I just want to take this a
step further and hear from you at the university level, and
certainly, Mr. Cardell from your--Mr. Johnson, from your GAO
study. Is there the opportunity to better predict? And, Mr.
Salna, if you would like to start, that'd be great.
Mr. Salna. Thank you. Thank you very much. Well, there's a
couple of ways that we could look at that. One thing that is
used within the research community, with NOAA and universities,
are what's called Federal labs and test beds. And it's a great
collaboration that we've had here at FIU, where we've
collaborated with NOAA and the National Hurricane Center,
through test beds and other grant programs, to overcome, you
know, certain restrictions, but that collaboration of the
academic with, you know, the government agency, it's been very
successful, and it also--our connection with the National
Science Foundation, and the National Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure Program, with our Wall of Wind--as we
like to say, we don't want silos. We want collaboration to
bring people together.
So when you have an open forum for research and testing
proposals from all across the country, for example, coming to
the Wall of Wind, where we can test not only for hurricane
force winds, but we can test for lower speed wind events, like
derechos, and things that make----
Ms. Stevens. The derechos----
Mr. Salna. Yes.
Ms. Stevens [continuing]. Um-hum.
Mr. Salna. That--and so I think that's one way to look at
it, is now--because that all leads to improvement in the
models, when we talk about the weather forecasting models, so--
these test beds. So continuing our efforts and support in those
kinds of environments to make advances in the models.
Ms. Stevens. Mr. Johnson?
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you for that question. So,
the work that we've done since 2017 did not focus on the
different technologies for prediction but more on how the
National Weather Service has managed its reform efforts. But
one thing that I can say from the work that we've done, I think
this is where the Weather Service is focused with its National
Blend of Models, and, you know, having a common point for
developing forecasts so that they can be able to predict
weather conditions and get that information out through its
impact-based decision support services for the community to
have that lead time.
So we know that they're doing work to refine that model.
There have been some concerns about the accuracy of it, in
terms of working with certain terrain or weather conditions,
but the Weather Service is aware of those. They're engaging
their employees on the technical aspects, and making those
refinements, and hopefully that, through IDSS, may help with
the predictions. Thank you.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Babin is recognized.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir, thank you very much, and thank you,
Madam Chairwoman, and Ranking Member. And I also want to thank
the witnesses today, it's very, very interesting. I have the
honor of representing Southeast Texas, from Houston over
basically to Louisiana, which, unfortunately, has been the
center of devastating 500-year floods that seem to come almost
yearly now. And 4 years ago Hurricane Harvey dumped the single
largest amount of rainfall in recorded history in our country,
and, in fact, North America, in mine, and also in Randy Weber's
district, which is right next door. And since then we've had
several hurricanes, tropical storms, leave much of Southeast
Texas underwater, et cetera, and this sort of reoccurring
devastation not only upends the lives of thousands of people,
but has enormous implications on our Federal budget. These
disasters every year leave the taxpayers responsible for
colossal bills that are needed for recovery. Investing in
money--excuse me, investing money in mitigation efforts seems
to be an incredibly wise investment that could save billions of
dollars every year in damage.
So, Mr. Salna, I would ask you, since Hurricane Harvey,
there has been a great effort to promote resilience in order to
help communities be better prepared for future extreme weather
events. FIU's Extreme Events Institute is at the forefront of
reducing the impact of natural hazards through research and the
advancement of technology that strengthens response, improves
recovery, and mitigates exposure to risk. Can you please
expound short--just a short answer, if you don't mind, upon the
importance of mitigation efforts, and how the model that you're
working on in Florida could be translated to different areas,
such as East Texas--Southeast Texas?
Mr. Salna. Sure, thank you.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Salna. So, resilience. That's the key word, right? And
how can we all be more resilient? And another one of the words
is mitigation. And as we know, we've heard of that formula, for
every $1 spent on mitigation saves at least $6 in damage and
cleanup, so it makes fiscal sense to do what we can on the
front end, right, to build stronger, build better. So--test
does that with testing infrastructure. That's related to
building codes, where there's certainly room for improvement on
building codes across the country. Florida is the leader, has
the strongest building codes, and they can be replicated in
other regions of the country, especially hurricane-prone
States.
And we have this model, the Florida Public Hurricane Loss
Model, with the State of Florida and the Office of Insurance
Regulation, and that's a model--now you can predict what the
damage cost would be to a--following a storm. So that's a tool
that will then verify, and then show you that if you do this
kind of mitigation, you look at the savings you're going to
make. So this is how we have to think. We can't do things like
we've done in the past, when it comes to where we build and how
we build.
And, because our exposure has increased across the
coastlines, and in Southeast Texas, you know, that exposure is
there, buildings and people in harm's way, so we need to get
them protected, we need to get them prepared, and so
vulnerabilities, that's--need to look at, how is the
infrastructure strengthened with building codes, preparedness,
and safety, and getting together with emergency management is
one of those team members in all of that.
Mr. Babin. All right, great. Thank you. Thank you very
much, Mr. Salna. Secondly, serving as the Ranking Member of the
Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee, I'm interested in the
collaboration effort between NASA (National Aeronautics and
Space Administration) and NOAA, particularly the longstanding
issue of research to operations. And so, Dr. Uccellini, as the
Director of the National Weather Service, you are well aware
that the NWS is the very tip of the spear for operational
weather forecasting, and your recently announced--you recently
announced your retirement after decades of service, and I want
to thank you for that. You've done an excellent job, and made
this country, I think, a lot more secure and confident at the
approaching storms that we have.
But you recently--after your announcement, is there
anything that you think should have--that you could've done
better to enable that research to operations transition, but
were unable to do for one reason or another? Just out of
curiosity. If you would like to elaborate on that, I would
appreciate it.
Dr. Uccellini. Well, yes, actually, you're looking at
someone who lived the research to operation--I worked at NASA
for 11 years, established a research career, and then came over
to the operational world to learn what the other half of the
equation was. And one of the things that I did with my leaders
that I left at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center was we
established the Joint Center for Satellite Data Assimilation,
and that's been very successful in bringing research satellite
data to us, but also preparing us for the future operational
data that we now implement in the models. And that includes not
only the National Weather Services, but NESDIS (National
Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service), the
satellite service component of NOAA, and other researchers
throughout the community, and it's really been a tremendous
success.
But there are other things that we can do. NASA has
established an organization they call SPoRT (Short-term
Prediction Research and Transition Center). Don't ask me to
define the acronym, but what they've done is they've done
research on our operational AWIP (Advanced Weather Interactive
Processing) system that's in every local forecast office.
They've brought advancements onto that system. What does that
do? That allows us to get those advancements into the local
forecast offices, into the national centers, faster, and we've
been doing that. In fact, we've been doing that for fires,
we've been doing that for floods, et cetera, et cetera. So we
have a very strong relationship with NASA, and I hope that we--
that NOAA and NASA continue that kind of linkage as they move
forward.
Mr. Babin. Excellent. Thank you very much, and with that,
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Staff. Mr. McNerney is recognized.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I thank the witnesses for your
testimony this morning. It's really interesting to hear the
evolution of the Weather Service, and what you've been able to
accomplish over the years. So my first question will be to Dr.
Uccellini. Over the past few years, California has been
devastated by historic wildfire seasons. The Weather Service
Incident Meteorologists, or the IMETs, are critical to helping
our fire managers and incident commanders. You mentioned in
your testimony the IMETs are being stretched too thin, with
only 89 trained IMET forecasters, and 18 in training. What's
the actual need for IMETs?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, the--we--we've actually been
increasing the IMET numbers, and making them more available to
these offices that--and to these areas that need it. We
coordinated, of course, through the NIST (National Institute of
Standards and Technology)--the group up in Idaho, and that's
how our folks get assigned to the fires. The fact is we've just
set a record this year now for the number of IMET deployments,
but we've been increasing those numbers, and training.
One of the stress points on this is that, with the fire
season growing in time, you know, as--I think the fire
community calls it a fire year now, that actually impacts on
the training. You know, there's--the down time--used--you--we
used to use the down time for training, continued training,
because they have to be certified to be on the lines with the
firefighters, and these are really brave souls that are out
there fighting the fires, and the IMETs are actually right next
to them, OK, right with them.
So we have that kind of an issue, but we have worked very
hard over the last 2 years, seeing this trend line, to get
those numbers up. These IMETs are actually located in offices
across the country, and as they're assigned, they fly in, and
they go into the fire area. We've got--we--increasing the
numbers, we're dealing with the struggle on time to make sure
that they're all certified through training, and this year
we've met the record, basically. We've broken the record
numbers, and--yes, it's a stress point, but it's a stress that
we're addressing, I believe.
Mr. McNerney. Very good. Well, we expect the need for IMETs
to be growing over the--in the next few years, especially with
fire season coming around, and--or fire year, as you put it,
coming around. Are we specifically addressing that need? Are
you specifically addressing, or----
Dr. Uccellini. Yes.
Mr. McNerney [continuing]. Plan to address that need?
Dr. Uccellini. Yes, and we're working through--the
administration has cited this as a priority. We're working
through the inter-agency approaches to this, and responding to
the needs accordingly. But we are internally addressing this
through training more IMETs, and making them readily available
as requested.
Mr. McNerney. What about the statutory pay limits for
Federal workers? Is that a problem--a longstanding problem for
your agencies?
Dr. Uccellini. It's been a problem. I believe we're
addressing it. Every year we work through the different
processes. They've--they do get paid, but it's just that there
is that--when you hit up against it, there's--let's put it this
way, there are things that happened that we have to work
through. We've been more proactive with that, and I believe
that we're--we've got a smoother process in place to address
it. And it's not just us, again, working as an individual
agency. We have to go all the way up through top of government
to deal with this issue.
Mr. McNerney. Of course. Mr. Werner, have pay limits
presented a barrier to the available IMETs as--from your
perspective?
Mr. Werner. Thank you. Absolutely, and I--we greatly
appreciate Congresswoman Lofgren for introducing I believe a
bill that's going to help our incident meteorologists, the
Wildland Firefighter Fair Pay Act. Because what happens is they
get up to a point, because they're out there so often right
now, because the wildfires are so frequent, that they hit a pay
cap, and they can no longer be deployed out there anymore. So
if we get that--we release that pay cap, there are folks who
are very dedicated, and will continue to work to support the
folks out there on the fire.
Mr. McNerney. What other obstacles are there, other than
the pay limits?
Mr. Werner. I think just because of the frequency. We need
more IMETs, and to get them trained takes time. That's the big
thing. And then there's also--we have a deal that we wrestle
with is the pay cap, for a biweekly pay cap, where folks go out
there and work on these fires, and they're putting in basically
16-hour days, and--but they don't get paid for that until maybe
several pay periods later, because the system doesn't react
quick enough at times to go ahead and make sure that shows up
in their paycheck when it should.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. My time's expired. I yield back.
Mr. Werner. Thank you.
Staff. Mr. Baird is recognized. If no Mr. Baird, then Mr.
Garcia is recognized.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, and thank you, Madam Chair, and
Ranking Member Lucas, for this very timely and excellent
Committee hearing, and thank you to our witnesses as well. Dr.
Uccellini, I want to thank you for your service and your
leadership over the last several years, and what you've brought
for our country. It's a national security issue as much as
anything else, so very important work you're doing--that you're
all doing, frankly.
I do want to touch on something that Mr. Johnson and Mr.
Werner were pretty consistent about in their testimony, and
specifically in their written testimony. I think they were
tactful about it, but they're hitting at a fundamental problem
right now within the National Weather Service, and that's the
staffing issues that they mentioned. As an appropriator, I'm
looking at your budgets, and I'm seeing continued growth from
Fiscal Year 2017 through Fiscal Year 2021, so I don't think
it's a funding problem, necessarily, and I do envision certain
scenarios where actually you--we--you can have increasing
budgets, and lower staff counts needed as a result of
technologies evolving, efficiencies improving within that
technology coordinate system.
But it looks like, based on some of the written testimony
we have in front of us, that the staffing needs are actually
validated, and confirmed that we are well below what is
absolutely necessary. And I do have a question about fire--
wildfire, especially in the West. I actually want to put more
on your plate with regards to wildfire prediction, and
modeling, and support of the public utility companies locally,
but I also want to give Dr. Uccellini an opportunity to talk
about what are the causal factors and potential remedies? It
sounds like we all agree that the staffing issues, and getting
people onboarded, are the long pole in the tent right now. Is
it a retention problem, is it a recruiting problem, is it a
process problem, what--just in the hiring process? How do we
incentivize people to stay, and then come to the National
Weather Service so that we can get back on step to where the
staffing levels are matching the mission statements that we're
providing you all?
Dr. Uccellini. OK. So that's directed toward me,
Representative----
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir.
Dr. Uccellini [continuing]. Garcia? Yes, OK.
Mr. Garcia. Yes, sir.
Dr. Uccellini. Just wanted to make sure. All right. So I
just want to assure everyone, and this was also reviewed by the
GAO, that, through our new budget process that we implemented
in 2015, the portfolio process, where there's staffing in each
portfolio, but they're concentrated--the staffing for the field
is concentrated in what we call analyzed forecast support, that
we've been very diligent in identifying not only the needs of
how many people we have there, but how do we support those
people getting the job done?
And that's a balancing act within the budget process, and
the budget process involves, you know, going through the
executive branch, trying to get the requirements met through
that process, and then bringing it to the Hill. And the final
part of that, of course, is that we have to show our budget
plan before any of the money is allotted, and we do list the
number of FTEs (full-time equivalents). Those FTE counts are
not up to what they probably should be, OK? We have--we go
requirement by requirement, but that's what the money will buy,
OK? From an FTE count, and from the--from those programs and
activities that are needed to actually support them. Train
them, get them the local travel that, you know, they can meet
with the emergency management community, and every tabletop
exercise, you can just go down the list. So--and we got
reviewed by the GAO on that, and we were found that we do
follow the amount of money allocated. We do--there's no
impoundment of funds from what we have to pay our people. But
that GAO review is actually quite specific, in terms of
following the budget process, no impoundment, and mapping our--
--
Mr. Garcia. So, Doctor----
Dr. Uccellini [continuing]. Hiring----
Mr. Garcia [continuing]. Not to cut you off, but I only
have--I have a--only have a minute. I just want to clarify my
question. Are we saying, then, that this is actually a
budgeting problem? Because the precipitous fall off in non-
managerials, non-supervisory employees chart that Dr. Werner, I
think, presented showed that we went from about 3,900 FTEs down
to 3,300 FTEs during budget increases, yet we're still
understaffed, and Dr. Johnson mentioned that we don't have--the
hiring process itself is taking too long. I just want to make
sure that we're looking at this very clear-eyed internally, and
I'm not trying to throw spears. I'm actually trying to give
more work to you all, and put more on your plate with wildfires
that we can talk offline about. But, internally, are you happy
with the hiring processes, and the ability to get the FTEs on
board in a timely fashion to support your mission requirements?
Dr. Uccellini. Yes. If I may say that right now we're at 99
percent staffing, which is pretty good. It's the highest
staffing we've had since 2015. We're 150 over. Our hiring rate
is at 98 days. This is a tremendous improvement over where we
were, and I would say that, in working with the appropriations
side of the Hill, I think we have convinced them that this is a
funding--there is a funding component to the issue list that
needs to be address. And the President's budget for Fiscal Year
2022 does increase the budget in AFS, the analyze forecast
support, and I think there's more that's going to be needed as
we move forward.
Mr. Garcia. OK. I'll--I'm out of time, so I'll have to
yield back. I would just submit that the employee organization
may be--the testimony there may be inconsistent with that
assertion, but we can talk through that on the appropriations
side. And, Mr. Werner, if you'd like to comment? I'm out of
time, but I can yield back, I think, Chairwoman.
Staff. Mr. Bowman is recognized.
Mr. Werner. Thank you very much. I don't know how--how Dr.
Uccellini came up with the 99 percent, and what they had done
is not used what was in the table of organization, which the
actual GAO used, and I think they called it the organizational
table, in their 2017 study. They didn't like, really, the way
the National Weather Service was kind of moving bodies around.
But it's not at the number--I think it's something like 4,866
which is in that organization, and for some reason they'd
knocked that number down based on what they consider active
positions and inactive positions. Why, only they could explain,
but that number's, like, 4,623. So by the organizational table,
which the GAO references in their 2017--we are not at 99
percent staffing.
Insofar as getting people into the organization, there are
hundreds of candidates, I'm told, bidding on every position,
just about, that's out there, so there's a lot of folks who
want to participate, and get a chance to serve the public, and
try to protect lives and property, would just love to get into
the National Weather Service. So they're out there, we just
need to bring them in.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, sir. I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Bowman is recognized.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much. Dr. Uccellini, thank you for
your testimony, and for your many years of service, and
congratulations on your upcoming retirement. Thank you as well
for highlighting the devastating impact of disasters like
Hurricane Ida, which killed over 40 people in New York State,
and led to the destruction and flooding of homes and schools in
my district. In your view, given that unprecedented events like
Ida will keep happening, what specific improvements to IDSS are
most imperative now that could help prevent the kind of
heartbreaking loss of life and damage that we saw in New York?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, one of the things to emphasize is
that, when a situation like this happens, we--and with the
emergency management community, the first responders, we--our
job doesn't end when that event ends. We get back right away,
OK? What can we do better? What happened on this particular
case? What are the lessons learned? We try to get that
turnaround rather quickly, because, you're right, it can happen
again. And, I mean, this--you know, Ida was an unprecedented
event. It's the first time we've issued a flash flood emergency
for the entire area of New York City. All five boroughs, part
of Nassau County to the east, part of Westchester County to the
north, and it's the most extensive flooding--urban flooding
that New York City has experienced.
So it's--you know, how do you prepare for something like
that if it's going to happen again, when it'll happen again?
We've got to practice. Even if it's a relatively rare event
now, it's a high impact event that we have to be ready for,
and, quite frankly, we're going to have to learn how to message
to that in a way--and it's not just us, it's the whole
community, how will people respond to an event like that,
right? So, you know, this is something that--it's a continuum.
It's not, OK, that episode's over, we'll just move on to the
next area that gets hit by rain. We're looking at these types
of events to learn from them from a forecast and a response
perspective, and we're doing it in partnership with the
emergency management community.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you very much. My next question is for
Mr. Salna, and it's about STEM education and climate jobs.
Thank you for your testimony. As a former teacher and middle
school principal, I appreciate your attention to community
outreach and K to 12 education. When we talk about green jobs,
weather forecasting may not be the first thing that typically
comes to mind, but it's a perfect example of a career path that
is both intellectually stimulating and essential for our
future.
At the same time, as you pointed out, all of our children,
tomorrow's adults, need to understand the climate crisis, and
they need to be able to identify and reject disinformation. I'm
wondering if you can expand on your testimony to explain how
the National Weather Service and other agencies can improve
their own long-term capacity and effectiveness through
investment in children and climate education. What kind of
long-range thinking and planning do we need here so our young
people are prepared for a wide range of STEM careers, and to
thrive on a hotter planet?
Mr. Salna. Well, thank you. Well, certainly it takes a team
effort, as I described, but on the education front, you know,
one thought is, you know, when it comes to weather science, and
preparedness, and safety, in the curriculums, at the elementary
and middle school level, there can definitely be increases so
that we can get that education at that younger age, elementary,
carry it to middle, then to high school, and that's so then
they can get into this process of preparedness, and knowing
where--you know, all about safety. And then that would then
instill even more interest those--into those STEM careers, and
into meteorology, atmospheric science, and climate studies,
into the college level.
So taking it through at a younger level, and getting them
educated about it, and getting them inspired and excited about
it as well. And so programs where--through the Weather Ready
Nation Ambassador Program, where we work with schools, in
conjunction with the media, and the National Weather Service,
and, of course, the university, where we do bring in students.
We have events where we bring in students of all ages and do
weather STEM events, where we try and get very interactive,
immersive, and to show them how exciting it is to get into
these areas, but, at the same time, show them how important it
is for their future as well.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Baird is recognized.
Mr. Baird. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ranking Member,
and all the witnesses for being here today. It's a--it's really
interesting. I always learn something from these Science
Committee meetings. But my first question--Dr. Uccellini, I
really respect your service to our country, and to the things
you've done, but my first question goes to the idea that--we
use high performance computing, including our emergency
capabilities, to be edge to edge--century integration, and AI
(artificial intelligence), and do those help the National
Weather Service enhance their predictions? And how does this
enable communities to mitigate the impacts of more frequent
severe weather events?
Dr. Uccellini. So, if I may, in answering that question,
just note that there are really three fundamental components to
making a numerical prediction system work, and making it work
operationally at 99.9 percent reliability, which we do with the
backup computer. But you have to have the computing capacity to
do that, and historically weather prediction has been one of
the main drivers for the--what we now call supercomputers. One
of the original drivers for that, back in the 1960's, 1970's,
and 1980's, is still one of the main drivers for that, so you
need that. We need global observations.
You know, all--I like to say all forecasts are local. You
want to know what's going to happen in your backyard. They're
all driven by global observing system, even at the 1-day
marker. So that's where the importance of the satellite
coverage comes in, for example, and other data sets, is that,
you know, you just don't have one golden data set that can do
it all, you need a collection of them. And then you get into
the science and modeling for the data assimilation, and running
the models themselves, and post-processing the models to
extract the information from them. So those three fundamental
components is what we're in the middle of, and what we're in
partnership with the larger community to make all of that
happen, private sector, academic communities, larger research
labs, other agencies, all of the above.
With respect to the AI and machine learning, it's becoming
extremely important in several components of that forecast--
that model process, the post-processing, and extracting the
information from the observations to get into the models in a
way that they can be used to enhance the predictions. So we're
there. We're there with that science and technology. We're the
benefactors of it, and moving forward with that--we rely on it
to not only do today's forecasts, but to prepare ourselves for
the future, because, as you can see from this hearing, there's
going to be increasing demands on what we can do to serve
society, because the weather is getting more extreme, and the
climate is a large part of that. And the vulnerability, by the
way, is because we've got more people also living in more
vulnerable areas, so all of the above is contributing to these
increasing needs, and the modeling system, as I've just
described, is going to be a key component in moving us forward.
Mr. Baird. So, continuing in that vein, are you--or do
your--does your agency have access to the Department of
Energy's supercomputers? They've got three of the five fastest,
I think, in the world, so do you----
Dr. Uccellini. There are--OK. So there are research
components of our agencies that have access to the computers,
but Department of Energy, my--our--I would say our previous
attempts to get some operational models onto their systems to
be tested on those kinds of computers, because we do go through
a 10 year procurement cycle to--and with 3 year blocks in
there, to try to stay on top of the computing capacity
advancements and computing technology that we see as we're now
going toward the exascale type of abilities. But Department of
Energy doesn't lend itself to having operational models on
their systems for either test or use, so I would like to see
something done in that regard. I've attempted several times in
my career, but I haven't crossed the finish line with that
effort.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you very much. And--looks like I've
got about five seconds left. I wish I had time to ask questions
of the other witnesses, but, with that, Madam Chair, I yield
back.
Staff. Mr. Foster is recognized.
Mr. Foster. Well, thank you to the Chair and Ranking
Member, and to our witnesses. I would also like to echo my
congratulations and appreciation to Dr. Uccellini for his
career and service to our country. He and I are both graduates
of the University of Wisconsin, which, for more than a century,
has been guided by something called The Wisconsin Idea, meaning
that we should ``never be content until the beneficent
influence of the university reaches every family in the
State.'' As explained by Adlai Stevenson II, ``The Wisconsin
tradition meant more than a simple belief in the people. It
also meant faith in the application of intelligence and reason
to the problems of society. It meant a deep conviction that the
role of government was not to stumble along like a drunkard in
the dark, but to light its way with the best torches of
knowledge and understanding that it can find.'' There really
can be no better embodiment of The Wisconsin Idea than Dr.
Uccellini and his career.
And, you know, as someone who grew up in Wisconsin, I have
to say that there are things going on there that I do not
recognize, and they seem to be directly antithetical to The
Wisconsin Idea and everything it represents, but nationally,
the Weather Service has itself been victimized by uninformed
and politicized attacks that have nothing to do with facts,
science, and logic, and that can't help with the recruitment
challenges that NWS is facing. But I want to urge every young
person with an interest in STEM to have a look at Dr.
Uccellini's career as an example of the good that they can do
with their STEM skills to make our planet a better place.
And--now, in terms of--I'd also like to echo what others
have said about the value of weather forecasting to keeping
families safe in our districts. You know, when I was a child,
someone was killed by a tornado, and our family lost a sailboat
stored a few miles away on Lake Mendota in Madison. And, as a
result, my mother bought a little emergency--you know, one of
these little radio warning boxes, and she was always careful to
test, and make sure the battery was still alive on it. 30 years
later, the city of Plainfield, in the district that I represent
in Illinois, suffered one of the most devastating tornadoes on
record, and this past June, DuPage County, and nearby
communities in the district I represent, faced their most
severe tornado in nearly 50 years, rated F-3 by the National
Weather Service. But because the NWS was able to issue a timely
warning, and help local authorities prepare, not a single life
was lost. The destruction, and homes and businesses, caused by
the tornado was just devastating, but this really constitutes a
success of our Nation's weather forecasting systems, which
exist, first and foremost, to keep us all safe.
And so I'd like, actually--my questions here, if I could
return a little more to the AI aspects of it. You know, there
were a spate of newspaper stories about--I think it was Deep
Mind has, you know, won some contest for getting the best
performance for local short term weather forecasting, and I was
wondering if you're seeing the same trend in your
supercomputing, more toward wanting AI engines than
traditional, you know, vector pipeline machines. Is--are you
seeing a shift in what you're going to be asking for from the
next generations of these because of AI? Or do you end up--
pretty much just want more of the same?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, actually, we're--we were one of the
first operational units in the world to go from vector machines
to parallel processing, so we've been in parallel processing
mode since 2001, and led the way on that.
Mr. Foster. Um-hum.
Dr. Uccellini. AI--the artificial intelligence and machine
learning is certainly something that we are paying attention
to, we are involved with, and it will influence how we operate,
I think, over the next--especially over the latter part of this
decade, in the sense that we'll be growing it, we'll be using
it, and it will influence our next-generation computing. So
you've got that technology. You also have the cloud technology.
We use the system so much that we'll probably stick with an
internal cloud-based system like we have now, but we'll see.
You know, the things are changing really fast. But from an AI,
machine learning perspective, we're--NOAA, working through
NOAA, are making an--accelerated advances and use of that type
of an approach.
Mr. Foster. Um-hum. And if you could recommend turning up
our investment in either getting a higher data point--higher
density of data points, you know, throughout our country and
the world, or more CPU (central processing unit) FLOPS
(floating point operations per second), where's the highest
return on investment there?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, the only--those three components I
outlined, you're only as strong as your weakest link. And when
I took over the Weather Service in 2013, we had computing
capacity in which I could not transition models from the
research component of NOAA. We had models sitting for five
years before I could fit them onto the machine, with all the
other responsibilities we have on that machine. We were way
behind what the Europeans had for model capacity. It was one of
the biggest issues that we faced.
We're comparable now. So the point is that if you take away
from any one of those components, CPU, the science, the global
observations, it will slow down our move forward. Sorry to say
that. You know, it's--everybody wants people to make a--you
know, a list that has priorities in it, but we're only as
strong as the weakest link when it comes to these modeling
systems.
Mr. Foster. Well, thank you for everything, and my time's
up, and I yield back.
Dr. Uccellini. And thank you for your kind words, and I do
appreciate The Wisconsin Idea. I was transplanted into it from
New York, that's where I grew up, but I certainly--it
assimilated into everything that I learned there, and taking
that into my dedication to public service.
Staff. Mrs. Bice is recognized.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you so much. Thank you for--the witnesses
for being here with us today. As a lifetime resident of the
great State of Oklahoma, I know a thing or two about extreme
weather, and importance of immediate weather reporting. Just
yesterday morning, at 5 a.m., we had tornadoes touch down in my
district, and my family was alerted because of the importance
of the things that the National Weather Service does. I
recognize that weather can change with only a moment's notice,
and it's important that people at NOAA have the technology
available to predict and prepare for these impacts. because of
this, I recently introduced H.R. 5324, the NOAA Weather Radio
Modernization Act, to update antiquated technology for weather
radios to ensure no one is left behind during weather
emergencies.
Speaking of maintenance, updates for Weather Services, and
technology, the budget reconciliation piece that came through
this Committee contained $743 million for deferred maintenance
for NOAA, while the administration's budget requested only $450
million. That's an obviously very large difference toward
maintenance that we've heard little about. Dr. Uccellini, what
are some of the National Weather Service's priorities for
maintenance, and is upgrading infrastructure and facilities
important, or is just keeping them working and functional--
goal?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, we have a separate portfolio for our
facilities, for, you know, what I say houses the Weather
Service, and it is the smallest portfolio that we have. And
we--you know, I came into a situation in which maintenance was
at--of the facilities themselves were put on hold, and we made
that a priority early on, the infrastructure. And I would say
that it's still an issue. We're still catching up on the
facilities, but also trying to--you know, some of these
facilities we own, some of them we rent. When the lease comes
up, we're looking for opportunities to co-locate with partners,
and I think this is a very important factor that we look at, we
take advantage when the opportunity presents itself, and we can
get the resources to do it, but it's proven to be a big
success.
So that's one way of dealing with it, but we still have to
maintain--and Houston is a great example of that, by the way,
and so is Albany, coming up in November, opening up that new
building that they have up there. We'll be co-located within
Emergency Management College, the weather office, and right
across the street from the State Emergency Operations Center.
Those are the kinds of things we are looking for, but we have
to deal with the maintenance of the facilities we're in today,
and the infrastructure for our IT and dissemination program as
well. So that's the budget balance that we are trying to work
with as we work up through the system.
Mrs. Bice. To sort of add on to that--and let me also say
my apologies to Mr. Werner and Mr. Johnson for--and Mr. Salna
for focusing some of these questions to Mr. Uccellini, and not
giving you necessarily the time, but, talking about the Storm
Prediction Center at the National Weather Center, and the Radar
Operation Center in Norman, do you think that they are meeting
their full operational capabilities, or could they use
additional maintenance and upgrades?
Dr. Uccellini. The--both units are really fantastic units.
I mean, the rock is the basis for our NEXRAD (Next-Generation
Radar). We do have the NEXRAD Service Life Extension Program.
We're at year 7 of an 8 year, on time, and within budget, I
just want to emphasize that. The--really incredible upgrade to
the entire system, and they're, you know, fully focused on
that. At the same time, we're trying to prepare for the next
generation radars, and it's in that research area, which
includes the OAR, the Oceanic and Atmospheric Research
component of NOAA, that we--you--we need to take a look at,
because there is an interest in accelerating our way into the
new generation of phase to ray radar systems. So there is that,
but in terms of operating, I think we're really OK there. We've
really advanced, and sustained really great work.
The Storm Prediction Center has--you know, their staffing
is secure. They move forward, they're there. I would say that
as they--as the severe--you know, there's been a lull in the
severe weather season, but we've had this great activity in the
fire weather activity. They actually put the extended forecast
out for the atmospheric conditions for fire. There are
similarities there, except the lack of moisture, of course. But
the point is that I think there's stress levels that are going
to develop in that area, and will have to be looked at.
Mrs. Bice. Great. Thank you, my time is expired. I yield
back.
Staff. Ms. Ross is recognized.
Ms. Ross. Thank you so much, and thank you for holding this
hearing, Chairwoman Johnson and Ranking Member Lucas, and
thanks to all of the panelists for joining us today for this
very important discussion. My home State of North Carolina is
particularly vulnerable to extreme weather, like floods and
hurricanes, and that's why accurate, prompt weather forecasting
from the National Weather Service is critical to protecting
lives, personal property, and our infrastructure. But as we saw
with the well-forecasted, and yet still deadly, 2011 tornado
season, exceptional forecasts alone cannot protect lives, and
rather it would require, as we've discussed, a whole of
government approach, where the National Weather Service
collaborates with local officials, individuals, and
organizations responsible for making public safety decision. I
look forward to talking about ways to increase this
collaboration, and I want to build a little bit on what
Representative Bowman raised about inspiring the next
generation of scientists and forecasters.
Here in Raleigh, North Carolina we have a wonderful newly
renovated science museum that has a nature research center that
has a component that focuses on the weather, and it brings in
schoolchildren from all over the State to have hands-on
experiences. It also encourages citizen scientists, and I'd
like to know, from Dr. Uccellini, and maybe from Mr. Salna,
what your experiences are with citizen scientists, and the--and
collaboration from the community to--helping to not only
publicize weather events, but also to help with public safety.
Dr. Uccellini. OK. I guess I'll go first. We--I mean, I'm a
firm believer, by the way, in the STEM education, and the
citizen science aspect. I participate in the American
Meteorological Society as the past president for now almost 25
years of continuous work with their education, that's K through
12, and what the Weather Service can bring to their programs,
not only in terms of, you know, the--from a museum point of
view, but real time data, so that the folks--the kids in the
classroom can start, you know, making forecasts to see whether
school's going to open the next day or not, right?
So the thing is, firm believer in that. The citizen
science--we have the Co-op Observing Program, about 3,000, and
it's formed the backbone of the client--you know, we have a
subset of those 3,000 that, you know, provides information for
the climate statistics for this country. I get the opportunity
to award these families that have been involved in this now for
75 years, you know, Thomas Jefferson Award, you know, 50, 75.
You know, it's just incredible to see the dedication, you know,
all over the country, you know, of families that have passed
this ability down so they don't lose the site, right? Because
climate really important if you can keep the site maintained
right and all that. It's really phenomenal.
And having those award ceremonies, we do this virtually,
has actually been a real plus because you get to see the
excitement of what these people bring, and they still talk
about their grandfathers, and their great-grandfathers, or
grandmothers who went out there in blizzards to get that daily
observation, right? So it's really an amazing part of what we
do, and we're trying to build on that, because with this type
of technology, you know, everybody's got observations that they
want to share with us, and in real time, that can make a big
difference, right? So all I'm saying is just that it is a
component that we embrace where we can, and certainly a big fan
of it.
Ms. Ross. Great. Mr. Salna, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Salna. Sure, thank you. I just want to jump on the
science museum concept, which is a big part of our team here in
South Florida. So we have a big event called Eye of the Storm,
and it's all about hurricane preparedness and science. And so
we bring that event, with all our NOAA partners, emergency
management, American Red Cross, all the agencies come together
in a science museum environment that now brings a very
interactive, very immersive, fun for the kids, and moms and
dads. So we bring all this content into the museum, and it's
been a very effective way to kick off our hurricane season here
in South Florida.
But the science museum in every community, they're the
conduits of taking high level science from local university or
research institutes to the community through their exhibits,
and that's why we put the Wall of Wind exhibit there too, so we
can explain the importance of wind engineering and mitigation.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, and I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Feenstra's recognized.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, and Ranking
Member Lucas, and thank you to all our witnesses for their
testimony today, and sharing extensive research and experience
on these important subjects. Dr. Uccellini, I'm working on
legislation that aims to create a research development testing
evaluation program involving National Weather Service and NOAA
Assistant Administrator for Oceanic and Atmospheric Research.
It would focus on technology-based solutions to mitigate issues
caused by radar obstruction. A key portion would involve
consultation with the Inter-agency Council for Advancing
Meteorological Services, ICAMS. The Department of Commerce,
NWS, and NOAA are vital members of the Council, but it also
includes input from departments and agencies. Can you elaborate
on why it's so important to have Department of Transportation,
Defense, Energy, and others at the table when meteorological
policies and practices are discussed?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, I would say it's important in general
because they're users of the information as well, and--as we
make all of our observations and forecasts readily available.
So, in general, it's important to have them at the table. With
respect to the radar obstruction issues, we track the
performance of our radars every day. We assess, you know, on an
annual basis, with respect to obstruction issues, for example,
related to growing trees, or now, working with the research
institutes in some of these agencies, by the way, with respect
to what's happening with the wind farms in the central part of
the country that actually has now caused an obstruction within
the return signal coming back to the radars.
So, you know, we're very--you know, these are problems that
are very complex, so you have to go where the science is, but
also deal with the folks who are in the user community that
have to rely on other things, like wind energy, for example,
and what that would mean. So we're in that mix, and attempting
to work with these folks have been, actually, rather
successful, and, you know, we realize we have to solve these
issues.
There might come the day, though, that--especially in some
areas with trees that--and other obstructions, people build
buildings, that we have to move. We have to move the radar
somewhere else. So that's an expensive proposition, you know,
average $10 million a pop.
So we don't do that lightly. But there are those examples
already, where it looks like the only solution's that, when we
get into this obstructed view, is to move. Very rare, but it
can happen.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, I appreciate those comments, because,
as you noted, I live in Iowa, and we have a lot of wind
turbines, which are fantastic, but they do create some
obstacles, obstructions, so--last month, when we had
Administrator Spinrad testify, I asked him about the radar
obstructions and technological solutions. Out of some of the
possible solutions I raised to him, he mentioned his
fascination with phased-array radar as a possible option for
future weather detection. It also focuses on the future
legislation I'm working on. Could you explain some of the
benefits of phased-array radar that can complement our current
radar systems?
Dr. Uccellini. Yes. So one of the major benefits is that,
with the way the phased-array radar works, you don't have the
rotating parts, you don't have, you know, the extent of the
vertical scans, which takes--all takes time to observe, and
then to process. Could be minutes into--when we first put the
NEXRADs out, it was a five minute period just to process all
that data with these--with phased-array it's out and in, right?
Part of it is the real fast access to the data. You know,
minutes count in a tornado warning, so there's an advantage.
One of the disadvantages is that one of the--or one of the
advances we've made with the NEXRAD is something called dual
pole radar. It's not just what you're doing laterally, it's the
vertical aspect of it, which has allowed us to see better into
the clouds, and the structures of the rain shafts, the
potential rotation, the brief flow that actually signals a
tornado on the ground can now be observed. The type of
precipitation, the rate, the amount of precipitation falling is
all enhanced with dual pole. It's not into phased-array yet,
OK? That's a research issue. So we have to be careful as we
move forward with these, and we are. We really do believe that
phased-array radar is the call of the future, but we have to
ensure that the research and technology adds to what we do now,
it's not a step back from that. And I'm sure that the science
and the technology is going to bring that answer to us, but we
have to go through the steps.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, thank you so much for your comments.
Thanks for all your work, and each person that's on the--that's
testified, thank you so much. I yield back.
Staff. Mr. Casten is next.
Mr. Casten. Thank you so much. Thank you to the Chairman,
Ranking Member, and to our witnesses. I'd like to introduce for
the record a paper written by James Hansen and Makiko Sato this
past August, ``July Temperature Update: Faustian Payment Comes
Due''. If I could have unanimous consent on that? I'll take
that as a yes. The--Dr. Hansen's work is somewhat speculative,
but he basically makes the observation in this paper that the--
our success at reducing particulate pollution may mean that we
have dramatically understated future warming, that we're
essentially taking particulate out of the air, and that has a
very immediate effect on cooling, even as reducing CO
2

has a longer duration impact. And the kicker in his article is
he says, ``We should expect that the global warming rate for
the''--excuse me--``quarter century 2015 to 2040 to be about
double the .18 degree Celsius per decade rate from 1970 to
2015.'' That's obviously a bit of a gut punch.
And, Dr. Uccellini, I don't want to confuse climate science
and weather forecasting, but I am curious, from a computational
perspective, if, in fact, we are seeing a--an acceleration in
the rate of warming that is that quick? How much do you trust
our computational tools and the weather system to model
scenarios that are increasingly outside of the range of data
we've historically been able to check against?
Dr. Uccellini. That's a very interesting question. The fact
is is that the equations we use in numerical weather prediction
are the basics--the basic physics and dynamics that are also
being used in the climate domain. We are accounting for now
aerosols, particulate matter within these models. The--to get
at the issues, though, that you're referring to, and I do
have--this is Jim Hansen, right, that're you're----
Mr. Casten. Yes, yes.
Dr. Uccellini [continuing]. Referring to? Yes.
Mr. Casten. Yes.
Dr. Uccellini. Yes. Yes. I have the greatest respect for
him, and he's--he was--you know, he really has a lot of
foresight, so this is something really worth listening to.
That--we will need higher resolution models to effectively deal
with the kinds of feedback mechanisms that he's referring to.
From a point of view of a daily, weekly, and, you know, out to
monthly type forecast, we will need higher resolution models to
deal with that kind of feedback mechanism.
And one of the things about the warmer atmosphere that I'm
very concerned about is that, you know, we--in terms of
predicting--and even determining the current precipitation rate
with radars, these are based upon equations with statistical
post-processing on past events. Well, like, in New York City,
no--you don't have any past events that had 1.94 inches of rain
in 1 hour that we got from Henri, and then 3.15--these are
preliminary numbers--3.15 in 1 hour 2 weeks later, all right?
So exactly the physics of that, and how that's working, is
another part of the research equation that we're going to have
to look into. So--and that's for observations, for short term
forecasts, and for extended forecasts.
So it's one of these challenges that we're going to have to
embrace. I like to call it a grand challenge, because it's
going to take basically the whole community to deal with this
in the weather, the water, and the climate communities to
collectively study these issues, and to allow us to make the
advances on an operational basis.
Mr. Casten. I know a lot of the--a lot of my colleagues
have been asking you about staffing levels. Assume that we can
assume the computational issues, should we be thinking about
this primarily as a computational problem, or is it also a
staff problem to go through and figure out--sort of ask the
questions we haven't thought to ask before?
Dr. Uccellini. Yes, and I think this is definitely relevant
to the staffing, because there's going to be increasing demands
for products and information, even on something like you've
just brought up, that perhaps doesn't have the full attention
today. As we become more susceptible to some of these feedback
mechanisms, it's going to manifest itself in events that affect
society, and once that starts happening, you're going to see
the Weather Service right in the middle of this, in terms of
making better forecasts, but also getting that information to
decisionmakers that could likely go beyond the emergency
managers and water resource managers we focus on today. The
public safety lens will grow, and we'll be dealing with that as
well.
So, yes, I think--you know, I'm not disagreeing that there
are staffing--I wish we could get more staff, but the point
is--first of all, I've got to live within appropriation, which
is my first rule, and second, we have to show--to get it to you
folks that this is really needed. So--but I--I'm a firm
believer that our services are going to grow, and it's not only
going to be us, it's going to be the whole enterprise. I want
to again emphasize what the private sector will be doing in
this domain space as well. I think this is growth for the
entire enterprise.
Mr. Casten. Well, thank you, and I appreciate the Chair for
letting you complete your answer. I'm out of time to continue
this, but--I yield back, but not before wishing you a very
happy retirement.
Staff. Mr. Ellzey is recognized.
Mr. Ellzey. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Lucas. For those who don't know, Mike Garcia and I flew
together in the Navy in combat in 2003, so we are the end users
of the product that the National Weather Service has delivered,
and it's essential to our success. And--so as a former Naval
aviator, and a commercial airline pilot until very recently,
weather forecasting has played a critical role in my ability to
do my job and keep America safe.
During my career I've relied on data provided from the NWS
and its forecasters, and I'm forever grateful to these men and
women who work around the clock to deliver accurate and
reliable data. The National Weather Service is instrumental in
our ability to protect property, save lives, and enhance our
national economy, not to mention our security. After hearing
and reading your testimonies, I believe that Congress must
equip the organization with tools to better forecast weather
events, and communicate those findings with the general public.
And I'd like to also point out that Chairwoman Johnson and I,
back in December 26 of 2015, were hit with a massive tornado,
since we're in the middle of Tornado Alley, that literally
jumped over my house, and led me to--while I was on a trip in
Los Angeles as an airline pilot, my family was hiding in the
closet, and spurred me to invest in a tornado shelter at our
home.
So this problem isn't going away. It's extremely important
as a--and also, as a former airline pilot for a company that
recently, this last weekend, had some issues both with weather
and manning, I'd like to address this to Mr. Werner. Since the
management and labor issue has always existed, there's always a
tug of war between the two. You've identified a problem that
you are--that, in your mind, you are understaffed, and that the
GS construct with your work group isn't helpful. If I'm wrong
there, please expound on that, and what are your solutions to
getting the staffing up to the requirement that you need? Thank
you.
Mr. Werner. I didn't quite catch the last part of that
question. The GS construct?
Mr. Ellzey. GS-5 through 12. I mean, it's--I think you said
that that's not working in the way it was intended. Second,
third order effects rarely do, so I'd just like your thoughts
on it.
Mr. Werner. Yes, I think with regards to staffing--let me
start out with this, is that we've firmly, totally, embraced
impact-based decision support services. Let's just forget about
the numbers. Well, we've been operating in that mode
continuously for a number of years now, and we keep talking
about possible unlocks to free up time. We haven't really fully
realized those because things are still in the process of being
developed, being tested out, what will work, what won't work.
There's hypothesis what will come, but there are increasing,
increasing demands on the service that we provide. And that's
great, because you know what? We realize at the local level
that they're really, really at a benefit, because most of the
key decisions are actually at the local level, with the
emergency managers and the public health officials, because
they are the ones that makes the decisions that actually wind
up protecting the community. So we're fully, fully invested in
that.
And I see the strain out there. I see lack of personnel in
offices. I see people who have worked, over the last five
years, 500 hours, and I've even been told up to 1,000 hours of
overtime in 1 year. That's not sustainable. We've actually
created new capabilities at the Hurricane Center. We made the
storm surge unit there operational, with two Federal employees.
It became operational last year, during our busiest, most
active hurricane season ever, these two folks, during the
pandemic, put in over 500 hours of extra time to support the
mission. Thank goodness nobody caught COVID. So this is real,
that this is going on.
Now, as far as the five through 12 construct, that's a
concept where the whole focus, and it shouldn't be the whole
focus, is bringing bodies in, but we also need experience,
right? I was alerted not long ago of an office that had three
vacancies out of their staffing of eight meteorologists, they
were down, three, OK? So they only had five now. And of those
five, who had reached the full proficiency level of a GS-12
level, I think there was only one, maybe two, was at that
level. And normally an office at least has a lead forecaster,
somebody who's a GS-12, who's proficient, and maybe another
forecaster there. So that puts a burden on that office to
provide the increased products and services to get that out.
So we need to step back and go, wait a minute. When we see
offices that do not have this experience, we need to stop. We
need to go ahead and put out an announcement to allow an 11 or
a 12 to move there, or do a lateral transfer prior to opening
up this mass vacancy for new hires. You can do them in steps.
So you're still filling the seats, but also giving people an
opportunity to move. And there is frustration out there, I've
spoke about this in a paper, where, prior to this five through
12 construct, we had another construct where we had people that
reached the grade of an 11, an internship, and they'd have say
3 years under their belt, and then they would apply for the
journey position as a 12. Well, when this started, they got
shut out as they're unable to move. So, we have people who did
research in say, convective weather, but they're someplace
where they don't have convective weather, and they're someplace
where they don't have convective weather. Talking about taking
research to operations, and tropical weather as well, so
they're frustrated, and they're moving out. So people are
leaving----
Mr. Ellzey. OK.
Mr. Werner [continuing]. The seats that we need to keep in.
Mr. Ellzey. OK. Thank you for your time, Mr. Werner. Mr.
Uccellini, sorry we didn't get to you. My time is up, I yield
back, and happy retirement, Mr. Uccellini. Thank you for your
years of service.
Dr. Uccellini. Thank you.
Staff. Ms. Wild is recognized.
Ms. Wild. Thank you very much. Good afternoon, everybody.
My district is Pennsylvania 7th District, located squarely in
the Lehigh Valley of Pennsylvania, for those of you who know
Pennsylvania geography, the Allentown/Bethlehem/Easton are. We
recently experienced a rash of flooding and damaged
infrastructure as the aftermath of Hurricane Ida tore through
our community. We had flooded roads, strong winds, lack of
power, and serious debris that made it very difficult for
businesses to reopen, for people to get to work and to school,
and for the first responders to get those who were in need
after the storm. I appreciate each of your testimonies so far
on how we can make our country a Weather-Ready Nation, and I
believe one key part of this aim is ensuring that extreme
weather and disaster warnings are accessible and understandable
to stakeholders, and to the public, in the face of such events,
and I know that all of you have talked about that to some
extent.
In addition to emergency managers and first responders, key
service providers, like our transit systems, healthcare
systems, and schools need timely and accurate information to
prepare for, and, of course, to respond to disasters. And in
preparing their families and their homes for storms and floods,
the general public needs quick access to well contextualized
information on the timing, location, and severity of extreme
weather risks. I have a constituent organization in my
district, the Nurture Nature Center in Easton, Pennsylvania,
that is working to answer these questions through social and
behavioral research, and the group has received NOAA grants,
among other agencies. This research can help inform how all
levels of government can make disaster and extreme weather
planning, communication, and management meet the needs of the
public, and fulfill the mission that Congress laid out of
protecting lives, property, and the national economy in the
Weather Research Act of 2017.
So, with all of that said, I'd like to start--Dr.
Uccellini, could you discuss how the National Weather Service
uses social and behavioral science research to strengthen its
impact-based decision support services for community and
emergency management partners?
Dr. Uccellini. Thank you. Yes, with--going beyond the
forecast, the warning, to interact with--directly with
decisionmaking and influence that--comes the recognition that
we're now entering the field of social science, and dealing
with, you know, exactly how to message to get the best
response, how to design products and services that map into
specific key decision points, how to deal with the changing
risk preference that people have. Even as you're going through
a forecast, from 10 days out to the actual event, people have
different risk preferences, and even the emergency management
community will have a different tempo as you approach an event,
so everything is affected from a human factors perspective.
So we do have--now, at--we partner with other agencies, we
partner with the line offices within NOAA to leverage off of
their social science research. We have a small amount of work
that's actually done in the Weather Service that's more focused
on the products and services in assessing our messaging, and--
et cetera, et cetera, and we've already gotten feedback about
simplifying our messaging through that activity that we're
going to be implementing over the next 1 or 2 years. So this is
becoming increasingly a bigger part of what we do and what we
need.
And certainly, with the organization that you referenced,
there's work that's done that's focused on how to respond to
water events, which is different, you know, than weather
events, quite frankly. There are different aspects to it. So
it's been very helpful to us, and it certainly has been a part
of the successes we have seen to date, but we certainly have a
much longer way to go in that area.
Ms. Wild. Thank you. And I'm going to just shift gears
because we, as you know, have very limited time, and ask Mr.
Werner, based on your experience and your members' feedback,
what types of training, professional development, and other
resources can help support the employee pipeline, especially
for new hires and young professionals at the Weather Service?
Mr. Werner. I think--well, basically it requires a degree
in meteorology to become a meteorologist. We also have folks
who are interested in hydrology. That's another interest that
we take in. We also have folks who--electronic technicians that
come in as well. We also have physical scientists. I think that
the big thing that we really need to do is go out there and
actually sell ourselves, go to these schools, and actually show
them what a career in the National Weather Service is all
about.
And we do that a lot sometimes at the local offices, or we
did prior to the pandemic. We'd go to high schools, we'd go to
colleges, and, you know, what does it take to get into this
career. What do we do? Or come out to the office and
participate in a forecast, look through this weather radar
scenario. What interests you in this, what--and what are the
requirements to get there? Which we don't set, but they're
already laid out, and how do you go about doing that? Did I
answer your question on that?
Ms. Wild. Thank you. It's a--it--it's probably an open-
ended question that we could talk about all afternoon, but I
thank----
Mr. Werner. OK.
Ms. Wild [continuing]. You very much for your input, and
with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Staff. Mrs. Kim is recognized. Mrs. Kim? If you're ready,
you're recognized. OK, I don't think we have Mrs. Kim available
now. We'll go with Ms.--we'll give Mrs. Kim one last second.
Mrs. Kim? OK, if Ms. Kim is not prepared, then we'll go with
Ms. Stansbury.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you so much. Thank you, Madam Chair,
for convening today's important panel, and thank you to Mr.
Uccellini, you--for your service for so many years with the
Weather Service. I'm sorry, I just mispronounced your name.
Uccellini. As we all know, our communities are already
experiencing the impacts of climate change, as many have said
today, and extreme weather events, and these events are
becoming more frequent all across the country, including in my
home State here in New Mexico, and the National Weather Service
plays such a pivotal role not just in weather forecasting, but
increasingly in climate forecasting. And in order to enable to
our communities to plan for and to respond to these events, and
the changing climate, it is so vital that we are able to
accurately model and develop tools and technologies, and to
really translate and deliver that information to our community
so that it can inform their decisionmaking on the ground. So
this includes both responding to emergency situations, as we've
talked so much about this morning, but also planning for and
building a more resilient and sustainable infrastructure and
future for our communities.
So, to do that, our communities and our Federal partners
really need resources to ensure that all parts of our country,
including my home State, have sufficient staffing, technology,
funding, et cetera, for real time observations for forecasting,
for place-based tools, and to provide that on the ground
technical assistance. And I think, like so many parts of the
country, this year has really punctuated the need for those
investments in New Mexico, where we have been simultaneously
grappling with one of most severe droughts in our history at
the same time that we've experienced the highest number of
disaster declarations ever in our State's history due to
flooding and to wildfires. So we are very much appreciative to
the National Weather Service, who has been a fantastic partner
in New Mexico, and provides, of course, regular briefings to
our State and to our local partners through the Drought
Monitoring Workgroup, and all of the services that you all
provide.
But New Mexico needs more support. We need more
observational platforms, including things like dense Mesonets
for improving near-term and short-term forecasts to help
support our public safety and decision support. We don't have
enough monitoring systems, and we really have severe
limitations in our local weather forecasting. We also need more
support for real-time precipitation and flood alert systems,
especially in our urban areas, which are experiencing more
severe weather incidents. And, just as we've been talking about
all morning, we are also facing staffing shortages locally,
which impact our forecasts, and drive talent to burn out
quickly and leave the field. You know, the National Weather
Service does perform outreach to our communities and to our
schools, but there's so much more that we need to do to create
a strong STEM pipeline so that New Mexicans can also take a--
take part in forecasting our future.
Here in our State, we are home to communities that have
lived on these lands for centuries, and since time immemorial,
and our communities are experiencing and seeing climate change
before our very eyes, and we need to make sure that they have
the opportunity to not only have a seat at the table, but also
to build that robust STEM work force across our communities, so
we see that as being part and parcel of building our STEM work
force through our public universities, our minority-serving
institutions, our tribal colleges, and also partnerships with
our two National Labs, who are themselves at the forefront of
climate science and modeling. And so I urge all of our Federal
agencies, including the Weather Service and NOAA at large, to
look at expanding programs in New Mexico, and particularly at
our minority serving institutions, and to really partner to
build that pipeline in communities. So I look forward to
working and supporting NOAA, and the Weather Service, and our
Committee's work on these issues, and we know how critically
important our weather and climate forecasting capabilities are
to the future, the safety, security, and well-being of our
communities.
So, with that, Mr. Uccellini, I would like to just ask a
couple of quick questions. You know, one of the big challenges
from a science perspective is how to make that translational
leap between weather and climate forecasting so that we can
close the gap----
Mrs. Kim. Emeril, thank you so much, OK? I will try to come
back. Thank you.
Ms. Stansbury [continuing]. To help our communities prepare
and plan for the impacts of climate change, especially with
extreme weather events. And what I wanted to ask you this
morning is how can we help support the scientific and
technological advances that are needed to close that gap
between weather and climate forecasting, and how can we here in
Congress help to support that work at the Weather Service?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, we clearly need support in that the
weather/climate--I would say the weather/water/climate linkage
is something that's being recognized as a fundamental issue
that we need to build off of and address. The--you can't make
advances in the weather domain space, or the water domain
space, or the separate climate domain space, without the
interactions amongst all of them, and this is something that
we're really promoting as a basis for moving forward, and it
certainly applies to the Southwest. And the monsoon, whether
you get it or not, I know is a big deal out there. That's a
forecast a year in advance, 6 months in advance, 3 months in
advance, that people plan around, and that's a big challenge.
We understand that. So it's something that we absolutely need
to do.
I also think, in terms of getting to your users, we really
have shown success in our partnership with tribal nations
across the country, and that's a success, again, built on a
trusted relationship among the Weather Service personnel, and
the tribal leaders, and the people there--out there, so we're
really proud of that. Again, it's something we need to build
off of, because all the things you've just mentioned, those
threats are multiplied when you get into the tribal domains, or
the poorer areas in any State. The impacts are amplified. So
this is something that's certainly in our planning to deal with
more as effectively as we can, let's just put it that way.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And I know I'm out of time here,
but we very much look forward to working with the Weather
Service, and I very much hope, as you all are moving forward,
and doing your planning for staffing, and addressing many of
the management and the staffing issues that have been discussed
this morning, that you will lean into partnering with minority-
serving institutions to build that pipeline, because that's the
future not only of our communities, but I think really the
future of Federal service. So I want to thank you all, and I
appreciate you being here this morning.
Dr. Uccellini. Thank you.
Staff. Mrs. Kim is recognized.
Mrs. Kim. Well, thank you very much, Chairman, and I would
like to thank our Ranking Member for holding this timely
hearing. Actually, tomorrow I will be preparing to host a
wildfire roundtable discussion, so this, you know, is very
timely for me. And at our wildfire roundtable discussion
tomorrow, we are looking to find cooperation--the system
between Federal, State, and local stakeholders, and see how we
can alert and predict mechanisms of wildfires, and emergency
response, and public safety, so I really appreciate the
conversation today.
I represent California's 39th Congressional District, and
my district is in Southern California, where the air quality is
infamously poor due to smog and wildfire smog during the
wildfire season. As a result, as you can see, the individuals
with heart disease, lung disease, diabetes, as well as
children, the elderly, and pregnant women in my district are at
risk of these health complications due to poor air quality
during wildfire season, so it's really important that we
discuss the--accurately forecasting wildfire smog, because it's
not only an environmental issue, but also an issue of public
health.
So, Dr. Uccellini, the question for you is what is the
current state of our ability to predict smoke output and
transport from a wildfire, and what questions do we need to
answer in order to improve smoke forecast models, and what do--
and--improved smoke forecasts mean with regard to public health
and safety?
Dr. Uccellini. So it's a very important part of the health
equation, with respect to fires, is the smoke. We have a number
of models now that actually deal with particulate matter and
smoke directly, and a very high resolution model, which has
been implemented over the past several years, is actually what
is--what we've seen on--the output from those models we've seen
on TV, in terms of the movement of the smoke. I would also say
that we've made great advancements in our satellite program.
This is--the satellite component of NOAA, NESDIS, and in the
launch of these geostationary satellites with high resolution,
advanced baseline imagers. I mean, the smoke observations that
come from them with the incredibly high resolution has just
been phenomenal, actually. And another aspect of those is being
able to spot the fires. It's become one of the earliest
indicators that you've got a fire in your neighborhood, is what
we're seeing on one of these ghost images.
So, you know, we're there in providing the observations.
With air quality forecasts, I would--I should note that we--
whatever we produce, we provide to the States and the local
communities that actually make the air quality assessments, and
related predictions. So--but we do have the tools--improved
tools to get to them. Are they good enough from the health
vector perspective? That's an interesting question. It's
probably another basis for an extensive research effort to be
able to have the more exact quantification of the smoke, the
nature of the smoke, the size of the particles, et cetera, to
be able to relate those to health, but that's certainly an
interest in the larger community, the medical community, in
terms of what can be done to assess locally, and then use the
predictions to assess what's going to be happening downstream
from those fires.
Mrs. Kim. So would you say--I mean, or can I ask you, very
frankly, how do you think we--I mean, how accurate are the
National Weather Service's smoke forecasts?
Dr. Uccellini. You know, we are doing--actually, the
forecasts for the particulate matter and smoke is relatively
good. I don't have the numbers in front of me, but it's--you
know, they're as good as the--basically the dynamics in the
flow field--in the atmosphere that moves those--the smoke and
particulate matters will make it. And it's actually been pretty
remarkable, I would say. I was--I'd been one of the main
proponents when I was the head of the National Centers of
Environmental Prediction. We actually introduced these models,
working with EPA, and then--and with the research component of
NOAA, which is out in Boulder, producing the higher resolution
versions. I--you know, I think it's a pretty good product
already, but like every other forecast system, they always have
areas that need to be improved. I can't articulate them for you
right now, but I can guarantee you that there's--there are
researchers out in Boulder, Colorado who could.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. Gosh, I see that my time is up, but I
wanted to talk about the next generation of meteorologists and
scientists, because my home State's economy is heavily reliant
on large STEM work force in many different sectors, so--gosh,
I--but I am out of time. Chairwoman, do you--would you allow me
maybe time to ask one more question regarding this? I mean----
Chairwoman Johnson. If we have a second round, we'll come
back.
Mrs. Kim. OK. Well, thank you, then. I'll yield back.
Staff. Mr. Tonko's recognized.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Thank you to Chair Johnson, and
Ranking Member Lucas, for offering this stage of--for
discussion on what is a very important role that--and, you
know, the Weather Service plays in our country's security, and
so I thank you for that, and I thank the witnesses for offering
information to us today, which is very important as we go
forward.
Before I begin, I acknowledge Dr. Uccellini's 43-year
career in public service, as well as his nine years of
leadership at the helm of the National Weather Service. Doctor,
you've dedicated over 50 years of your life to the field of
meteorology, and therefore are leaving a legacy that will have
a lasting influence for generations, so I indeed wish you the
best, and for you and the team at NWS, thank you for your
reliance on, and your respect for science, as it is indeed
critical as this Nation addresses its national security and its
response to the challenge of climate change.
For many years I have been deeply concerned about several
matters within the NWS, but specifically work force issues, and
the reorganization of the National Weather Service forecast
offices. I greatly appreciate the incredible and essential work
that the NWS does, however, I have remained concerned for some
time about the number of vacancies and hiring backlogs at the
Weather Service. In the 2017 GAO report, some Weather Service
staff said that because positions remained vacant for extended
periods, they were concerned that the agency might be
intentionally leaving vacant positions open to downsize the
number of staff across operational units. So, Dr. Uccellini,
does the National Weather Service indeed intend to downsize?
Dr. Uccellini. No.
Mr. Tonko. OK. In Fiscal Year 2016 the Weather Service's
vacancy rate at its operational units was 11 percent. What is
the current vacancy rate, both funded and--with both funded and
unfunded vacancies?
Dr. Uccellini. I can say--I have the number with respect to
what we're appropriated for, and what's in our spend plan that
was--been vetted with Congress as the money was being allotted,
that we are up to about 99 percent now, with the baseline being
what's in the appropriation bill, not the table of
organization, which dates back to 2000. So I--if you will allow
me, I can--I would like to just say that--I would say it's been
since 2017 that we finally--all the stars lined up with respect
to the processes, the hiring processes being improved within
NOAA, and within the Weather Service, and being able to use
programs like 5 through 12 to get more people into the Weather
Service, we're 150--we have 150 more people in the Weather
Service today than we had in 2017. This is related principally
to the entry level coming through the Five through 12 Program,
right? Mobilization doesn't change the bottom line. It moves
holes from one office to another. What we----
Mr. Tonko. OK. What----
Dr. Uccellini [continuing]. Want is a staffing that can do
the job, and we're working hard to get that.
Mr. Tonko. And I appreciate that. And, you know, Mr.
Werner, you've opined that there, in your opinion, are vacant
positions, and how--if that is the case, how would that impact
the Weather Service's delivery of accurate forecasts and the
IDSS?
Mr. Werner. Well, it stresses the staff, and I think the
big thing is there--we wind up having to limit the--what we can
take on, so far as impact-based decision support services. And
what is frustrating, if you're going for a time, and you have a
partnership where you're providing this service, there's an
expectation. It's a partnership. And then all of a sudden
you're short staffed two or three bodies, and you no longer
have the critical mass to do that. You have to pull back. That
to me makes us look poorly as a partner when we're really
trying to build relationships, and better serve the community.
Mr. Tonko. OK. The 2021 GAO report that I co-requested with
Chair Johnson, Representatives Crist, and Bonamici, recommended
that the National Weather Service develop a two-way
communication strategy for the Evolve Program that outlines how
the agency will listen and respond to employee concerns. The
report mentioned the National Weather Service had started
working on a strategy in 2019. So, Dr. Uccellini, when will
this communication strategy be finalized and released, who is
developing it, and will it have buy-in from both employees and
union members?
Dr. Uccellini. So the strategy aspect is--well, first of
all, since 2019 we now have a CBA (collective bargaining
agreement) that--and I thank John Werner and his leadership on
the union side, and Mary Erickson, who is Deputy Director of
the Weather Service, really got together and pulled that
together. Part of the strategy is--you know, is wrapped up in
that we do invite new ECO to the table as we move forward.
There are times, though, that there's certainly not agreement,
and we are attempting to work that through, like right now, in
the collaborative forecast process. There are discussions going
on between the folks in the PMO and the union to bring this
forward.
So it's something that we're working on. Part of this is--
involves the staffing plan that would come out of, you know,
trying to address the increasing demand signal that John has
rightfully pointed to, by the way. We're certainly in solid
agreement on that. The question is, how do we get that to the
point where that can be funded along with everything else we
have to do? So I just want to assure you that we're working on
these plans, we're working to advance ourselves, and advance
our staffing issues, within the budgets that we are
appropriated.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Madam Chair, I had two other
questions that I wanted to ask of both Dr. Uccellini and Mr.
Werner. I'll get those to the Committee in writing, and will in
advance thank the two gentlemen for their responses. So, with
that, Madam Chair, I yield back, and again thank you. I'm sorry
we ran over time.
Dr. Uccellini. Thank you.
Staff. Mr. Beyer is recognized.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you very much, and, Madam Chair, thank you
so much for putting this on. Dr. Uccellini, let me add my
congratulations, and I hope you have lots of plans for your
retirement. And Dr. Uccellini especially, because I'd love to
know what you and the Weather Service are preparing for, in
terms of the critical weather events in the years to come.
You know, the global surface temperature has risen 1.1
degrees Centigrade, compared to the years 1850 to 1900. This is
from the IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change)
report. The last time the Earth's surface was this warm was
125,000 years ago. But that's not the bad news. The bad news is
the IPCC now--their best estimate is three degrees Centigrade,
so that's another 1.9, or almost two full degrees Centigrade
from where we are right now, with all of the things that we
have heard in the last two hours from my fellow Members of
Congress. That range is 2-1/2 to--point--2.5 to 4.0 degrees
Centigrade, and it will break the 1.5 mark, which was the Paris
thing, sometime between 2025 and 2037. So what can the National
Weather Service do now to get ready for ever more dramatic
weather events, ever more dramatic changes in the ability to
forecast what's coming?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, I can say that we are certainly aware
of the increasing vulnerability--I would call it increasing
vulnerability that our communities are facing with respect to
these extreme events. Whether it's the coastline, winter
storms, hurricanes, whether it's inland, with droughts, the
flash droughts that are now becoming more prevalent in the
Northern Midwest, the heat--I mean, you know, we talked about
the northwest part of this country, there were heat events this
year that rivaled the records that are the--that you see in
Phoenix, OK? It's really--and, of course, the fire--the fires
are burning faster and hotter, and impacting society.
So we are trying to step up our game with respect to the
ability to forecast the extremity of these events, which will
likely grow. To deal with the vulnerability of the communities,
we have to work in partnerships. This is really the key to a
Weather-Ready Nation, is that--those public safety officials,
the emergency management, the water resource management. And
one of the things we recognize, and this gets back to John's
concern, John Werner's concerns, most of the decisions on
public safety in this country are made at the local levels, all
right? Tocqueville discovered that in 1835, published it in
1838, and it's still true today. So we have to provide this
consistent and accurate information to all government levels,
but it's the local presence that's going to be put under extra
stress, in terms of dealing with this, whether it's us making
the forecasts and warnings over extended period of time, or the
public safety officials that are out there on the ground
evacuating people, who are dealing with the community issues,
to react. So all----
Mr. Beyer. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Uccellini [continuing]. Of the above. We're all going
to be challenged.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Uccellini. Let me pivot. Mr.
Werner, we talked about the 500 vacancies, and there's some
ambiguity of how much there is, but why 98 days? You know, I'm
a private sector guy, and I can't imagine taking 98 days to
hire anybody. You know, the background check can be done in two
days, check their references in five days. Mr. Werner?
Mr. Werner. You're asking me that? I don't know why it
takes that long. Apparently it's actually--supposedly, from
what I've been told, it's sped up somewhat.
Mr. Beyer. Yes, yes.
Mr. Werner. I have no idea. I think our system was broke,
and they're trying to get it better. I have no idea why it
takes that long. I think it should be a lot quicker than that.
And there is also another mechanism we could use, with doing
lateral assignments prior to doing the external mass hirings,
it's called the NOAA Reassignment Opportunity Notice, that gets
people in a lot quicker because they're already status
employees, to take care of that experience gap, and then do the
external mass hirings to fill in those seats. But why those are
going to take 90 to 98 days, I have no idea.
Mr. Beyer. So, Dr. Uccellini, I know it's better, but why
is it still so long?
Dr. Uccellini. Well, you know, this is a process that
involves--the 98 days is getting the announcement out, you
know, getting people to apply, getting it reviewed, right?
Going through the--going through that process takes a month or
two, and then actually getting people to--you know, they apply,
but they don't necessarily agree--then you've got to go through
the security checks. The security checks have gotten, actually,
a lot better. That used to be the tall pole in the tent, and
we've worked that. That's point one.
Point two is, with respect to--and there's so many
resources that you have in the human resource area that it's
not just a problem in the Weather Service, it's a problem
throughout NOAA. I don't have a hiring component within the
Weather Service. I have to rely on NOAA, and they're improving
tremendously. So we've got to work through that, but we're--98
days is a marked improvement over where we were before.
And I would also say that there are people who get that
hiring--they're in school, that need another month. That all
adds up to the average time of when you actually fill the seat.
So--but that's--let me assure you that we're not the private
sector, that's able to do that, but we are finding ways to
accelerate where we can.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you very much. Madam Chair, I, of course,
yield back.
Staff. Chairwoman Johnson, all of the Members have asked
questions, and I think you can close out the hearing whenever
you're ready.
Chairwoman Johnson. To the staff, do we have time for a
second round?
Staff. That's entirely up to you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Well, let me just suggest perhaps that
those who had questions, I know that one of the Members already
said that, if they would--I only heard maybe two that needed
other time, if you will submit your questions to the Committee,
we will then submit them to the witnesses. And let me say thank
you to all of our witnesses. This has been a very dynamic
hearing, and I appreciate you spending your time with us.
Before we bring the hearing to a close, I want to make sure
that every single witness receives a very hearty thank you, and
appreciate the knowledge you've shared.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
statements for Members, and for any additional questions the
Committee may ask the witnesses. So our witnesses are now
dismissed, and our Committee hearing is closed.
[Whereupon, at 1:59 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
