- KEEPING OUR SIGHTS ON MARS PART 3: A STATUS UPDATE AND REVIEW OF NASA'S ARTEMIS INITIATIVE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

KEEPING OUR SIGHTS ON MARS PART 3:
A STATUS UPDATE AND REVIEW
OF NASA'S ARTEMIS INITIATIVE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 1, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-42

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-525PDF          WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. DON BEYER, Virginia, Chairman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              BRIAN BABIN, Texas,
AMI BERA, California                     Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MO BROOKS, Alabama
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BILL POSEY, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          YOUNG KIM, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 1, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Don Beyer, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    18

Witnesses:

Mr. James Free, Associate Administrator, Exploration Systems
Development Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    20
Written Statement............................................    22

Mr. William Russell, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    26
Written Statement............................................    28

Dr. Patricia Sanders, Chair, Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel
Oral Statement...............................................    48
Written Statement............................................    50

The Honorable Paul K. Martin, Inspector General, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    59
Written Statement............................................    61

Mr. Daniel Dumbacher, Executive Director, American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics
Oral Statement...............................................    72
Written Statement............................................    74

Discussion.......................................................    82

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. James Free, Associate Administrator, Exploration Systems
Development Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.................................................   100

Mr. William Russell, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, U.S. Government Accountability Office............   118

Dr. Patricia Sanders, Chair, Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel.....   125

The Honorable Paul K. Martin, Inspector General, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration...........................   128

Mr. Daniel Dumbacher, Executive Director, American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics...................................   134
Statement from Karina Drees, President, Commercial
Spaceflight Federation.....................................   137

KEEPING OUR SIGHTS ON MARS PART 3:

A STATUS UPDATE AND REVIEW

OF NASA'S ARTEMIS INITIATIVE

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 1, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Don Beyer [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare recess at any time.
And before I deliver my opening remarks, I want to note
that, today, the Committee is meeting virtually, perhaps the
last time I hope.
I'm going to announce a couple reminders to the Members
about the conduct of this hearing. First, Members should please
keep their video feed on as long as they're present in the
hearing. Members are responsible for their own microphones, so
please keep your microphones muted unless you're speaking. And
finally, if Members have documents they wish to submit for the
record, please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose email
address was circulated prior to the meeting.
And before we get underway, I want to take a moment to
raise what's in the back of all of our minds, the Russia-
Ukraine conflict and its implications for civil space
activities. According to media reports, NASA (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration) has stated that, quote,
``It continues working with our international partners,
including the State Space Corporation Roscosmos, for the
ongoing safe operations of the International Space Station
(ISS).'' I'm encouraged by that--by the fact that the
International Space Station partnership has been successfully
preserved through periods of geopolitical stress in the past
and that sustaining its safe and productive operation has
always been a focus of the partnership. That said, this
Subcommittee will continue to monitor the situation and seek
updates from NASA as needed.
So turning now to the hearing, good morning, and welcome to
today's hearing titled ``Keeping Our Sights on Mars Part 3: A
Status Update and Review of NASA's Artemis Initiative.'' At
this time, I'd like to extend a warm welcome to our panel of
distinguished witnesses. Thank you for being here.
Before I continue, I want to take a moment to recognize the
Artemis I team at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). They're working
hard to prepare for Artemis I, the first launch of the
integrated Space Launch System (SLS) with the Orion crew
vehicle. This is an exciting and important milestone for
Artemis, and we couldn't do it without them.
It's been four years since President Trump first announced
a return to the Moon with humans, later naming the effort
Artemis, and it has been nearly three years since former Vice
President Pence accelerated the date for the Moon landing by
four years to 2024. The Biden Administration is continuing
Artemis, providing the important constancy of purpose for
NASA's long-term exploration initiative, an initiative that
will span multiple Congresses and Administrations.
Today's hearing will review NASA's plans and progress on
Artemis--the heavy-lift Space Launch System, the Orion crew
vehicle, the ground systems, the spacesuits, the Human Landing
System (HLS), the cislunar orbiting Gateway station, and the
many other systems, payloads, and operations that will support
planned missions to the Moon in preparation for the next giant
leap, being the first nation to land humans on the surface of
Mars.
Our witnesses will discuss the status of Artemis and
provide their perspectives on what is needed to make it
successful. We need their wisdom and guidance because, by all
accounts, Artemis is facing significant challenges. Advisory
boards, reviews, and audits are sounding warnings. Taken
together, those warnings signal that the issues afflicting
Artemis need serious attention by both Congress and the
Administration. Schedule delays and cost growth years in the
making, a confusing mishmash of contract types, and untried
approaches to organization and management are just a few of the
concerns that have been raised.
Throughout its history, NASA has repeatedly shown that it
can solve hard problems. The question before us today is are we
willing--is NASA willing--to own the challenges, face them head
on, and undo any problematic decisions if necessary? That is,
are both NASA and we in Congress prepared to take the actions
that will be needed to lead Artemis to success? Well, the
answer must be a resounding yes because I believe we have a
unique opportunity in Artemis if we choose to accept it.
Bipartisan support is strong. I love working with Dr. Babin,
Mr. Lucas, and others. The desire to explore deep space with
humans once again is palpable, and the chance to achieve is
before us. What's missing are the answers to the questions.
What are we trying to accomplish and how are we going to do it
and what are our priorities?
Funding of course will not be unlimited. Choices will need
to be made. And are we establishing a sustainable lunar program
of unlimited duration or are we meeting milestones and defined
objectives that feed forward to enable the Mars goals? Are we
developing national capabilities needed for Moon to Mars or
investing in commercial capabilities designed for objectives
other than national needs? Is Artemis going to be a national
program or a disparate set of projects? Have we laid out a
credible plan, approach, organization, and management structure
and identified the resources needed to implement it?
Everything--everything is dependent on having a clear and
agreed-upon story of what we're doing, why, and how we will do
it. More than four years into Artemis--the Nation's premier
effort to lead America back to the Moon and onto Mars--I'm
still looking for that narrative, something I can tell my
constituents, my family, especially my wife, and my colleagues
abroad and my colleagues here in Congress, especially the
appropriators.
Great nations do great things. I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses on what's needed to write an Artemis
narrative that is worthy of our great Nation.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Beyer follows:]

Before we get underway, I want to take a moment to raise
what is in the back of all of our minds, the Russia-Ukraine
conflict and its implications for our civil space activities.
According to media reports, NASA has stated that it ``continues
working with all our international partners, including the
State Space Corporation Roscosmos, for the ongoing safe
operations of the International Space Station.'' I am
encouraged by that and by the fact that the International Space
Station partnership has been successfully preserved through
periods of geopolitical stress in the past, and that sustaining
its safe and productive operation has always been a focus of
the partnership. That said, this Subcommittee will continue to
monitor the situation and seek updates from NASA, as needed.
Turning now to the hearing, good morning, and welcome to
today's hearing titled ``Keeping Our Sights on Mars Part 3: A
Status Update and Review of NASA's Artemis Initiative''. At
this time, I'd also to extend a warm welcome to our panel of
distinguished witnesses. Thank you for being here. Before I
continue, I want to take a moment to recognize the Artemis I
team at Kennedy Space Center. They are working hard to prepare
for Artemis I-the first launch of the integrated Space Launch
System with the Orion crew vehicle. This is an exciting and
important milestone for Artemis, and we could not do it without
them.
It's been four years since former President Trump first
announced a return to the Moon with humans-later naming the
effort, ``Artemis''. And it's been nearly three years since
former Vice President Pence accelerated the date for a Moon
landing by four years, to 2024. The Biden Administration is
continuing Artemis, providing the important constancy of
purpose for NASA's long-term exploration initiative, an
initiative that will span multiple Congresses and
Administrations.
Today's hearing will review NASA's plans and progress on
Artemis-the heavy-lift Space Launch System, the Orion crew
vehicle, the ground systems, the space suits, the Human Landing
System, the cislunar orbiting Gateway station, and the many
other systems, payloads, and operations that will support
planned missions to the Moon in preparation for the next giant
leap--being the first nation to land humans on the surface of
Mars.
Our witnesses will discuss the status of Artemis and
provide their perspectives on what is needed to make it
successful. We need their wisdom and guidance, because by all
accounts, Artemis is facing significant challenges. Advisory
bodies, reviews, and audits are sounding warnings. Taken
together, those warnings signal that the issues afflicting
Artemis need serious attention by both Congress and the
Administration.
Schedule delays and cost growth years in the making; a
confusing mishmash of contract types; and untried approaches to
organization and management are just a few of the concerns that
have been raised.
Throughout its history, NASA has repeatedly shown that it
can solve hard problems. The question before us today is are we
willing--is NASA willing--to own the challenges, face them
head-on, and undo any problematic decisions if necessary-that
is, are both NASA and we in Congress prepared to take the
actions that will be needed to lead Artemis to success?The
answer must be a resounding ``yes,'' because I believe we have
a unique opportunity in Artemis, if we chose to accept it.
Bipartisan support is strong. The desire to explore deep space
with humans once again is palpable. The chance to achieve is
before us. What is missing are answers to the questions-what we
are trying to accomplish and how we are going to do it? And
what are our priorities?
Funding will not be unlimited and choices will need to be
made. Are we establishing a sustainable lunar program of
unlimited duration, or are we meeting milestones and defined
objectives that feed forward to enable the Mars goal? Are we
developing national capabilities needed for Moon to Mars or
investing in commercial capabilities designed for objectives
other than national needs? Is Artemis going to be a national
program or disparate set of projects? Have we laid out a
credible plan, approach, organization, and management
structure, and identified the resources needed to implement it?
Everything. Everything is dependent on having a clear and
agreed-upon story of what we are doing, why, and how we will
get there. More than four years into Artemis-the nation's
premier effort to lead America back to the Moon and on to Mars-
I'm still looking for that narrative, something that I can tell
my constituents, my family, my colleagues abroad, and my
colleagues in here in Congress-especially appropriators.
Great nations do great things. I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses on what is needed to write an Artemis
narrative that is worthy of our great nation.

Chairman Beyer. Let me now recognize my friend, the
distinguished dentist and Congressman from Houston, Mr.--Dr.
Babin for an opening statement.
Mr. Babin. I want to thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It's good to see all of our expert witnesses and panelists back
again and to be with all of my colleagues.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and your distinguished
panel of witnesses. This hearing will provide Congress with an
update on the current status of the Nation's deep space
exploration initiatives. This panel is uniquely positioned to
provide that update. One theme that should emerge from this
hearing is the agreement from all participants, Members and
witnesses, about the importance of continuity and purpose and
design and architecture stability of space exploration programs
that fail because of conflicting direction, uncertain goals,
and unrealistic expectations. Maintaining progress through
various administrations and Congresses is critical for space
exploration programs.
The Trump Administration brought space policy back in line
with congressional direction derived from the consistent and
steady guidance provided by the 2005, 2008, 2010, and the 2017
NASA Authorization Act. This meant a return to the Moon and
onto Mars and beyond, not an asteroid distraction directed by
the Obama Administration. President Biden, to his credit, has
stayed the course as well so far. Hopefully, future requests
will prioritize funding an expedited return to the Moon, which
is important to our Nation geopolitically, scientifically,
economically, and from a national security perspective. The
Moon is also a logical and achievable near-term goal that will
enable the future exploration of Mars.
In the next few weeks, we will hopefully see a successful
launch of Orion atop the Space Launch System or SLS derived to
meet critical national capabilities, NASA's facilities,
infrastructure, and work force. SLS, Orion, and Exploration
Ground Systems (EGS) are not just a rocket but national
capabilities that enable deep space exploration of the Moon,
Mars, and our solar system. SLS and Orion for Artemis I are at
the Kennedy Center right now waiting a wet dress rehearsal
before launch this spring. Core stages and capsules for later
Artemis missions are well along in production.
We're also in the early stages of a Human Landing System to
deliver crew to the surface of the Moon, advance spacesuits to
replace the aging ISS suits, and allow for surface operations
and enabling [inaudible] surface power, habitats, and surface
vehicles that are necessary for a robust exploration program.
Finally, work on Gateway in space propulsion, other long-
term capabilities are also underway and are poised to enable a
sustained exploration architecture. As highlighted in the
testimony, we are receiving today the novel approaches proposed
for these acquisitions will require robust oversight and
insight to ensure a success.
We've returned to the correct goal, are on the right path,
but we are waiting on the right plan. And as we will hear from
our witnesses, there are still many details that NASA needs to
provide. We have no reliable cost for Artemis, no integrated
master schedule for Artemis and its subcomponents, and no
clarity on how the integration of elements such as Gateway,
space suits, HLS, SLS, Orion, and EGS will happen, or who is
responsible for ensuring ultimate success.
NASA's new reorganization may be a step in the right
direction, but many questions certainly remain. The
reorganization is very similar to the previous reorganization
proposal from the Trump Administration, which was rejected by
the majority only to be approved by them under this new
administration. Is NASA just reiterating deck chairs or will it
have a real impact? Is NASA's proposed phasing of transition
from development to operations appropriate, and does it heed
the past safety warnings from the Columbia Accident
Investigation Board on deeming spaceflight systems operational?
I'm sure that we all have many more questions. I'm also
confident that we all have the same shared goal, and that is a
robust human spaceflight program. But as the saying goes, the
devil is certainly in the details. We are still waiting on
those details.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony today, and I
yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our distinguished
panel of witnesses. This hearing will provide Congress with an
update on the status of the Nation's deep space exploration
initiatives. This panel is uniquely positioned to provide that
update.
One theme I expect to emerge from this hearing is agreement
by all participants--members and witnesses--about the
importance of continuity of purpose and design. Past space
exploration programs have failed because of conflicting
direction, uncertain goals, and unrealistic expectations.
We cannot afford to fail on the Artemis program.
Maintaining progress through various Administrations and
Congresses is critical for space exploration programs and our
national competitiveness.
The Trump Administration made space exploration a priority
and brought space policy back in line with the direction
provided by Congress for over a decade. The result is the
Artemis Program, dedicated to returning to the Moon and on to
Mars and beyond.
The current Administration, to its credit, has stayed the
course so far. Hopefully future budget requests will prioritize
funding an expedited return to the Moon.
This effort is important to our national and economic
security, as other nations like China seek to place a foothold
on the Moon and gain a strategic advantage over us. The Moon is
also a logical and achievable near-term goal that will enable
future exploration of Mars.
There are many upcoming milestones and important issues
related to the Artemis program that are critical for this
Committee to monitor and oversee. In the next few weeks, we
will hopefully see a successful launch of Orion atop the Space
Launch System (SLS). SLS, Orion, and Exploration Ground Systems
(EGS) are not just a rocket, but national capabilities that
enable deep space exploration of the Moon, Mars, and the solar
system.
SLS and Orion for Artemis 1 are at the Kennedy Space Center
(KSC) awaiting a wet dress rehearsal before launch this spring,
with core stages and capsules for later Artemis missions well
along in production. We are also in the early stages of
developing a Human Landing System to deliver crew to the
surface of the Moon. Another critical issue is the progress of
advanced space suits to replace the aging ISS suits that allow
for surface operations.
We also must ensure NASA has the technologies for
communications, surface power, habitats, and surface vehicles
that are necessary for a robust exploration program.
Finally, work on Gateway, in-space propulsion, and other
long-term capabilities are also underway and are poised to
enable a sustained exploration architecture.
As highlighted in the testimony we are hearing today, the
novel approaches proposed for these acquisitions will require
robust oversight and insight to ensure success. NASA has the
correct goal, we are on the right path, but we are waiting on
the right plan. As we will hear from our witnesses, there are
still many details that NASA needs to provide.
We have no reliable cost for Artemis, no integrated master
schedule for Artemis and its subcomponents, and no clarity on
how the integration of elements such as Gateway, space suits,
HLS, SLS, Orion, and EGS will happen, or who is responsible for
ensuring ultimate success.
NASA's recent reorganization may be a step in the right
direction, but many questions remain. The reorganization is
very similar to the previous reorganization proposal from the
Trump Administration, which was rejected by Congressional
Democrats, only to be approved by them under this new
Administration. Is NASA just rearranging deck chairs, or will
it have a real impact? Is NASA's proposed phasing for the
transition from development to operations appropriate and does
it heed past safety warnings? I am sure we all have many more
questions.
I am also confident we all have the same shared goal--a
robust human spaceflight program. But, as the saying goes, the
devil is in the details. We are still waiting on those details.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony and yield back the
balance of my time.

Chairman Beyer. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Babin, very much.
Now let me recognize the Ranking Chair of the larger whole
Committee, the distinguished gentleman from Oklahoma,
Congressman Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairman Beyer, for holding today's
hearing on the Artemis program and our efforts to send
Americans back to the Moon and then onto Mars. This mission is
the most complex, most important that NASA has undertaken to
date. It is far more ambitious than our landings more than 50
years ago in the 1960's and 1970's because this time, we're
going back to stay.
Still, we can take lessons from that pioneering generation
space explorers. Just 66 years after the Wright brothers flew--
first flew an airplane, NASA landed humans on the Moon. But in
the 50 years since we last walked on the Moon, we've not
returned, nor have we advanced further in our solar system. How
did NASA go from its founding in 1958 to a Moon landing in
1969? The same way we accomplish any big mission--we make it a
priority. We get strong leadership, a clear vision, precise
timelines, steady funding, and an incredibly talented work
force. We still have the most talented work force in the world,
but I'm concerned we're missing the rest of those variables.
We are 1 year in to the 117th Congress, and this is our
first hearing on the Artemis program. We've not achieved much
in space policy in general in this Congress unfortunately. All
we have to show for our work is an enhanced use leasing bill
that was hijacked for a dead-end Federal election bill. We're
back to square one on that, and we'll have to start over.
As the congressional Committee with jurisdiction over NASA,
it's our responsibility to maintain a strong space program, and
specifically, we must ensure a successful Artemis program. We
have to provide close oversight, clear guidance, and work with
our appropriators to allocate consistent funding. I stand ready
to do so, and I'd like to get to work on a NASA reauthorization
bill as soon as possible. It pains me to say that our
counterparts in the Senate side have made progress and passed
legislation on this while we've stalled. But Congress can only
do so much. NASA needs to provide us with an updated plan, a
precise timeline, and a realistic budget. Simply put, tell us
how long it will take, how we will do it, and how much it
costs.
The Artemis program must be NASA's highest priority, and I
expect the Administration's actions to start reflecting this. I
understand it takes time for--to--for an incoming
administration to appoint new leadership and then for them to
get up to speed, but we're a year in now, and we don't even
have a target date for when we can anticipate a Moon landing.
A recent Inspector General report made it clear that NASA
will not meet its goal of landing humans on the Moon in 2024.
It also recommended that NASA create an integrated master
schedule to identify and sequence all of the Artemis program
activities. Operating with a clear and comprehensive timetable
will improve efficiency and ensure we're holding to realistic
but prompt deadlines.
What's more, this Administration has not given us realistic
budget estimates for Artemis. I'm tired of the narrative that
Congress isn't giving NASA the money it needs. NASA needs to
give us a robust and accurate budget request so that Congress
can authorize and fund appropriately. The same Inspector
General stated that ``NASA does not have a credible estimate
that consolidates all of the Artemis costs across mission
directorates.'' We won't get to the Moon and Mars with
imprecise budgets and vague deadlines. And underestimating the
cost of large missions like this doesn't serve anyone. I'd like
to see this Administration put forth an accurate budget request
this year so we can take that into account when making funding
decisions.
One way to address these ongoing costs and scheduling
concerns is to designate a single program manager for Artemis
to integrate and coordinate the many complex elements at play.
So those are the issues we must address today: cost, budget,
and leadership. It is my hope that this hearing helps provide
some answers to these outstanding questions.
The good news is that I believe we all share the same goal.
We want to return Americans to the Moon as soon as possible and
as safely as possible. And we all want to take the next giant
leap in space exploration and send humans to another planet.
That's why I'm hopeful we can improve how Artemis is run.
I believe space exploration has value in and of itself.
It's human instinct to seek knowledge and to pursue new
frontiers. I also believe there are economic, technological,
and national security benefits to America's space program. We
have long benefited from being the leader in space, but China
is making aggressive moves to expand their presence, and
Vladimir Putin is acting increasingly erratic and
irresponsible.
At the fore--at the front--as the frontrunner in space
exploration, the United States established early precedents of
transparency, open science, peaceful collaboration. I can
assure you that the space program run by the People's
Liberation Army does not share those goals.
Through the Artemis Accords, the United States has pledged
to work with our allies to support peaceful and cooperative
exploration and research. We have made a commitment to
international collaboration and the benefits of all humankind.
These are the values that must guide our activity in space.
I am incredibly excited to see Artemis take off, literally
and figuratively. I'm honored to serve on the Committee with
oversight over this historic effort. To our witnesses, thank
you for being here today and sharing your expertise. I look
forward to hearing more about how we can continue to strengthen
and improve the efforts to return to the Moon and explore Mars.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Johnson, for holding today's hearing
on the Artemis program and our efforts to send Americans back
to the Moon and then on to Mars.
This mission is the most complex and most important that
NASA has undertaken to date. It is far more ambitious than our
landings more than 50 years ago in the 1960s and 1970s because
this time, we're going back to stay.
Still, we can take lessons from that pioneering generation
of space explorers. Just 66 years after the Wright brothers
first flew an airplane, NASA landed humans on the Moon.
But in the 50 years since we last walked the Moon, we've
not returned, nor have we advanced farther in our solar system.
How did NASA go from its founding in 1958 to a Moon landing in
1969? The same way we accomplish any big mission--we made it a
priority. We had strong leadership, a clear vision, precise
timelines, steady funding, and an incredibly talented
workforce.
We still have the most talented workforce in the world, but
I'm concerned that we're missing the rest of those variables.
We are one year in to the 117th Congress and this is our first
hearing on the Artemis program. We have not achieved much on
space policy in general this Congress, unfortunately. All we
have to show for our work is an Enhanced Use Leasing bill that
was hijacked for a dead-end federal election bill. We're back
to square one on that, and will have to start over.
As the Congressional committee with jurisdiction over NASA,
it's our responsibility to maintain a strong space program. And
specifically, we must ensure a successful Artemis program. We
have to provide close oversight, clear guidance, and work with
our appropriators to allocate consistent funding.
I stand ready to do so. I'd like to get to work on a NASA
reauthorization bill as soon as possible. It pains me to say
that our counterparts on the Senate side have made progress and
passed legislation on this while we have stalled.
But Congress can only do so much. NASA needs to provide us
with an updated plan, precise timeline and a realistic budget.
Simply put: Tell us how long it will take, how we will do it,
and how much it costs.
The Artemis program must be NASA's highest priority and I
expect the Administration's actions to start reflecting this. I
understand that it takes a minute for any incoming
Administration to appoint new leadership and for them to get up
to speed. But we're a year in now and we don't even have a
target date for when we can anticipate a Moon landing.
A recent Inspector General report made it clear that NASA
will not meet its goal of landing humans on the Moon by 2024.
It also recommended that NASA create an Integrated Master
Schedule to identify and sequence all the Artemis program
activities. Operating with a clear and comprehensive timetable
will improve efficiency and ensure we're holding to realistic
but prompt deadlines.
What's more, this Administration has not given us realistic
budget estimates for Artemis. I'm tired of the narrative that
Congress isn't giving NASA the money it needs. NASA needs to
give us robust and accurate budget requests so that Congress
can authorize and fund appropriately.
That same Inspector General report stated flat out that
``NASA does not have a credible estimate that consolidates all
Artemis costs across mission directorates.''
We won't get to the Moon and Mars with imprecise budgets
and vague deadlines. And underestimating the costs of large
missions like this doesn't serve anyone. I'd like to see this
Administration put forth an accurate budget request this year
so we can take that into account when making funding decisions.
One way to address these ongoing cost and scheduling
concerns is to designate a single Program Manager for Artemis
to integrate and coordinate the many complex elements at play.
So those are the issues we must address today--cost, budget,
and leadership. It is my hope that this hearing helps provide
some answers to these outstanding questions.
The good news is that I believe we all share the same goal.
We all want to return Americans to the Moon as soon as safely
possible. And we all want to take the next great leap in space
exploration and send humans to another planet. That's why I'm
hopeful that we can improve how Artemis is run.
I believe space exploration has value in and of itself.
It's human instinct to seek knowledge and pursue new frontiers.
And I also believe there are economic, technological, and
national security benefits to America's space program.
We have long benefited from being the leader in space, but
China is making aggressive moves to expand their presence, and
Vladimir Putin is acting increasingly erratic and
irresponsible.
As the frontrunner in space exploration, the U.S.
established early precedents of transparency, open science, and
peaceful collaboration. I can assure you that the space program
run by the People's Liberation Army does not share those goals.
Through the Artemis Accords, the United States has pledged
to work with our allies to support peaceful and cooperative
exploration and research. We have made a commitment to
international collaboration that benefits all of humankind.
These are the values that must guide our activity in space.
I am incredibly excited to see Artemis take off--literally
and figuratively. And I'm honored to serve on the Committee
with oversight of this historic effort. To our witnesses--thank
you for being here today and sharing your expertise. I look
forward to hearing more about how we can continue to strengthen
and improve our efforts to return to the Moon and explore Mars.

Chairman Beyer. Mr. Lucas, thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning. I'd like to join my colleagues in welcoming
our witnesses to this morning's hearing. We have a lot to
discuss.
As Chairman Beyer has noted, it is now more than four years
since the previous Administration launched its Artemis Moon-
Mars initiative. I have long supported a NASA exploration
program directed towards the inspiring-but also incredibly
challenging-goal of human missions to the Moon and then to
Mars. I would like Artemis to succeed.
However, I am very concerned that more than four years
after this program was announced, many of the fundamental
concerns and questions raised by Members of this Committee
since the start of Artemis still remain unresolved. For
example:
More than four years after Artemis was started, NASA still
has not established an overall architecture for the initiative,
and NASA is now saying it hopes to have one by the end of the
year.
More than four years after Artemis was started, NASA still
has not developed the specific objectives that it is to pursue,
or how they will fit together to support the goal of humans to
Mars. NASA says it hopes to have them in the coming months.
More than four years after Artemis was started, no one
appears to be in charge of the entire Artemis initiative. It is
still largely a collection of individual projects rather than
an integrated program managed by an empowered program manager,
something that has been raised as a serious concern in the
witness testimony for today's hearing.
I could go on, but I hope my point is clear-it is hard to
look at the current state of Artemis and have confidence that
it is on the right path.
I hope that today's hearing will help inform this Committee
about the seriousness of the problems and the steps that will
be needed to get Artemis on track.
Before I close, I would like to raise an issue that goes
beyond Artemis and is really about the future of the nation's
human spaceflight program. Whether intentionally or
unintentionally, NASA has taken-and is planning to take-a
series of actions that when taken as a whole put America on a
path of essentially privatizing its national human spaceflight
program. While some of the actions have been undertaken with
the agreement of Congress, others do not have that agreement
and are controversial.
NASA is now totally dependent on paying commercial service
providers to get its astronauts to the International Space
Station or even to Earth orbit at all.
Once the ISS is retired, the United States will have no
governmental outpost in low Earth orbit-it plans to pay for
access to still-to-be built private space stations.
And under NASA's current plans, the U.S. government will
have no independent capability to get its astronauts to the
surface of the Moon. It will be dependent on paying private
companies for its access to the lunar surface.
NASA will no longer even own its exploration space suits.
And it now appears that NASA is exploring essentially
transferring ownership of the Space Launch System-a system
developed with billions of taxpayer dollars, and a key enabler
of NASA's exploration missions-to a private company.
To quote from NASA's recent SLS RFI, ``This model assumes
the current government-owned and government-led system will be
moved to industry.NASA will purchase launch services and
payload delivery, but not take ownership of the flight
hardware.''
I find the sum of these actions to be very troubling, and
it raises the question of whether NASA will even retain the
capabilities and workforce within the agency that will be
needed to get U.S. astronauts to Mars if all of these
privatization plans are realized.
Beyond that, is it in the nation's long-term interest for
the U.S. government to have no independent capability for its
astronauts to access the lunar surface? To be totally dependent
on getting rides to orbit or to the surface of the Moon from
private companies whose interests and priorities may at times
conflict with those of the government? To not have a
government-owned system that can represent the United States
internationally in both cooperative and competitive space
exploration undertakings?
These questions and their long-term policy implications for
the nation's future in space need to be thoughtfully considered
and debated by Congress and the White House, rather than having
our national policy be set by the cumulative procurement
actions of a single agency.
It is my hope that today's hearing will in part serve as a
starting point for that critically important policy debate.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Beyer. At this time, I'd like to introduce our
witnesses. Mr. James Free is the Associate Administrator for
the Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate at
NASA. Mr. Free is a formally retired NASA civil servant who
spent the past few years in a variety of private-sector roles.
Prior to retiring from NASA, he served as a leader in the Human
Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate and across
several NASA sectors. Mr. Free earned his bachelor's degree in
aeronautics from Miami University, his master's degree in space
systems engineering from Delft University of Technology.
Mr. William Russell will be our second speaker. He's a
Director in GAO's (Government Accountability
Office's)Contracting and National Security Acquisitions Team.
He oversees a portfolio of issues related to NASA, DOD
(Department of Defense) weapons system cybersecurity,
protection of critical technologies, DOD industrial base and
supply chain integrity, and defense contracting. Mr. Russell
earned a master's degree in foreign affairs from the University
of Virginia and a bachelor's degree in political science from
Virginia Commonwealth University.
Dr. Patricia Sanders serves as the Chair of the Aerospace
Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP). She is currently an independent
aerospace consultant after having been the Executive Director
of the Missile Defense Agency. In 2008, Dr. Sanders retired
from the Federal Government after 34 years of service with
experience in the management of complex technical programs,
leadership of large and diverse organizations, and development
and execution of policy at the DOD level.
Mr. Paul Martin has served as NASA Inspector General since
2009. Prior to his NASA position, Mr. Martin served as the
Deputy Inspector General at the U.S. Department of Justice and
Deputy Staff Director at the U.S. Sentencing Commission. Mr.
Martin began his professional career as a newspaper reporter in
Greensville, South Carolina. He holds a BA in journalism from
Pennsylvania State University and a JD from the Georgetown
University Law School.
And then finally, we'll hear from Mr. Dan Dumbacher. Dan is
the Executive Director of the American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, or AIAA. Before joining AIAA, Mr. Dumbacher
was a Professor at Purdue University and had also served for
many years in leadership positions across NASA. Mr. Dumbacher
earned his bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from
Purdue and a master's degree in business administration from
the University of Alabama in Huntsville.
As our witnesses should know, you'll each have five minutes
for your spoken testimony. It's perfectly fine that your
written testimony is much longer than that. And your written
testimony will be included in full in the record for the
hearing. When the five of you have completed your spoken
testimony, we'll begin with questions and each Member will have
five minutes to question the panel.
So we will start with Mr. Free. Mr. Free, you have the
floor.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JAMES FREE,

ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, EXPLORATION SYSTEMS

DEVELOPMENT MISSION DIRECTORATE,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Free. Good morning. Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member
Babin, Ranking Member Lucas, and Members of the Subcommittee, I
want to thank you for the opportunity to discuss America's next
great exploration initiative, the Artemis program. It's
thrilling to stand in the vehicle assembly building at the
Kennedy Space Center and see the rocket and spacecraft
transformed from legislation to real hardware about to embark
upon its maiden voyage to the Moon. Soon, the entire vehicle
will be rolled out to the pad for the wet dress rehearsal in
preparation for the Artemis I mission later this year. This is
the first in a series of increasingly complex missions that
will demonstrate this Nation's commitment and capability to
extend human presence to the Moon and beyond.
To be clear, NASA's long-term goal is to send humans to
Mars, and we will use the Moon to help us get there. We could
not have gotten here without the steadfast bipartisan support
of Congress, starting with the NASA Authorization Act of 2010
and followed by the NASA Transition Authorization Act of 2017,
Congress established a clear vision for NASA to extend human
presence beyond low-Earth orbit (LEO).
Following this year's uncrewed Artemis I test demonstration
flight, NASA will conduct a crewed demonstration flight around
the Moon in 2024 to demonstrate performance of the Orion crew
capsule in the non-rectilinear halo orbit.
No earlier than 2025 NASA will launch Artemis III, which
will return U.S. astronauts to the Moon. During this mission,
the astronauts will leave Orion and board the human lander
system, which will deliver two crewmembers to the surface of
the Moon. The next generation of Moonwalkers will be much more
diverse as NASA's Artemis program will land the first woman and
the first person of color on the Moon.
NASA is also developing the Gateway, a lunar space station
that will serve as an orbital platform supporting future human
and robotic missions to science and resource-rich areas on the
lunar surface, as well as our preparation for Mars. The Gateway
is also a continued demonstration of NASA's commitment to
international cooperation, and the Artemis program extending
our international partnerships from low-Earth orbit.
NASA has also begun to work with commercial space industry
to obtain new spacesuits. Under this new program, NASA will
continue to leverage its center expertise on spacewalk systems,
spacesuits, and operational concepts.
Building upon the work done by the Apollo missions, NASA
will work to make this exploration effort more sustainable with
help of newer technologies, as well as innovative commercial
and international partnerships, all while advancing principles
for peaceful and sustainable space exploration through the
Artemis Accords. Through Artemis, NASA will continue to be at
the forefront of humanity's quest for knowledge.
NASA plans to send more robots and humans to study more of
the Moon than ever before where we will learn how to live far
away from Earth for longer periods of time. We will make new
scientific discoveries and gain a better understanding of how
much water and other resources are available on the Moon to
help build the first long-term presence on the surface of the
Moon. As much as possible, our technologies and operations will
be designed for use on both Moon and Mars, all supporting our
long-term goal of sending the first astronauts to the red
planet.
Every bit of work that I have mentioned is possible because
of the people of NASA and our private sector partners. Our
people have delivered despite COVID, which includes losing some
of our teammates because of the virus. They've come to work
while their homes were damaged and without power due to severe
storms. They've come with the spirit of exploration that has
and always will be as tangible as the hardware. I'm grateful to
be able to represent them here.
Thank you for the first of what I hope to be numerous
interactions to help explain our plans, how we can continue to
work together, and, most importantly, share our progress taking
humanity further into the solar system. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Free follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Mr. Free, thank you very much.
We'll next hear from Mr. Russell. The floor is yours.

TESTIMONY OF MR. WILLIAM RUSSELL, DIRECTOR,

CONTRACTING AND NATIONAL SECURITY ACQUISITIONS,

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Russell. Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member Babin, Ranking
Member Lucas, Members of the Subcommittee, I'm pleased to be
here today to discuss NASA's efforts to return astronauts to
the surface of the Moon and ultimately human exploration of
Mars through its Artemis missions.
NASA requested at least $32 billion over the next 5 years
to support this ambitious undertaking. Since 2017, NASA's been
developing eight highly complex and interdependent lunar
programs. These include a Human Landing System to support
transport crew to the surface of the Moon and spacesuits for
lunar operations. In addition, NASA plans to rely on existing
programs, including the Orion multipurpose crew vehicle and the
Space Launch System to launch and transport crew. Successfully
executing Artemis missions will require extensive coordination
across programs and with a wide range of contractors to ensure
systems operate together seamlessly and safely.
Our work has highlighted NASA's progress. For example, NASA
is conducting final integration and test activities for Artemis
I. NASA is also making progress acquiring hardware needed for
Artemis II. In terms of Artemis III, NASA is completing
planning activities such as updating requirements and
implementing our recommendation to schedule integration reviews
that help ensure coordination of individual lunar programs to
support the overall Artemis III mission.
While NASA continues to make progress, the agency still
faces a number of challenges related to schedule, cost,
technology development, and management. For example, the
Artemis III schedule remains challenging. NASA now plans to
conduct the Artemis III Moon landing mission no earlier than
2025, a year later than originally planned, but the schedule
remains challenging. For example, the 7-month delay in working
on HLS increases schedule risks as the program already planned
to develop and launch the system months faster than other
spaceflight programs and will need to mature critical
technologies along the way. In July 2021 NASA also approved the
change from developing its new spacesuits from an in-house
approach to using a contractor, which may also affect planned
timeframes.
There are also increasing costs. Key Artemis III programs
have experienced cost growth. For example, cost for the Space
Launch System and ground systems grew by more than $1 billion
in 2020. In addition, transparency of cost could be improved.
For example, SLS costs are not captured beyond Artemis I, and
Orion costs are not captured beyond Artemis II. We recommended
that NASA create an Artemis III mission cost estimate, and NASA
plans to do so later in 2022.
There are also management and integration challenges. In
May 2021 we found that NASA had not yet finalized roles,
responsibilities, and authorities for Artemis, and NASA is
currently in the process of reorganizing its Human Exploration
Mission Directorate. It's too early to tell the outcome of this
effort. Given the scale and complexity of the programs, it will
also be important that NASA continue to hold integration
reviews going forward to reconcile changes across the programs.
In summary, NASA has made important progress on its Artemis
efforts, but completing a lunar landing mission remains
challenging. NASA will need to manage multiple risks
seamlessly. NASA is undertaking a series of increasingly
complex missions that rely on the success of individual
programs, as well as the agency, to effectively manage and
integrate across those programs. NASA has already experienced
cost growth and schedule delays on programs needed for Artemis
I and Artemis II. Further delays and new technical challenges
can have cascading effects for the lunar missions. It is
important going forward that NASA continue to improve oversight
of the Artemis missions and continue to take steps to establish
mission and program costs, as well as further mature its
integration and management functions.
Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member Babin, Ranking Member Lucas,
this completes my prepared remarks, and I look forward to any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Russell, very much.
We'll now hear from Ms. Sanders for her five minutes. Ms.
Sanders, you have the floor.

TESTIMONY OF DR. PATRICIA SANDERS, CHAIR,

AEROSPACE SAFETY ADVISORY PANEL

Dr. Sanders. Yes, Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member Babin,
Ranking Member Lucas, and Members of the Subcommittee, I thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss
this very important topic.
Since its creation on October 1st, 1958, NASA has been
responsible for some truly remarkable accomplishments. However,
past achievement does not guarantee future success, and NASA
has also had its share of failures.
All of us here today are vitally interested in the success
of Artemis, which NASA, faced with numerous challenges,
constraints, and risks, will execute on behalf of the Nation
but with the essential support of the Administration, the
Congress, and the overall national space community. The
inherent challenges include that Artemis is significantly more
complex than the objectives of previous programs; sustained
lunar and Martian missions involve significantly greater risk
than NASA's experiences in low-Earth orbit; that the
continually increasing pace of technological change requires
sufficient flexibility to integrate advantageous achievements
and advancements; that there is a need to integrate the
contributions of a more diverse and innovative aerospace
industry both willing and able to make major contributions; and
that there is an international community that would like to
build on the International Space Station experience and
continue to work with NASA.
Our Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel has recommended some
key steps that NASA and its stakeholders should take to meet
the challenges, manage risk, and facilitate success. First, in
the evolving environment with increasing commercial space
capabilities and international interest in participating, NASA
should take a strategic scrutiny of the role the agency intends
to play going forward to best incorporate these to the
advantage of Artemis while ensuring clear accountability for
risk management. We emphasize the importance for NASA to
strategically define its mission, is guiding principles, and
its vision for the agency's leadership role in the future in
order to assure that risk is managed appropriately.
Second, NASA should manage Artemis as an integrated program
with top-down alignment and a designated program manager
endowed with authority, responsibility, and accountability,
along with a robust bottoms-up collaborative feedback process
for both systems engineering integration and risk management.
Third, all the stakeholders, both internal and external to
the agency, must be aligned to achieve the Artemis mission as a
cohesive whole. NASA must clearly communicate its strategic
mission and guiding principles, and these must be understood,
embraced, and supported by all mission directors, center
directors, and the work force as a whole, as well as the
Administration and the Congress.
Fourth, it is critical for both NASA and its stakeholders
to establish technical baselines and schedules that are
mutually consistent, realistic, and achievable, and that are
supported by adequate and stable resources.
And last but by far not the least and has already been
noted by several of the Members, we stress the requirement for
constancy of purpose as essential to the ability of the agency
to manage risk intelligently and proactively. Constant and
abrupt changes in direction must be avoided.
So as NASA looks to the future and moves to expand human
knowledge and operational capabilities beyond low-Earth orbit,
it must recognize and adapt to a new environment and decide
strategically how to forge humanity's path outward while
managing the risks in an appropriate manner. The agency, in
partnership with the Congress, should hold fast to the
fundamental standards of risk management while embracing new
approaches and not fearing alternative methods to achieve those
fundamentals.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sanders follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Thank you very much.
Now, we'll hear from Paul Martin, our--the floor is yours,
Mr. Martin.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE PAUL K. MARTIN,

INSPECTOR GENERAL, NATIONAL AERONAUTICS

AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Martin. Thank you so much. Chairman Beyer, Ranking
Members Babin and Lucas, and Members of the Subcommittee, over
the past 2 years the Office of Inspector General (OIG) has
issued seven audit reports that examine issues critical to
NASA's efforts to land humans on the Moon as a precursor to a
crewed Mars mission. This morning, I plan to highlight two of
the most important challenges we identified through this
oversight work, challenges we believe NASA must address in
order to achieve its ambitious Artemis goals.
First, controlling the program's enormous expense and
technical risk. We estimate NASA will spend $53 billion on
Artemis from 2021 to 2025. Moreover, we found that the first
four Artemis missions will each cost $4.1 billion per launch, a
price tag that strikes us as unsustainable. This $4.1 billion
figure represents only production costs for SLS, Orion, and
ground operations and does not include the billions in
development costs required to get the Artemis program to this
point in time.
Apart from its cost, NASA's initial three Artemis missions
face varying degrees of technical risk that will push launch
schedules from months to years past the agency's goals. With
all necessary elements for the Artemis I mission now being
tested at KSC, NASA is progressing toward the first launch of
the integrated SLS Orion space flight system this summer. For
Artemis II, NASA's facing delays due in part to the plan to
reuse key Orion components. And for Artemis III, given the time
needed to develop and test a Human Landing System and NASA's
next-generation spacesuits, we estimate the date for a crewed
lunar landing likely will slip to 2026 at the earliest.
Second, the Artemis program lacks transparency. Because
NASA has not defined Artemis as a formal program under agency
policies, no full Artemis-wide lifecycle cost estimate is
required. As a result, for fiscal years 2021 through 2025 the
agency is relying on a rough cost estimate that excludes $25
billion it plans to spend for key activities related to
missions beyond Artemis III. Absent a NASA-developed estimate,
the OIG aggregated relevant costs across all mission
directorates, and we project that NASA will spend $93 billion
on the Artemis efforts from 2012 through 2025.
We concluded that without NASA fully accounting for and
accurately reporting the overall cost of current and future
Artemis missions, it will be much more difficult for Congress
and the Administration to make informed decisions about NASA's
long-term funding needs, a key to making Artemis a sustainable
venture.
To its credit, NASA has taken steps to help reduce costs
and accelerate Artemis mission schedule, including modifying
its procurement and program management practices. For example,
NASA is obtaining HLS transportation services and the Gateway
spaceflight hardware using research and development contracts
that more effectively leverage commercial capabilities. As NASA
moves forward, it must accelerate these efforts to make Artemis
programs more affordable. Otherwise, relying on such an
expensive single-use rocket system will, in our judgment,
inhibit if not derail NASA's ability to sustain its long-term
human exploration goals to the Moon and Mars.
We look forward to assisting NASA in this ambitious and
exciting undertaking. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Mr. Martin, thank you very much. And
finally, we'll hear from Dan Dumbacher from AIAA.

TESTIMONY OF MR. DANIEL DUMBACHER,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICAN INSTITUTE

OF AERONAUTICS AND ASTRONAUTICS

Mr. Dumbacher. Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member Babin,
Ranking Member Lucas, and distinguished Members of the
Committee, I want to thank you for the opportunity to speak to
you today about complex space systems engineering, especially
as it relates to NASA's Artemis initiative.
As a former NASA program manager, I have led several major
NASA programs, including systems in service today. Developing
an operating space systems, particularly when human lives are
at stake, require exacting engineering, our best talent and
persistence. This is risky business.
Today's aerospace industry recognizes the need to move at a
more rapid pace. The speed of innovation is increasing. Four
important factors are needed to capitalize on the rapidly
evolving capabilities in the aerospace sector. One, a clear
strategy and focus for what is to be accomplished, why it is
important, with consistency over time; two, a clear systems
engineering approach serving as the glue to bring the program
elements together; three, a greater tolerance for risk at
certain points in program development, assuring safety and
balancing performance, schedule, and cost; and four,
development and growth of a talented work force who will make
the strategies reality.
First and foremost, an organization needs an overarching,
clear, communicable, and stable strategy. Such a strategy must
describe goals and objectives and define the needed program
elements. A well-developed strategy establishes the framework
for the program elements to be developed in concert with the
integrated whole and to safely operate. Space activities by
their nature are highly complex. They require extreme
reliability and safety and must be operable within the mass,
cost, and schedule constraints. This requires a highly
integrated space systems engineering effort to assure the
needed elements physically operate together.
Today, the commercial space enterprise has an increased
level of capability, economic opportunity, and potential to
carry out the strategic objectives with less cost and more
speed. This increases the need for clear strategic direction as
a recently released NASA ASAP panel report correctly
identifies.
As the program elements are defined and developed, the
following fundamentals are required: an understanding of how
all the pieces of the program fit together, an understanding of
how the system will operate and tolerate malfunctions and
failures, establishment of options and backup plans to address
risks and potential problems with onramps for new technologies
and capabilities. This requires clear decision criteria,
coordinated acquisition models, and risk acceptance decision
processes and authority. A piecemeal, uncoordinated approach is
doomed to failure.
With these complex endeavors comes unknown and known risks.
Program leaders must continually evaluate the overall progress
and risk posture. This necessitates backup plans, options, and
risk mitigation plans to assure potential--to address potential
influences and outcomes, and the team must remain curious and
challenge the status quo to assure success.
Undertakings such as the Artemis program require program
elements and acquisition models be coordinated and integrated
with shared information and clear leadership. The appropriate
stakeholder and level must own the decisionmaking authority on
risk acceptance and interface trades to meet safety, cost, and
schedule requirements.
Recognizing that safety, technical performance, cost, and
schedules are all interrelated is key to success. Our tendency
to avoid all risk at all cost and at all times must be tempered
with the need to understand the limits of our designs and
operations and grow our work force and also to learn rapidly
from a test in place of analytical perfection.
Space exploration is a long-term endeavor and requires a
broad view of the needed work force. Career journeys will be
built upon strategy and mission. Consistency of strategy is key
to enabling the best and brightest to commit to space
enterprise careers. We must continue to grow and enhance the
talents of the work force through inclusivity, capitalize on
the various perspectives of our diverse demographic
communities, and, most importantly, continue to build a
community where everyone is treated with respect and as equals.
Team leaders at all levels and especially the most senior
levels must remain vigilant and totally focused on executing
and accomplishing the established strategy. Experience has
taught us that successful organizations are laser-focused on
strategy and assuring the team has the necessary resources.
In summary, it is my expert opinion that four crucial
elements are required for successful complex space endeavors. A
clear and understood strategy is critical. It underpins all
decisions moving forward. Clear systems engineering and
integration implemented is the glue that brings all of the
elements together for safe operation. Risk acceptance
appropriate for program phase must be managed at the proper
level to remain in balance across all elements. And we must
continue to grow and enhance the talent of the aerospace work
force. This process will take focused leadership, require hard
decisions and clear communication. Our economic well-being in
the generations to follow demand success.
Thank you once again for allowing me to address the
Committee. I thank the Committee for its continued support of
our Nation's space program and look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dumbacher follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Mr. Dumbacher, thank you. And thank all of
our witnesses for your excellent testimony. We will now begin a
round of questions. I'll begin, to be followed by Ranking
Member Babin.
So the fact that we're even discussing the need for a
clear, agreed-upon story of what we're doing, why, and how we
can get there four years into the Artemis efforts are cause for
concern. We've heard this from virtually every one of you. Mr.
Dumbacher, not to have you repeat the last five minutes, but
why don't we have a clear strategy at NASA? And while you've
outlined the elements, what will it take to move us from here,
you know, many billions of dollars into Artemis, to actually
get to a clear strategy that we can all agree is a clear
strategy?
Mr. Dumbacher. Chairman Beyer, I think what is needed is a
clear story and a clear understanding of what those elements
are and what is needed and how those elements tie together.
There has been the discussion about schedule and cost
estimates, and also importantly is an understanding of how all
of the elements will technically fit together, particularly for
the safe operation in the long haul. So I think that story is
important. We need to--I understand that the agency has been
working hard on that and working to get to that communication
for us all, and we certainly look forward to hearing what the
NASA team has ahead for us. It certainly needs those key
elements that we've all discussed.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you. Mr. Free, let me pile on two
questions. First, what's the strategy look like? I'm Joe
Citizen out there. Is it one page, is it five pages, is it a
50-page white paper? What do we expect this story to look like?
And then, you know, I was amazed to find out that Artemis is
not a program, that it's just a series of initiatives. This
Committee's last NASA authorization, which passed our
Subcommittee, would have established the Moon to Mars
initiative as a program. Do you agree that we should be doing
that and should we be pressing ahead?
Mr. Free. Yes, thank you for the--for both questions, sir.
Let me start with your first one, what does the strategy look
like. For me, it's very simple. Our ultimate goal is putting
people on Mars. It's getting two people to Mars on the surface
for 30 days, getting them there and back safely. Everything we
do should be driven by that on the Moon. That's what I've seen
from the team. That's what I've talked with the team about.
That's how long we need to stay on the Moon so we prove the
systems out that we need to understand from a partial gravity
environment. That is what we use as everything that's driving
how we're defining our architecture on the Moon, defining and
refining it.
Your question about the program, I believe that in our new
organization we have set up the Artemis Campaign Development
Division, which will run all of our Artemis missions. There
will be a mission manager for every single mission, Artemis II,
Artemis III, that will understand the requirements of the
mission, the goals of the mission, will be responsible for
tracking the hardware through its development and bringing it
together for the operations people in the Space Operations
Mission Directorate to execute the mission. So from my--and
embedded in that is a strong system engineering function. That
Artemis Campaign Development Division will have the budget.
They will own requirements, and they will have the system
engineering function to bring the technical products to execute
each and every Artemis mission.
Chairman Beyer. [inaudible], Mr. Free, NASA is splitting
its former Human Exploration Operations Mission Directorate--
long title--into two mission directorates, including the one
you oversee, I guess one for human exploration, one for
operations missions. How will this work now? Who's going to be
in charge of Artemis and ultimately the authority over budgets
and tradeoffs between projects and all?
Mr. Free. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. The split
was to really focus in on the execution of our programs,
completing the development. The scope had grown greatly in the
Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate. This was
to split it and have my organization focus on the development
and have that budget authority over the development of the crew
vehicle of the lander elements over the suits. And then as we
developed that hardware and get it proven through flights,
sometimes multiple flights, sometimes a single flight--we're
defining development that way--we hand off the--to the
Operations Mission Directorate the control of those elements.
And then my organization in the Artemis campaign continues to
develop the new hardware we're bringing online and defined the
missions to achieve our ultimate goals, which are tied to those
two people for 30 days on the surface of the Mars safe there
and--on Mars safe there and back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Free, very much. Let's move
on then to our Ranking Member, Dr. Babin, for your questions.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
that. I'd like to start out with Mr. Martin. Your testimony
estimates that SLS will cost $4.1 billion per launch for at
least the first four Artemis missions. During the shuttle
program, there was a running joke that the first shuttle launch
of the year cost $3 billion. All the rest of the flights were
free. It doesn't look like that's going to hold here.
Wayne Hale, Chair of the NASA Advisory Council's Human
Exploration and Operations Subcommittee wrote in 2019, if there
is to be a program at all, a specialized skilled work force
dedicated to that program must be paid, specialized facilities
dedicated to that program must be maintained, and all of those
things must be paid for, never mind however--how many times a
year they are used. A real space program is not a buy-it-by-
the-yard kind of thing. The incremental cost of any additional
shuttle flight was more realistically in the neighborhood of
$200 million, not cheap but a lot less than 1.54--$1.5 billion
figure that comes from the simple computation that throws in
everything and divides by 135, which is the total number of
shuttle flights. So, Mr. Martin, if flight rates increased, how
much would the incremental cost per launch be?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Mr. Babin. You know, the exact
figure is unclear because part of it goes to the efficiencies
that the underlying contractors like Boeing, which is in charge
of developing the SLS core stage, the efficiencies that they
make. One of the problems we saw in development of the SLS and
Orion is the challenging development of course, but we did
see--notice very poor contractor performance on Boeing's part.
It was poor planning and poor execution. We saw that the cost-
plus contracts that NASA had been using to develop a combined
SLS-Orion system worked to the contractor's rather than NASA's
advantage.
And then for NASA's part we saw poor project management and
contract oversight. In fact with--for example, with respect to
award fees, Boeing received 86 percent of all available award
fees for the core stage development despite being billions over
budget and years behind schedule. So if they improve their
accountability, then we'll certainly get to drive down that
$4.1 billion cost per flight.
Mr. Babin. OK. Well, how much of your assessed cost of SLS
and Orion fund center infrastructure, NASA, work force, or
other agency capabilities necessary to maintain a civil space
program, how much?
Mr. Martin. If you look on page 24 of our November 2021
report on the Artemis program, you'll see that we cost out $2.2
billion for production of a single SLS, the Exploration Ground
Systems at $568 million, Orion at $1 billion, and $300 million
to the Europeans for the European Space Agency service module.
You add that together, and NASA checked these figures, and it's
$4.1 billion.
Mr. Babin. OK. All right. I see how you arrived at that.
OK, thank you. My next question is for Dr. Sanders. Ma'am, the
ASAP report states NASA should assess the work force, including
the number, types, skills, experience, and responsibilities
that will be required and the infrastructure facility
requirements with a plan for managing changes needed to meet
these--those requirements. And the report also states that NASA
should also propose general criteria for evaluating make,
manage, or buy decisions on future programs and projects. So
when making those make, manage, or buy decisions, how can NASA
ensure that they are conducting a true apples-to-apples
comparison when some programs carry costs associated with NASA
capabilities and some don't?
Dr. Sanders. Well, when we talked about NASA having a
strategic vision, we talked more--as much about deciding what
NASA's role would be relative to the commercial industry and
the international partners as we did about knowing where it's
going and what it's developing. And we were recognizing that
there is a fundamental shift underway in the space industry. In
the past, NASA owned the design, owned the requirements, owned
the development entirely itself. And now in many cases NASA
owns the requirements and the accountability for the success of
mission but not the design or the hardware. So we were--we're
talking about NASA having a fundamental understanding of how
they manage that risk, how they--when they don't control all of
the variables but still are accountable, and we were--so when
deciding what your criteria are for make, manage, or buy, you
needed to take into account how you were going to manage the
risk in each case and have the right criteria for that. It
depends on how you intend to do the oversight, how you intend
to do the insight, how you intend to operate in your
acquisition strategy as a customer or as a partner, and those
are fundamentally different relationships. And so we felt that
was important.
It does bear on cost. Our--obviously, our panel is focused
on safety and risk management, but cost can't be ignored. One
of the advantages of being able to take [inaudible] to
incorporate commercially built and designed components into the
Artemis initiative is the fact that you do not necessarily have
to pay for every part of the development if the commercial
entity is developing it for other customers besides NASA.
So, for example, if the human lander is going to--and the
components of the human lander, particularly the launch
vehicle, are going to have other users, then NASA shouldn't
bear the full cost of developing that part of the component.
But they still have to make sure it meets their requirements
and that it meets their objectives, so it's something that we
believe NASA has today evolved to through tactically managing
the commercial resupply system, the commercial----
Mr. Babin. OK. Yes, I'm out of time and I appreciate that
very much. I have several other questions, but we'll just have
to submit those in writing. So I'll yield back. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Babin. I'm going to now
recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman, for holding this hearing
and really appreciate it.
So my first question will go to Mr. Free but also want to
hear from the Inspector General if he concurs with this. You
know, our country over the last two years has been, you know,
severely impacted by COVID. We've seen time after time that
companies are shutting down, and now the supply chain is at
risk in so many areas. Many of the figures that we've heard
today were developed either before or during much of this
COVID. Can you reflect in a general way, have you taken into
effect--the COVID effect--on both work force and supply chain
and how that's reflected in your numbers, Mr. Free?
Mr. Free. Yes, thank you for the question, sir. I
appreciate it. We--so I mentioned in my opening statement the
challenges we face with COVID and storms. Keeping the work
force connected--obviously, we have a significant work force
that is hands-on when we're building vehicles. We've kept our
team connected and continued our design. So from my perspective
we--that has continued and not been a factor in increases in
our cost estimates.
From a supply chain perspective, I think we still are
trying to understand that. We are--we've had impacts before
that. Just the demand for components for space systems has
increased greatly; the complexity of those systems has
increased greatly. So we had supply chains that--issues that
were factored into our earlier estimates.
From a COVID impact perspective, I still think that's TBD
(to be decided). You've heard about a lot of the issues around
chips. For us, it's around valves, it's around tanks. All of
those I think are things that will--we still have to figure out
in the weeks and months ahead as we put our next budget
submittal together.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Mr. Free. And I should start out
by saying to all those who stayed on the job during COVID,
thank you. You literally kept things going. But you being one
of the only organizations that I have ever talked to that said
they had virtually no impact on their bottom line.
And with that, I'd like to ask our Inspector General, do
you concur with the assessment that we just heard?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Mr. Norcross. I don't disagree. I
think it is to be decided. So many of these components that are
essential to the Artemis missions have such long lead times
that the production and development began long before COVID.
But it's clear that, as Mr. Free pointed out, there have been a
variety of challenges. And I would add an additional one, legal
challenges. When NASA awarded the contract for the Human
Landing System, there was a series of legal challenges that
stopped work with the award-winning contractor for 7 months.
And so there's a whole--even beyond COVID, there are many
challenges.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. I just want to followup with Ms.
Sanders. When you talked about owning the risk--and I will use
the term risk--but plan--how do we not own the design plans?
Having gone through and--my Committee deals with the F-35 on
some of those very issues--when we sign away the ownership on
some of this, we sign away a significant future for those parts
and plans. Can you give us a little bit more clarity on what we
will own versus what we won't?
Dr. Sanders. It will actually depend on how the contract
acquisition is carried out. But in--for example, the experience
they've had with commercial crew program--and I think has--
which is carrying forward into the Human Landing System, the--
NASA sets the requirements, and they say this is what we need
the system to do, and also the verification of meeting those
requirements. But the provider designs and sets the design, and
the design may be set to meet more than one--more than NASA as
a customer. Therefore, it's really important that the
verification that they meet the requirements that NASA must
have is well-established and that there is adequate testing,
adequate verification, adequate insight, oversight in order to
make sure that NASA can then be accountable for the success of
its mission.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you. Let's be clear. We end up paying
for that design whether we share it direct or indirectly. Those
are included. And let us just not forget the software.
Dr. Sanders. Yes.
Mr. Norcross [continuing]. And owning that. With that, I
see my time is expired, and I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Norcross, very much. Let me
now recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, the
Honorable Mr. Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I think all of you
know that I strongly support NASA's efforts to return to the
Moon. I realize it's going to be expensive, and I realize it's
going to be hard, but I believe that it is worth the effort.
And a part of accomplishing that shared goal is, as we've
discussed in this hearing so far, the need for solid cost and
schedule plans.
So I ask this--a question of the panel. I guess maybe a
phrase would be I survey this panel. And I know, Dr. Free, I
believe offered 2025. But realistically, each of you, what is
your estimate based on your vantage point and observations of
this process about when we'll again land crew on the Moon? I
believe, Jim, you said 2025, correct?
Mr. Free. Yes, sir. Yes, sir, I did. And that's based on
how I see the hardware coming together for the suits and the
landers and Orion and SLS.
Mr. Lucas. Could I have the rest of the panel offer an
observation about what year you realistically believe we'll put
a--land a crew on the Moon again?
Mr. Martin. I'm going to jump in. Inspectors General tend
to be a tad bit more pessimistic than the agency. That's what
we're paid to do.
Mr. Lucas. That's your job.
Mr. Martin. Our current--based on our current work is we
say no earlier than 2026, citing the two developments that Jim
mentioned, development of a human-certified Human Landing
System, as well as the next-generation spacesuits, no earlier
than 2026, but it could be a good bit later.
Mr. Lucas. Anyone else care to touch on that? Be brave.
Mr. Russell. Sure. Congressman Lucas, this is Bill Russell
from GAO. Certainly, that's what we've seen in our work that
even 2025 may be optimistic given some of the challenges, not
the least of which would be getting the Human Landing System
certified to operate. Spacesuits, same thing, still--there's a
change in the acquisition strategy, so you're going to have a
contract award that you need to do this year, and there's still
some technologies that are not mature, which often point to
taking longer in development to get there. So 2025 is not
impossible, but it seems improbable given the current
situation.
Mr. Lucas. Carefully worded.
Dr. Sanders. And our panel would probably echo that. We
don't think it's impossible, but it's a stretch goal. It's
sometimes good to have stretch goals in terms of your schedule,
but you need to be realistic and--as well. And we also believe
that you shouldn't let having a prescribed deadline kind of
date cause you to make unwise decisions that impact the safety
and success because you're just trying to meet that goal.
Mr. Lucas. Valid point.
Mr. Dumbacher. Yes, Congressman, I think from our
perspective the 2025 date is certainly on the optimistic
stretch goal side, and we would agree with that and certainly
want to echo Patricia's point on making sure that we make good
decisions along the way and not let schedule pressure force bad
decisions.
I think from our perspective the 2025 to 2027 timeframe is
probably realistic. With the right focus, the right resources,
we think it's certainly attainable in the 2025 to 2027
timeframe.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Free, of course, we are clearly in this
hearing highlighting the question about detailed plans and cost
for Artemis. When will NASA send Congress a plan, including an
integrated schedule and detail cost estimates for the Artemis
program? When will we see that?
Mr. Free. Yes, sir. You know, we've--we have our new
organization that I mentioned with our Artemis campaign that
I'm counting on putting that mission manager in charge to put
the integrated plan together. We've put together a plan that
lays out through our Artemis V showing our goals. We have a
longer-term architecture that we're trying to put the final
details on by the end of this year. We're in the midst of our
budget process right now to--that captures out through our
landing, which will inform the President's budget for 2024.
So all of those things, I just gave you the list, not to
defer to your question, but give you the list of how it's all
lining up that I feel it's my responsibility to put an
integrated plan and budget together to show--to getting us to
the first landing.
Mr. Lucas. Well, clearly, this is now the focus of the
Committee, and our attention will only increase. And I would
offer the same observation to my colleagues on the Committee.
Our responsibilities to do a NASA reauthorization bill are only
increasing, too. We have responsibilities also with
specifications that will help enable the Artemis project.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the--whatever time I
don't have.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Lucas, very much. And, Mr.
Lucas, we look forward to your input as we move forward on the
authorization this spring and reflecting many of your concerns.
I know you asked about how soon we put men and women on the
Moon. I now recognize the gentleman who will be concerned about
when we put them on Mars, Mr. Perlmutter from Colorado.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I'll hold up my
bumper sticker, which all of you have seen before. That
obviously has been something--thanks, Frank. And I concur with
Mr. Lucas's comments about us, you know, doing our work and
getting a NASA authorization bill to give direction to the
agency as to what we want to see and when we want to see it,
why we want to see it, all that stuff. So we've got our own
work to do.
Mr. Free, I'm going to start with you. And I liked what you
said in your opening remarks about, look, what we're doing
here--and this was a conversation we had with Mr. Bridenstine
when he was leading the agency, Senator Nelson since he's been
leading the agency, that for me at least going back to the Moon
is the stepping stone to going on to Mars. And that really is
what we want to do. So, you know, if there is any schedule
pressure, Dr. Sanders, Mr. Dumbacher, it's 2033, OK? There's a
lot of leeway in there.
So my staff was concerned though in the written testimony
of all of you, everybody's talking about the Moon like two,
three times more than you're mentioning Mars. And so for me I
just want to make sure and I'd like you to kind of reiterate
what you said, what is it that you're planning to do on the
Moon that will help us get to Mars? That's what I want to see
in any report that you guys prepare.
Mr. Free. Yes, sir. Thank you. Thank you for your question
and for your passion. I did mention our goal is to get on the
surface of the Moon so we understand how our systems operate in
partial gravity. I'll give you an analogy. We tested systems
for life support for a great deal of time on the Earth, and
then we put it in orbit, we saw a different type of behavior
because it was in microgravity. We are trying to set our plans
for the same thing, life support system, how will--the human
interaction partial gravity for long duration, how we can use
power systems that are common. When we talk about adding
elements to our lunar architecture, it's always about how does
that play forward into what it can do on Mars. Obviously, a
lander is going to be different because we have an atmosphere,
but there are a lot of things that we could do from a rover
perspective, from a spacesuit perspective, from a surface
habitation element perspective that have great parallels
between the Moon and Mars.
So I'll go back to what I said, two people on the surface
for 30 days there and back safe to Mars, that drives everything
we're going to do. So when we feel confident that we have the
runtime on the surface--and also I should mention Gateway. We
plan on using Gateway as a platform to test our transit hab as
well for extended durations to get that runtime is just like
building reliability in cars, right? We want to build that
reliability by operating time. That's what we're trying to get
on the surface and on Gateway before we go on to Mars.
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. Thank you for that. Mr. Martin,
let me ask you. You know, when I--earlier on, I want to say it
was probably about 2016, we had a hearing with NASA executives
and that's really when they said to me, look, the best time for
us to get to Mars, making sure it's international in scope and
public-private partnership because it's a big task, but the
orbits are close and it saves space travel time, it's safer for
our astronauts. At that point they--I said how much is this
going to cost for us to get there 2033? And they said at that
time, 2016, $200 billion. So this is not inexpensive. Nobody
ever said it is.
So looking at that kind of big number, you said we've
already spent $93 billion, but you took it back to 2012, if I
heard your testimony correctly. I mean, where are we sort of as
we--if $200 billion were that--were the right number back in
2016?
Mr. Martin. Sir, you're exactly right. The $93 billion was
from 2012 through 2025. And we picked 2012 because that was
when the heavy-duty work for the Post-Constellation program
began and several of the components, both the capsule and the
rocket from Constellation have evolved into the SLS and Orion,
so that's sort of why we chose those dates.
We've done some work looking at potential Mars--the cost of
potential Mars missions. And to be honest, there's no reliable
estimates out there about what such a mission would cost given
the change in strategy. As Mr. Free indicated, we're building--
NASA is building capabilities, many of which they hope to use
on an eventual Mars mission. So we will continue as an Office
of Inspector General to look at both what they're spending now
and how they're developing the equipment and the missions for
the future.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK, thank you. I see my time has expired,
and I have, as you can imagine, a lot of questions. I'll yield
back to the Chair.
Chairman Beyer. Mr. Perlmutter, thank you for your
steadfast Mars advocacy. We need you.
Let me now recognize the gentleman who has the honor to
represent Cape Canaveral, Congressman Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Chairman Beyer.
Congressman Perlmutter just asked a question which was of
greatest interest to me, and that was the importance of
sustained lunar exploration as a precursor to human exploration
on Mars, and great answers.
Mr. Free and then Mr. Dumbacher, China and Russia have
their sights set on the Moon and its resources with their now
joint lunar base. Given what the Moon represents in terms of
resources, prestige, U.S. national security, what does the
United States and NASA need to do to guarantee the success of
the Artemis program in the coming years?
Mr. Free. Yes, thank you, sir, for the question and----
Mr. Posey. [inaudible] besides big checks.
Mr. Free. Yes. Thank you for the question, and thank you
for your work force. Representative Norcross asked me earlier
about impacts. There have absolutely been impacts from COVID on
the work force, and I don't underestimate that, so appreciate
your--the folks you represent that work so hard for us.
I think what we need to do, you know, there's published--
public data about when China plans to go to the Moon, but I
look at what I have to do every day is keep our focus on
performance, on our programs, setting a realistic schedule and
budget, and working to that, highlighting when we can't meet it
and why, and then, frankly, executing it. I see that as my job
and what I need to do every day. If I don't keep that focus,
then I can't say that I'm giving my all to the effort that you
all have given us the resources to do. We need to continue to
expand our international partnerships through the Artemis
Accords, the--Romania signed the Artemis Accords at 10:30
Eastern today. So we continue to add international partners,
and we continue--we need to continue to take advantage of what
the commercial industry provides us for our capability.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. And you just answered another
question that I had next. For the record, what is the China-
Russia date?
Mr. Dumbacher. The Chinese date I think is published to be
later this decade.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Dumbacher, do you want to add to that?
Mr. Dumbacher. Thank you, Congressman. I think, one, I've--
one thing we're certainly seeing across the aerospace industry
is this--because of the China and Russian activities is a new--
is an increased urgency and an increased need for speed and
innovation. We have the commercial private industry that we can
build upon, and with the--again, with the proper focus and the
proper strategy in place that everybody understands and can--
and we can get people making those--their important decisions
at their appropriate levels with that new urgency and that
consistency of purpose or constancy of purpose are how we're
going to get there and how we're going to get ourselves and
retain our leadership and in fact increase the U.S. leadership
in space.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Mr. Free, in your written testimony
you state Artemis represent new opportunities to broaden the
international Artemis coalition with China using its Belt and
Road Initiative to expand its influence into outer space. What
is NASA's plan to compete against this threat? Does it include
a proactive strategy which you just touched on a minute ago to
increase the number of countries and other partners to be part
of the Artemis force?
Mr. Free. Yes, sir. So I mentioned Romania. And we're
working with several nations on other contributions to Artemis.
And it runs across the spectrum from early discussions about
their desires to participate all the way through finalized
elements that you know of that are going on Gateway for the I-
HAB (International Habitat), the service modules we get today,
the ESPRIT (European System Providing Refueling, Infrastructure
and Telecommunications) refueling module. We're talking with a
potential partner about an airlock. So it's from small efforts
to large with several different countries and entities all
going on at the same time, so we look to continue to expand
that.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Thank you very much. And, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Posey.
We only have one more questioner for this first round, but
for those Members who would like to hang in for a second round,
please, please stay.
And with that, let me recognize the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Kim.
Ms. Kim. Thank you, Chairman Beyer and Ranking Member Babin
and Ranking Member Lucas. Thank you very much for holding this
important hearing on Artemis program.
As all of us are, I am also a very proud supporter of our
efforts to return to the Moon and land humans on Mars. And I
really want to thank the witnesses for appearing before this
Committee today to speak on our progress on achieving that
goal. And it's my hope that we will soon have a NASA
authorization bill in the House, and I hope the Space
Subcommittee will have the opportunity to work with NASA and
seek input from the industry stakeholders to produce a good and
bipartisan reauthorization bill that supports our goals of
getting to the Moon and eventually to Mars.
The Inspector General's report on NASA's management of the
Artemis program states that $25 billion should be added to the
Artemis plan's projected cost, which will bring the projected
cost of the program to $93 billion for the fiscal years 2021 to
2025. And this report calls for increased price transparency
and more realistic cost estimates and calculations of per-
mission costs.
So, Inspector General Martin, what explains the differences
between your projected costs and NASA's projected costs of the
Artemis program through 2025? And I know we're talking more--
rather than 2025, a more realistic goal of 2033.
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Congresswoman. What's not included
in that $25 billion are costs for capabilities beyond Artemis
III. And they include the Gateway, they include development of
the SLS Block 1B, also the exploration upper stage, the Mobile
Launcher 2. There's a whole series of capabilities that are
being developed as we speak now that we total up to be
approximately $25 billion that are not reflected in NASA's
current Artemis cost estimates.
Ms. Kim. Now, Inspector General Martin, so what can NASA do
to provide more realistic cost assessment for the Artemis
program?
Mr. Martin. I'm glad you asked that because we made that
recommendation to them in our November report that you cited.
We think that there should be an Artemis-wide lifecycle cost
estimate. And it's sort of a--not completely clear to us why
NASA has failed to agree with our recommendations. From our
perspective an Artemis-wide cost estimate--lifecycle cost
estimate would help increase transparency into the program. It
would inform NASA's annual budget request. And I think,
importantly, it would provide a benchmark against which NASA
can assess its cost-saving initiatives.
Ms. Kim. Thank you. You know, as we look to once again go
beyond the low orbit--low-Earth orbit, I believe it is
important that we do not forget the research in LEO that is
required prior to sending astronauts into deep space. The
Inspector General's report on NASA's management of the ISS
notes that several research programs dedicated to human
exploration in deep space will be incomplete by the time the
ISS is de-orbited. So while I am pleased to see that NASA
recently released an update to the ISS transition plan, I am
worried that NASA has not been specific enough on how it
intends to continue to invest in research into human systems
integration architecture, injury due to extravehicular activity
operations, spaceflight end-use cardiovascular disease, space
radiation exposure, and other critical low-Earth orbit research
activities when the transition is complete.
So, Mr. Free, let me ask you a question. Are you confident
that NASA's ability to complete this research in time for
future crewed Artemis missions, and how is NASA working with
commercial partners and international partners who signed the
Artemis Accords to ensure those LEO research requirements are
met?
Mr. Free. Thank you very much for the question. NASA has a
robust research plan around its--for human research and to buy
down the risks for the systems for our long-term missions to
the Moon and Mars. That is based in LEO.
Today, we're doing a great deal of research on the space
station of our systems that will actually be used to fly to the
Moon and to Mars. Carbon dioxide removal as an example. Our
plan to continue after the space station life is complete is to
work through our commercial LEO destinations that we just
awarded three contracts for late last year where we plan to
continue to do our research that is dependent on microgravity,
that will continue from what we do on space station today. So
we are not ending our time in low-Earth orbit when the space
station life is complete. We're actually enabling that through
our commercial LEO destinations and completion of our research
plans.
Ms. Kim. Thank you very much. I think my time is up. I
yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congresswoman Kim.
Now, let me recognize Congressman Sherman from California
for his questions.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. This one's for the panel. To ensure
we get the maximum value out of the capacity of the Space
Launch System, please discuss how NASA plans to take full
advantage of the Space Launch System's, the SS--the SLS's
capacities. Are you working with the science community and
government--and other government agencies, particularly the
Department of Defense, to help take advantage of America's
rockets?
Mr. Free. Yes, sir, and thank you. I'll start and the rest
of the panel can answer.
We are--as you know, SLS is really--truly a national
capability. It has incredible lift capability to low-Earth
orbit and enabling our lunar missions. And we'll continue to
expand that as we move through development of Block 1B in the
Artemis IV mission set today.
The access to that rocket we're looking to enable through
our exploration production and operations contract. Other
entities, both other government agencies, including the science
community, to take advantage of the capabilities of that rocket
and eventually our goal with our--that contract is to lower the
cost of SLS operations as well.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Mr. Martin, you frequently reported
on the need to implement more effective contracting mechanisms
to control costs and hold companies accountable if there is
poor performance. This seems reasonable. Following your recent
reviews of the Artemis program, can you elaborate on how tools
like fixed-price contracting could help keep the Human Landing
System's effort, within Artemis, within budget compared to
other contracting approaches?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Congressman. As NASA has moved a
number of its spaceflight capabilities to a fixed-price system,
fixed-price contract mechanism, and that makes sense if only if
the design for the system is solidified. What we've seen even
with fixed-price contracts is they award a fixed-price contract
but then have modifications down the road that are often caused
by NASA because the engineering and design work has not yet
been solidified. So we're pro-fixed-price contracts, but they
have to be appropriately used with a more firm design and
engineering construct.
Mr. Sherman. That seems reasonable. Thank you very much. I
yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Excellent. Thank you very much.
We'll now begin a second round of questions. To Mr. Martin,
in your role as overseeing NASA for all these years, we've come
up again and again with this whole notion of Artemis-wide
lifecycle cost estimate. Is there any sense that that would
terrify the American public and shut down a program like this,
that instead of looking at it as X-billion dollars per year, we
looked at the lifecycle cost and then robbed it of its
political salience?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The politics of it I
will leave to you and the Members of the Committee and the rest
of Congress. We just think operationally and strategically it's
in NASA's best long-term interest to have an idea when they're
presenting whatever, be it Artemis or be it the James Webb
Space Telescope, if they have a--as detailed and as accurate a
lifecycle cost estimate so you know what the American taxpayer
is buying.
I mean, there's opportunity cost. If you buy--let's use
James Webb for instance. It costs over $10 billion. It--we're
not making a value judgment at the Office of Inspector General
whether it's worth the $10 billion. It may very well be worth
$20 billion. That's not our--within our purview here at the
Office of Inspector General. But that came in many years ago
approximately as a $1 billion--was presented to Congress as a
$1 billion project, OK, and then ballooned over the years. It
is a one-of-a-kind instrument, I get that, but it ballooned
over the years to $10 billion. There's opportunity costs by
Congress appropriating and NASA spending that $9 billion
deficit on the James Webb Space Telescope, there were other
things it couldn't do. So I think an overall, as accurate as
possible lifecycle cost estimate should be sort of baseline for
these major programs.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you very much. Mr. Dumbacher, you've
been on all sides here, including a professor at Purdue.
There's a fascinating piece called ``Good NASA, Bad NASA'' by a
guy named James Meigs that I read over the weekend. It talked
about how NASA had done incredibly good work on things like the
space telescopes and the--all the science stuff, but had just
spent endless amounts of money year after year through the
major contractors, the Boeings, et cetera, making virtually no
progress on human exploration.
The--does the Elon Musk experience, the development of
Starship, the ability to go back and forth for what seems to be
a fraction of the cost of NASA, push us in the direction of
privatizing more of NASA? And how does that feed into the
debate about who should own the assets at the end of that,
assets that the American people have paid for?
Mr. Dumbacher. Well, that's a very interesting question,
Congressman. I will do my best to do it in a short form. I
think the opportunity that the commercial private space
enterprise companies provide us, one, is they are a new level
of competition that we haven't had in the past that--or in
recent memory that has turned and just proven to be beneficial.
They also bring forward that efficiency, thinking through how
we can do it more efficiently while retaining our safety and
our technical performance. I think those are all valuable
lessons that should be continued.
What we--and how we can apply that to the future is, as
NASA moves forward and we consider the typical or the expected
role of the government investment to reduce the risk for
private industry to then come in behind the government and to
make--and to pick up--make it a market potential and get the
cost efficiency and the speed into it.
We are going through that transition for the first time
from a human spaceflight perspective similar to what the
commercial airline, commercial aviation industry did back in
the 1940's and 1950's. So what we have to learn forward is that
we need to work through that transition, we need to think
through that transition and, importantly, value the taxpayer
investment because that taxpayer investment and the knowledge
from it provides the necessary basis for the emerging economic
opportunity down the road.
So we have the opportunity with--in the launch vehicle
industry because of the investments that the government has
made in the past, they are now coming to commercial fruition,
and we can begin to apply those. We have to be diligent,
though, of making sure we protect the knowledge base so that
the taxpayer investment can be utilized across the board. And
also recognize that at times--and we have experienced doing
this. Also recognize at times that we will have to protect
commercial investment when they--when the commercial entities
also provide some funding.
So this is a balancing act. It's a complicated transition
that we're going through for the first time, and I think we're
learning and we're seeing good progress. And there's
opportunity out there. We just have to be cognizant and
conscious about the hard decisions.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Dumbacher, very much.
Now let me recognize Dr. Babin for his questions.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm glad we're going
back through it a second time. I've got a couple more that I
was not able to get to.
I'd like to go to Mr. Free and ask you, will there be one
mission control for Artemis, SLS, Orion, and HLS, or will there
be separate mission controls and mission operation centers like
there are for ISS and the commercial operations? If there's
just one, where will it be located? And if there will be
several, where will they be located as well?
Mr. Free. Yes, thank you, Dr. Babin. Actually, I'm down
here at JSC (Johnson Space Center) right now, a place you're
familiar with and a pleasure. I'm sure you meet a lot of folks.
It was a pleasure to meet you at the astronaut candidate
induction.
And so from a mission control perspective, we have mission
control in Houston, which will be the hub for all of our
activities around Artemis. There will be mission control for--
from our HLS provider that mission control here in Houston will
connect with. SLS has a control center where they look at all
the data for SLS, but the central control for us will be here
in Houston whenever we put the crew on there. That's where we
focus our efforts.
Mr. Babin. OK, great. Thank you very much. That's good
news, and great to see you again as well, Jim.
Also, one last question for you. NASA recently initiated an
effort to reduce the cost of SLS and Orion by 50 percent. What
is the status of this review? And is the goal reducing 50
percent of the cost of contracts or the overall programs,
including NASA's portion of the program? So if you could
elaborate on that a little bit, I would appreciate that.
Mr. Free. Yes, sir. That's our exploration, production, and
operations contract effort. That is currently being set up and
evaluated through our procurement process internal to the
agency, so that's ongoing with near-term activities underway.
Trying to get to that as fast as we can, the focus is on
beginning that with Artemis V.
I talked earlier about the change between development and
operations. That's where we're looking at making that switch.
The focus of that contract is to work the contractor's side to
get that 50 percent reduction on everything we have with the
multiple contracts we have around the Space Launch System in
today. And we of course will always look at our side of the
equation also of can we do things differently to lower our cost
and our general operations to work with the contractor. If we
give them that contract, that's going to change how we
interact. That also means we need to make sure that that work
force has work to go to as well.
Mr. Babin. OK, thank you so very much. And I really
appreciate it. I'll yield back, Mr. Chairman. And, Jim, thank
you for your service, too.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Babin. I'll now recognize
perhaps the first Congressman to represent Mars, Mr.
Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And my questions
are going to go to you, Mr. Russell, Mr. Martin, and Dr.
Sanders, just to--and then anybody else. It's sort of more of a
philosophical kind of an overall kind of thing. Dr. Sanders,
you talk about the need for a strategic vision. We are in a
moment now--and this goes back to the beginning of, you know,
our spaceflight and--where we were in serious competition with
Russia. And, you know, President Kennedy and President
Eisenhower said, OK, we got to get busy here. And it was
civilian and a defense effort.
So my questions in--my question generally is has there been
any discussion as you're doing sort of a budget analyses, as
you're thinking about the strategic vision, what role the
Defense Department may play in all of this as we're going back
to the Moon, as we move toward Mars? So I guess it's just a
very--and I want my Chairman and my Ranking Member to be
thinking about this. You're not going to have me around for a
long time, and I have been talking to the Armed Services
Committee about the need for us to consider this. So I'll yield
first to you, Dr. Sanders.
Dr. Sanders. OK. A little bit outside of the lane, but one
of the things when we talk about the hazards of space
exploration, they always talk about balancing the value of what
you're undertaking with the risks that you're--that are
attendant with it because you're never going to eliminate all
the risk. And anything that can help you manage that risk
better, including partnerships with the Department of Defense,
would certainly be a potential positive there.
The other thing is is that leadership--the Nation's
leadership in space is an important aspect of our leadership
in--across the spectrum, and so cooperation wherever it's
possible between defense and NASA is certainly a welcome thing.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you. So I guess to Mr. Russell, Mr.
Martin, in your sort of calculations, do you guys ever consider
the potential that part of the budget of getting back to the
Moon, part of the budget of going to Mars could be borne by the
Defense Department?
Mr. Russell. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I
would turn back to what Dr. Sanders was just mentioning about
the overall goal is to mitigate that risk. And if you can
leverage government resources, whether it's within NASA or DOD
to do that, that would be beneficial.
And so one element to that is using mature technology. So
if DOD in their realm and their programs, they're very active
in space, has a key technology that could help enable or
technology improvement effort, that could help enable what NASA
is doing, certainly leveraging that across the Federal
enterprise would be a smart move. But that's the main thing.
Just wherever you can leverage some of the DOD knowledge to
help mitigate the risk in putting together the Artemis mission
set would be beneficial in my view.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you. Mr. Martin?
Mr. Martin. Thank you, Congressman. I will respectfully
dodge the question if that's OK but only to underscore a theme
that's emerged through this hearing both from the panel of
witnesses, as well as the Members is constancy of purpose. I've
been here at NASA OIG for the last 12 years, and we've seen--
one of the more problematic things for NASA long term is when
the national strategy lurches from one--excuse me--from one
pole to another. And we saw that with the cancellation of
Constellation and then the Asteroid Retrieval Mission and now
we are back at Artemis. And so when you lurch, NASA takes years
to buildup capabilities and billions of dollars in
infrastructure, and we cannot leave those kind of investments
on the table.
Mr. Perlmutter. No, and I thank you for that. I'll yield
back after this, Mr. Chairman.
I mean, I think what we've got to do from a congressional
standpoint is just also, you know, take advantage of other
budgets that will benefit by the work that we're doing to get
back to the Moon, to have commercial on the Moon, and to get to
Mars because we know we are in competition with China, with
others and, you know, sometimes even though we try to keep the
civilian side and the defense side separate, there will be a
benefit to the defense side is what I'm talking about. We
should be able to take advantage of their budget a little bit
since it's about 100 times bigger than NASA's.
So with that, I'll yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Perlmutter, very much. And
thanks also for the feedback on the constancy of purpose. I
remember in 2016 at a Space Subcommittee hearing asking the
NASA Administrator--and this is three Administrations ago--what
the constancy of purpose was at NASA, and he had a one-word
answer, Mars, which he then revised a few minutes later to say
science, but they're both in the right realm.
And before we bring the hearing to a close, I thank all of
you for hanging in there for almost two hours and for
testifying and being prepared for this. The record will remain
open for two weeks for additional statements from the Members
and for any additional questions the Committee may ask of the
witnesses. We have much to do this year, NASA reauthorization,
lots of work on space situational awareness and how we manage
low-Earth orbit traffic, but we always want to keep the Artemis
mission, the initiative and someday a program, right at the top
of our priority list. So thank you. The witnesses are excused.
The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:42 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. James Free

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. William Russell

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Patricia Sanders

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by the Honorable Paul K. Martin
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Daniel Dumbacher
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
