- ASSESSING FEDERAL PROGRAMS FOR MEASURING GREENHOUSE GAS SOURCES AND SINKS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING FEDERAL PROGRAMS FOR MEASURING
GREENHOUSE GAS SOURCES AND SINKS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 23, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-62

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-809PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. HALEY STEVENS, Michigan, Chairwoman
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa,
PAUL TONKO, New York                     Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
------

Subcommittee on Environment

HON. MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey, Chairwoman
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma,
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                   Ranking Member
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas               ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

June 23, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Haley Stevens, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Randy Feenstra, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Written statement by Representative Mikie Sherrill, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    12

Written statement by Representative Stephanie I. Bice, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    13

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    14

Witnesses:

Dr. Eric K. Lin, Director, Material Measurement Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17

Dr. Ariel Stein, Acting Director, Global Monitoring Laboratory
and Director, Air Resources Laboratory, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    26
Written Statement............................................    28

Dr. Karen M. St. Germain, Earth Science Division Director,
Science Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    37

Dr. Bryan Hubbell, National Program Director for Air, Climate,
and Energy, Office of Research and Development, United States
Environmental Protection Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    45
Written Statement............................................    47

Discussion.......................................................    55

ASSESSING FEDERAL PROGRAMS
FOR MEASURING GREENHOUSE
GAS SOURCES AND SINKS

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 23, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology,
joint with the Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Haley
Stevens [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Research and
Technology] presiding.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. This hearing will come to order. My
colleague, Congressman Feenstra, we're both running from
meetings, but this is an exciting and important topic. So
without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at
any time.
Before I deliver my opening remarks, I wanted to note that
today's Committee hearing is meeting both in person and
virtually. Just a couple of reminders to Members about the
conduct of this hearing. First, Members and staff who are
attending in person may choose to be masked. It's not a
requirement. However, any individuals with symptoms, a positive
test, or exposure to somebody with COVID-19 should wear a mask
while present.
Members who are attending virtually should keep their video
feed on as long as they are present in the hearing. Members are
responsible for their own microphones. Please keep your
microphones muted unless you're speaking.
Finally, if Members have documents they wish to submit for
the record, please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose
email address was circulated prior to the hearing.
So, good morning, and welcome to today's joint hearing to
examine Federal programs for measuring greenhouse gas sources
and sinks. I really want to thank our distinguished panel of
witnesses. It's just so great to be with so many of you in
person today.
The vast majority of American adults, 78 percent, now say
that they have been personally affected by extreme weather
events in the last 5 years. This is according to a nationwide
survey released this week by the Harvard School of Public
Health, NPR (National Public Radio), and the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation. Americans report these events caused
serious health problems, severe financial woes, and property
damage. I know just yesterday I was talking to a Michigander
who said she is still getting her house in order from floods
she experienced last year. No State in our Nation is untouched
by the damaging physical and emotional impacts of climate
change.
As the hottest part of the year now gets underway, families
across the country are bracing themselves for another season of
devastating hurricanes, storms, floods, fires, and heat waves
all while we're just trying to enjoy the Fourth of July. So it
is timely that on the brink of this summer season we are
holding this hearing to examine the tools the government has to
properly track our greenhouse gas emissions and where our data
is falling short.
Greenhouse gases act like a blanket. The gases trap heat in
the atmosphere. These gases include carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, and other fluorinated gases. And they are
drive--they are a driving force of climate change. Since the
start of the Industrial Revolution, human activities have
vastly increased the volume of greenhouse gases emitted into
the atmosphere. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is essential
to mitigating the effects of climate change. I hope that that
is no longer a controversial statement in Congress or one that
requires further explanation. It is the year 2022, and we have
been talking about this since mid-last century. Yet we seem to
be arguing about whether or not we should do anything.
And so I can only hope that this Nation's leaders are able
to come together soon to enact real policy to reduce emissions
and address the threats that are already at our door because it
is not too late for us to respond. And in fact, this can be an
opportunity for us. I come from an industrial State. I come
from the heart of automotive land in Michigan, and our industry
leaders are also environmental leaders because our industry
leaders are our manufacturers. They are the people who work in
manufacturing facilities who love to go up north. They love to
access our Great Lakes. They like a regular temperature over
the summer. And they certainly don't want to experience
flooding in their home and incurring the costs.
So when we don't enact real policy, we need the tools to
track progress and guide evidence-based decisionmaking. That's
what this Science Committee is all about. We will want the most
accurate tools to ensure that we are reaching our goals, but
also importantly, ensure that we are able to hold other nations
to accountable measurements to be global leaders. We need
accurate and consistent greenhouse gas data.
And that is where our Federal science agencies come in.
Many of our agencies, including those represented by the
experts before us today, are engaged in tremendous research and
development (R&D) work to improve our measurements of
greenhouse gas emissions. This work spans the whole range of
greenhouse gas measurement activities, from fundamental
measurement science and technology development to operation of
science-based airborne and ground-based sensors and observation
platforms to maintaining greenhouse gas emissions inventories.
These agencies do not do this work in a vacuum. Each of
these agencies represented here today cooperate on vital
interagency work to improve greenhouse gas measurement, both on
individual projects and as part of an interagency working
group. Hurray, government coming together for a productive
outcome for the public good. This cooperation is essential to
the success of our greenhouse gas measurements. So much can be
accomplished when our Federal science agencies leverage their
respective expertise in support of a common goal.
I am looking forward to this hearing, and I'm looking
forward to hearing more about the work that our witnesses are
here today to discuss with us to support and improve the
programs underway. So thank you again for joining us.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Stevens follows:]

Good morning and welcome to today's joint hearing to
examine federal programs for measuring greenhouse gas sources
and sinks. I thank our distinguished panel of witnesses--it is
great to be with so many of you in person today.
The vast majority of U.S. adults--78 percent--say they have
been personally affected by extreme weather events in the past
five years. This is according to a nationwide survey released
this week by the Harvard School of Public Health, NPR, and the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Americans report these events
caused serious health problems, severe financial woes, and
property damage. No state in our nation is untouched by the
damaging physical and emotional impacts of climate change.
As the hottest part of the year now gets underway, families
across the country are bracing themselves for another season of
devastating hurricanes, storms, floods, fires, and heat waves.
So, it is timely, that on the brink of this summer season, we
are holding this hearing to examine the tools the government
has to properly track our greenhouse gas emissions and where
our data is falling short.
Greenhouse gases act like a blanket--the gases trap heat in
the atmosphere. These gases include carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, and other fluorinated gases, and they are a
driving force of climate change. Since the start of the
Industrial Revolution, human activities have vastly increased
the volume of greenhouse gases emitted into the atmosphere.
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is essential to
mitigating the effects of climate change. I hope that is no
longer a controversial statement in Congress, or one that
requires further explanation. Yet we still seem to be arguing
about whether to do anything about it.
I can only hope that this nation's leaders are able to come
together soon to enact real policy to reduce emissions and
address to the threats that are already at our door.
Because it isn't too late for us to respond.
When we do enact real policy, we will need the tools to
track progress and guide evidence-based decision-making. We
will want the most accurate tools to ensure we are reaching our
goals, but also importantly, ensure we are able to hold other
nations to accountable measurements. To be global leaders, we
need accurate and consistent greenhouse gas data.
And that is where our Federal science agencies come in.
Many of our agencies, including those represented by the
experts before us today, are engaged in tremendous research and
development work to improve our measurements of greenhouse gas
emissions. This work spans the whole range of greenhouse gas
measurement activities from fundamental measurement science and
technology development, to operation of space-based, airborne,
and ground-based sensors and observation platforms, to
maintaining greenhouse gas emissions inventories.
These agencies do not do this work in a vacuum. Each of the
agencies represented here today cooperate on vital interagency
work to improve greenhouse gas measurement, both on individual
projects and as part of an interagency working group. This
cooperation is essential to the success of our greenhouse gas
measurements. So much can be accomplished when our federal
science agencies leverage their respective expertise in support
of a common goal.
I'm looking forward to hearing more about this work from
our witnesses today and to discussing what we here in Congress
can do to support and improve these programs. I'd like to again
thank our witnesses for joining us today.

Chairwoman Stevens. The Chair is now going to recognize
Ranking Member Feenstra for an opening statement.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, and
thank you for your passion. And thank you to our witnesses for
your participation today. I'm very grateful to have you here
and to hear from you.
We're here to discuss the measurement and monitoring of
greenhouse gases, which can improve the tools we have available
to reduce and capture emissions. Importantly, we're not just
going to discuss emissions but also sinks and the processes
that remove greenhouse gases from our atmosphere. One example
is the land use and forestry sector, which offset total U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions by 13 percent in 2020. This is an
important contribution to emission reductions, and Federal R&D
can help us make even this further--go further. For example, we
now know the potential to improve carbon sequestration in
cropland through conservation, tillage, and other practices.
Without accurate data, however, it's difficult to make
significant progress in any greenhouse gas reduction efforts.
So Federal science agencies are working with academia and
industry to improve the monitoring, measuring, and verifying of
the sources and sinks of greenhouse gas emissions. Better
monitoring and measurement technologies give us the ability to
implement more efficient and cost-effective practices to reduce
greenhouse gases and its concentrations.
I'm encouraged by the work being done today, and I see
great potential. For instance, the National Institute for
Standards and Technology, NIST, is using an innovative approach
through its Greenhouse Gas Measurement Program. While most
cities estimate greenhouse gas emissions indirectly through
economic data such as the number of miles that vehicles drive
within the city, NIST has developed atmospheric observational
tools to measure emissions directly. By combining the indirect
and direct observations, scientists can make better estimates
for emissions and provide more useful information to its
stakeholders.
NIST also operates an Urban Greenhouse Gas Measurement
Testbed System, which develops and evaluates the performance of
emission measurement capabilities in Indianapolis, the Los
Angeles Air Basin, and the Northeast Corridor. In order to help
measure, monitor, and report greenhouse gas emissions in an
accurate, standardized, and transparent manner, NIST has also
initiated a documentary standard effort. This work will help
develop best practices that improve industry's ability to use
measurement tools and quantification methods to reduce
greenhouse gases in the environment. Eventually, the hope is
that we will lead to the development of technical standards to
improve the data quality of greenhouse gas emission reports.
NIST also works with other Federal agencies through
Greenhouse Gas Monitoring and Measurement Interagency Working
Groups to coordinate existing efforts. The coordination is so
critical. We can't afford to have agencies duplicating work or,
worse, providing conflicting information.
So I'd like to emphasize to our witnesses today how
important it is that we continue to coordinate research
activities moving forward to maximize our resources. In
addition to learning more about the work being done to better
understand lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions, I hope to learn
more today about where measurement and data challenges exist
and where research gaps remain. I look forward to hearing your
perspectives on that. And I want to thank our witnesses again.
Madam Chair, thank you for putting this hearing on, and I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Feenstra follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens and Chairwoman Sherrill for
holding today's hearing. And thank you to our witnesses for
your participation here today.
We're here to discuss measurement and monitoring of
greenhouse gases, which can improve the tools we have available
to reduce and capture emissions.
Importantly, we're not just going to discuss emissions, but
also sinks, or the processes that remove greenhouse gases from
the atmosphere.
Once such example is the land use and forestry sector,
which offset total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by 13% in
2020.
This is an important contribution to emissions reductions,
and federal R&D can help us make it even better.
For example, we know there's potential to improve carbon
sequestration in cropland through conservation tillage and
other practices.
Without accurate data, however, it's difficult to make
significant progress in any greenhouse gas reduction efforts.
So federal science agencies are working with academia and
industry to improve the monitoring, measuring, and verifying of
sources and sinks of greenhouse gas emissions.
Better monitoring and measurement technologies give us the
ability to implement more efficient and cost-effective
practices to reduce greenhouse gas concentrations.
I'm encouraged by the work being done today and I see great
potential.
For instance, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) is using an innovative approach through its
Greenhouse Gas Measurement Program.
While most cities estimate greenhouse gas emissions
indirectly through economic data, such as the number of miles
that vehicles travel within a city, NIST has developed
atmospheric observational tools to measure emissions directly.
By combining the indirect and direct observations,
scientists can make better estimates for emissions and provide
more useful information to stakeholders.
NIST also operates an Urban Greenhouse Gas Measurements
Testbed System, which develops and evaluates the performance of
emissions measurement capabilities in Indianapolis, the Los
Angeles Air Basin, and the Northeast Corridor.
In order to help measure, monitor, and report greenhouse
gas emissions in an accurate, standardized, and transparent
manner, NIST has also initiated a documentary standards effort.
This work will help develop best practices that improve
industry's ability to use measurement tools and quantification
methods to reduce greenhouse gases in the environment.
Eventually, the hope is that they will lead to the
development of technical standards to improve the data quality
of greenhouse gas emissions reports.
NIST also works with other Federal agencies through the
Greenhouse Gas Monitoring and Measurement Interagency Working
Group to coordinate existing efforts.
That coordination is critical. We can't afford to have
agencies duplicating work or worse--providing conflicting
information.
So I'd like to emphasize to our witnesses today how
important it is that you continue to coordinate research
activities moving forward to maximize our resources.
In addition to learning more about the work being done to
better understand lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions, I hope to
learn more today about where measurement and data challenges
exist, and where research gaps remain.
I look forward to hearing your perspectives on that. I want
to thank our witnesses again.
And Madam Chair, I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Sherrill follows:]

Good morning, everyone. I am pleased to welcome you,
alongside Chairwoman Stevens, to today's joint subcommittee
hearing. And thank you to our witnesses for joining us today to
provide their expertise on programs at their agencies
responsible for measuring greenhouse gas emissions and sinks.
I'm looking forward to your testimonies.
Greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide, and fluorinated gases, trap heat within the Earth's
atmosphere causing our planet to become warmer. These
greenhouse gases can be emitted naturally and through human
activities. The scientific consensus points to the increasing
emissions of anthropogenic greenhouse gases as the leading
cause of climate change. We have often talked on this Committee
how communities across the nation are already experiencing the
effects of climate change through record rainfall amounts,
bigger wildfires, longer droughts, and rising sea levels.
Every day, many Americans take individual action towards
curbing their excess greenhouse gas emissions. This includes
but is not limited to, buying electric vehicles, using public
transportation, and purchasing carbon offsets. Governments at
all levels are also supporting these efforts through developing
energy efficiency standards and the rapid deployment of
renewable energy infrastructure. This shift in our behavior is
spurring the growth of the economy through the development of
new markets and the competitiveness of those markets, as well
as through innovation. Reducing carbon and other greenhouse gas
emissions will not only create a healthier environment for all
communities but will also encourage economic growth.
My home state of New Jersey has set an ambitious but
achievable goal of 50 percent reduction of the state's
greenhouse gas emissions by the end of this decade, and an 80
percent reduction by 2050. New Jersey also releases a
comprehensive statewide greenhouse gas emissions inventory
report every two years. This report is consistent with national
and international standards for inventory practices. Other
states and local communities publish similar reports to track
their efforts to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. While
these efforts are imperative to monitor our greenhouse gas
emissions, and reductions, the New York Times reported last
year that cities across the nation are under reporting their
emissions by nearly 20 percent. Accurate emissions data is
essential to understanding where our communities currently
stand and how the mitigation efforts are progressing.
That is what brings us here today. While we are working to
curb excess greenhouse gas emissions to reduce the impacts of
climate change and protect public health, we do not know
exactly how much we are emitting and if our efforts to reduce
these emissions are effective. The federal science agencies
that we are fortunate to hear from today are some of the
leaders in cutting-edge research to accurately track greenhouse
gas emissions globally and domestically. To address this
challenge immediately, we need to understand the current state
of observation, measurement, and verification processes of the
sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, and how to improve those
processes. We also need to address any challenges there may be
in monitoring or collecting this valuable data.
Achieving our emissions reduction goals and meeting our
commitment to the Paris Agreement requires accurate accounting
of the sources and sinks of greenhouse gas emissions. We cannot
mitigate what we cannot measure. The U.S. can continue to lead
the world in advancing research and technology innovation to
help tackle this global issue.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony today on the
ongoing federal efforts on the measurements of greenhouse gas
emission data, as well as any recommendations to the Committee
on how we can address research gaps related to this important
issue. Thank you again for being here. I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Mrs. Bice follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens.
Last week we had a hearing on methane emissions from the
oil and gas sector. The overall message we heard was that
monitoring technologies are out there, but federal regulations
can hinder their widespread deployment.
Today's hearing is broader than that, as we look at the
whole suite of greenhouse gases and how they are monitored,
measured, and verified, no matter where they come from.
But the overarching message is likely the same: we have the
ability to improve the most helpful technologies, but we need
to make sure the path to deployment isn't blocked by burdensome
federal regulations.
The United States already has a tremendous story to tell
when it comes to environmental stewardship and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. That is largely due to industry
taking the lead and acting without being forced to change--or
outright stop--their productivity.
We've been the world leader in lowering carbon emissions
since 2005, reducing more than the next 7 emissions reducing
countries combined. Methane emissions in our country have also
decreased by 17% since 1990. And as Mr. Feenstra pointed out,
our land use and forestry sector continues to be a carbon sink,
reducing the overall amount of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere from all sectors.
All of this has taken place while the energy and
agriculture industries increased production and lowered energy
costs for American households during that time.
So with in mind, I sincerely hope that today's hearing is
not an attempt to villainize the energy producers like those in
Oklahoma, which are producing three times more energy than the
state consumes.
What I am hopeful we can talk about today is how our
federal agencies are collaborating with each other when it
comes to quantifying and reporting greenhouse gas emissions.
Because the simple fact of the matter is that if we don't know
how much or what kind of gas is in the atmosphere, we have no
hope of preventing its release in the future.
Make no mistake, this is a whole-of-government approach.
NASA and NOAA have satellites with global monitoring tools.
NIST evaluates the performance of measurement and
quantification technologies. EPA prepares the Inventory of U.S.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks, the premier collection of
data related to greenhouse gases.
Each agency has a role to play, but we must ensure that
federal resources are not being wasted on duplicative efforts.
With energy prices at record highs, now is not the time for
virtue-signaling. If there are ways to better monitor and
quantify greenhouse gases, we don't need to play the blame
game. We need to understand what is impeding their deployment
and work to enable their commercialization as soon as possible.
We must also remember we are talking about a global problem
in need of global solutions. For every ton of greenhouse gas
emissions reduced by the United States, China has increased
their emissions by nearly 4 tons. We can do our part here at
home, but if monitoring doesn't extend to a global reach, we
have no hope of real change.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for taking the time to
testify today. I look forward to your testimonies and--given
that you each works for a federal agency--how you are
collaborating on these efforts. I also hope to hear how each
agency is incorporating a global outlook when it comes to
greenhouse gases.
Thank you Madam Chair and I yield back the balance of my
time.

[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning. Thank you everyone for joining us for this
joint subcommittee hearing. I especially want to thank Chairs
Stevens and Sherrill for holding today's hearing. This is an
important and timely topic.
Last November, I attended the 26th U.N. Conference of
Parties, or COP 26, in Glasgow with Speaker Pelosi and many of
my colleagues. Throughout the conference, we consistently heard
about the need to keep within 1.5 degrees of warming. This
Committee has worked tirelessly to pass legislation that
ensures we develop the tools and technologies to address
climate change and its worst impacts.
Ultimately, however, we will need to enact policy to
regulate greenhouse gas emissions. And for any such policy to
be successful, we must have high-quality and accurate
measurements of these emissions. Measurement, reporting, and
verification will be the backbone of meeting obligations and
holding parties accountable at the local, national, and
international level, including under the Paris Climate
Agreement.
But ensuring the accuracy of these measurements is a
difficult challenge. Earlier this month, this Committee had a
hearing about methane, during which witnesses testified that
oil and gas companies are failing to measure and mitigate
methane leaks. A 2021 study showed that many U.S. cities were
dramatically undercounting their greenhouse gas emissions.
Failing to accurately measure our emissions will undermine our
ability to achieve effective climate solutions.
Fortunately, many of our Federal science agencies are
working together to address this challenge. Some of our
agencies, like the EPA, focus on a bottom-up approach,
analyzing ground-level sources of greenhouse gases. Others, in
particular NASA and NOAA, collect data top-down through the
atmosphere. NIST has developed a greenhouse gas measurement
framework for urban emissions, using both top-down and bottom-
up measurements to calibrate one another.
In order to reach our goal of trusted measurement
frameworks, new technologies will be needed to improve the
accuracy of greenhouse gas measurements while bringing down
their associated costs. Creating novel measurement capabilities
will in turn require a workforce with the skills to operate
them. And finally, we must continue to support and improve
domestic and international partnerships toward our common goal
of addressing climate change.
Today's discussion will rightfully focus on the science and
technology needs to advance this field. However, we mustn't
forget the public health impacts of greenhouse gas emissions.
Communities of color are disproportionately vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change caused by increased greenhouse gas
emissions. Improving our ability to accurately measure
greenhouse gases will in turn improve public health outcomes in
these communities. The most vulnerable communities must be
prioritized when improving our greenhouse measurement programs
I am excited to hear testimony from expert witnesses
representing each of these agencies about their unique roles
and activities related to greenhouse gas measurement. I am
particularly interested to hear if the agencies need any new
authorities or funding to support their important work.
Thank you, Chairs Stevens and Sherrill. I yield back the
balance of my time.

Chairwoman Stevens. And at this time, I would like to
introduce our witnesses. Our first witness is Dr. Eric Lin. Dr.
Lin is the Director of NIST Material Measurement Laboratory,
MML. MML has more than 900 staff members and visiting
scientists and serves as the Nation's reference laboratory for
measurements in the chemical, biological, and materials
sciences, another best kept secret at NIST. Dr. Lin has also
served as the Acting Associate Director for Laboratory Programs
at NIST, during which time he provided direction and
operational guidance for all of NIST's scientific and technical
laboratories.
Our next witness is Dr. Ariel Stein. Dr. Stein is the
Director of NOAA's (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's) Air Resources Laboratory and Acting Director
of NOAA's Global Monitoring Laboratory. He has extensive
expertise and experience working with atmospheric transport,
dispersion, and photochemical models. Prior to his current
role, Dr. Stein served as a Supervisory Physical Scientist at
the Air Resources lab.
Our third witness is Dr. Karen St. Germain. Dr. St. Germain
is the Division Director of the Earth Science Division in
NASA's (National Aeronautics and Space Administration's)
Science Mission Directorate. In this role, she provides
executive leadership, strategic direction, and overall
management for the entire agency's Earth science portfolio.
Prior to coming to NASA, she served as the Deputy Assistant
Administrator systems for NOAA's Satellite and Information
Service. She has also previously served in positions at the
Department of Defense.
Our third--our final witness is Dr. Bryan Hubbell. Dr.
Hubbell is the National Program Director for the Air, Climate,
and Energy (ACE) Research Program in EPA's (Environmental
Protection Agency's) Office of Research and Development, ORD.
Dr. Hubbell has worked for EPA for 24 years as an expert on the
health and environmental impacts of air pollution. He led the
EPA project team that developed the Environmental Benefits
Mapping and Analysis Program, which is used around the world to
estimate the benefits of clean air.
As our witnesses should know, you'll have 5 minutes for
your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will be included
in the record for the hearing. And when you've all completed
your spoken testimony. We will begin with questions, and each
Member will have 5 minutes to question the panel. We're going
to start with Dr. Lin.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ERIC K. LIN,

DIRECTOR, MATERIAL MEASUREMENT LABORATORY,

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Lin. Chairwoman Stevens, Chairwoman Sherrill, Ranking
Members Feenstra and Bice, and Members of the Subcommittees,
I'm Dr. Eric Lin, Director of the Material Measurement
Laboratory at the Department of Commerce's National Institute
of Standards and Technology, NIST. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss NIST's role
in greenhouse gas measurements. NIST's laboratory programs work
at the frontiers of measurement science to ensure that the U.S.
system of measurements is firmly grounded in sound scientific
and technical principles.
For this hearing, the NIST Greenhouse Gas Measurements
Program helps businesses and governments at all levels measure,
monitor, authenticate, and report greenhouse gas emissions in
an accurate, transparent, and standardized manner. This
measurement program will help cities demonstrate that they are
contributing to the Administration's national greenhouse gas
emissions reduction targets for the next 20 to 30 years.
NIST provides a system of observation networks for
measuring greenhouse gases at the city level and even down to
the street and block. Our work complements that of our partner
agencies with their expertise in quantifying greenhouse gases
on larger scales, our regions and continents.
To demonstrate the feasibility and validity of NIST's
granular approach, NIST established the Urban Greenhouse Gas
Measurements Testbed System. This so-called Urban Dome Project
provides the measurements and accuracy that businesses and
governments need for mitigation actions and science-based
policy decisions. The Urban Dome Project can measure and map
emissions at any level needed, down to an individual building
and over a range of time resolutions, from annual variations to
seasons, weeks, days, and hours.
NIST operates measurement testbeds in Indianapolis, the Los
Angeles Air Basin, and the Washington D.C./Baltimore region
with plans to extend through the Northeast Corridor to Boston.
These testbeds encompass a range of conditions that represent
the span of U.S. urban areas. The NIST Urban Dome Project is a
partnership with members of government, business, academic, and
nongovernmental organizations. The Urban Dome Project develops
and provides mature measurements-based scientific tools,
methods, and data to better estimate greenhouse gas emissions.
These validated tools will enable the identification of the
most economically viable emission-reduction opportunities in
urban areas. Application of these tools before and after the
deployment of energy efficiency where alternative energy
solutions can authenticate their effectiveness.
This toolkit will soon include international documentary
standards to which NIST provides technical expertise that will
improve data quality in national greenhouse gas emission
reports. High-quality data will help the community judge
progress toward national emissions reduction targets.
NIST works closely with our Federal partners in the
Greenhouse Gas Monitoring and Measurement Interagency Working
Group. Coordination through this group is essential to continue
to maximize the impact of agency resources; enhance the
Nation's ability to measure, quantify, and monitor greenhouse
gas emissions and removals; and accelerate the transition of
relevant research to operational use.
Interagency and additional collaborations can enhance our
understanding of greenhouse gas emissions by linking surface
emission measurements to satellite and airborne observations
for even more robust domestic measurement and monitoring
capabilities; modeling fossil fuel and biogenic emissions and
uptake to better understand the effects of vegetation,
wetlands, and similar urban features on emissions measurements;
developing measurements and models to relate atmospheric
greenhouse gas concentrations to emissions.
For more than a century, NIST has conducted measurement
science that is impartial, accurate, and consistent so that
decisions in the business and policy realms are made on sound
scientific footing. NIST helps to provide the measurements and
data that the United States and other nations need as they
monitor and choose ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
We greatly appreciate the Members of these Committees and
others in Congress for their support of Federal research and
services that support greenhouse gas mitigation efforts, and
I'll be pleased to answer any questions that you have. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lin follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. And now, we'll move to Dr. Stein.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ARIEL STEIN,

ACTING DIRECTOR, GLOBAL MONITORING LABORATORY

AND DIRECTOR, AIR RESOURCES LABORATORY,

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Stein. Chairs and Ranking Members and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today
regarding Federal programs focused on monitoring, measuring,
and verifying sources and sinks of greenhouse gases. NOAA's
mission is to understand and predict changes in climate,
weather, the oceans, and coasts. To achieve this, we must
continuously monitor and detect changes as they occur. The
primary focus of my work is to monitor and detect changes in
the atmosphere that impact climate. This is something NOAA has
a long history of doing. With CO
2
measurement dating
back to 1958, NOAA's Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii is the
global benchmark location for monitoring atmospheric
composition and was key in determining the connection between
rising atmospheric CO
2
levels and climate change.
Building off this historic accomplishment, NOAA's long-
term, continuous atmospheric observations serve as a baseline
and record which can be used to monitor natural and
anthropogenic emissions and greenhouse gases, as well as their
uptake by the natural land and ocean-based processes and the
effectiveness of efforts to reduce climate change through
greenhouse gas mitigation.
The Mauna Loa Observatory continues today as a cornerstone
of NOAA's Global Greenhouse Gas Reference Network. This network
has grown to a global scale, with more than 70 sites around the
world measuring over 60 gases. These high-quality data serve as
the backbone of NOAA's climate mission by providing vital
environmental intelligence for monitoring the steadily changing
composition of Earth's atmosphere and understanding global
weather and climate.
NOAA uses this foundational climate information to develop
products and tools to help inform decisionmaking. NOAA's
greenhouse gas data feed models to predict long-term changes in
climate that have the potential to impact long-term planning
needed for industries like shipping, fishing, forest
management, agriculture, construction, finance, and water
resources. For instance, NOAA has developed a system based on
measurements and models to detect long-term changes in sources
and sinks at the global, national, and regional levels.
NOAA is also working to better understand changes in
greenhouse gas emissions and air quality in our Nation's cities
in partnership with other agencies. In particular, NOAA
conducted research on how greenhouse gas emissions coming from
urban environments may not have changed much during the
lockdown period of COVID-19, while significant changes were
simultaneously observed in air quality.
NOAA has also conducted research with the oil and gas
industry to pinpoint fugitive emissions to realize efficiencies
while ensuring the safety of these sites and preventing the
loss of valuable fuel that could be captured and sold.
These are just a few examples of NOAA's boots-on-the-ground
approach to providing climate services. Just as with our other
climate services, by connecting with communities and leverage
our Greenhouse Gas Network, NOAA helps local decisionmakers
strengthen our resilience and adaptation to climate change,
which will help protect lives, lifestyles, and livelihoods.
NOAA's work on understanding sources and changing
greenhouse gas emissions and sinks requires cooperation with
numerous agencies. Each agency represented here today brings to
the table core capabilities that complement each other and will
help us advance this field.
NOAA is also looking toward expanding the Greenhouse
Observational Network by using new technologies to allow the
detection of greenhouse gases at higher temporal and spatial
resolutions. For example, NOAA is working with the airline
industry to help expand our agency observing network by putting
instruments on commercial aircrafts to acquire data as planes
ascend and descend. Much like how the National Weather Service
already partners with commercial airlines to gather
meteorological data, these new capabilities have the potential
to provide orders of magnitude more observation of the
atmosphere in climate-sensitive regions like the Arctic and the
tropics, as well as high-emitting regions surrounding many
metropolitan airports. These data may allow NOAA to detect
greenhouse gases changes at finer resolutions, which will
improve the climate information available to decisionmakers at
the regional and local scales.
Thank you, and I look forward for your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Stein follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And now, we'll hear from Dr. St.
Germain.

TESTIMONY OF DR. KAREN M. ST. GERMAIN,

EARTH SCIENCE DIVISION DIRECTOR,

SCIENCE MISSION DIRECTORATE,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Dr. St. Germain. Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Member
Feenstra, Chairwoman Sherrill, and Ranking Member Bice, and
Members of the Subcommittee and Committee, I'm Dr. Karen St.
Germain, Director of NASA's Earth Science Division, and I'm
very pleased to appear before you to share NASA's role in
measuring, monitoring, and understanding the role of greenhouse
gases in our warming climate.
NASA's mission is to provide the observations and
foundational science that underpin our understanding of the
Earth as a system. We're working to bring cutting-edge space-
based and airborne instruments and observations, advanced
modeling, new technologies, and analytic techniques to deliver
world-class scientific understanding of the Earth system. In
doing so, we support the broad range of efforts across the
agencies you see here and many others in the Federal Government
and beyond. We're committed to open science and collaborating
with our colleagues here to offer policymakers and Americans
actionable information in support of their efforts to mitigate
greenhouse gases and respond to the wide-ranging--the wide
range of impacts of the climate change.
We're moving out today to build the Earth System
Observatory that will consist of five major missions augmented
by several competed missions. The Earth System Observatory will
give us an even better overall understanding of the Earth
system and the interplay between greenhouse gases and the
carbon and water cycles.
Today, our instruments that measure greenhouse gases
include OCO-2, the Orbiting Carbon Observatory, and OCO-3, its
sibling on the International Space Station. NASA airborne
campaigns obtain high-resolution temporal and spatial
measurements of complex local processes, which give us an even
clearer understanding of what our global satellite observations
are telling us. For example, the MOOSE (Michigan-Ontario Ozone
Source Experiment) campaign in Michigan lets us better
understand why we're seeing elevated ozone levels in the--at
the Michigan-Ontario border region, while other campaigns have
been critical in documenting methane super sources.
NASA continues to advance technology for new space-based
and airborne measurement capabilities, and in developing these
tools, NASA strives to make these technologies reliable,
affordable, and deployable. And when there's opportunity, we
transition these technologies to the private sector, as is the
case with NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory partnership with
Carbon Mapper Inc. Our technology efforts will enable better
measurements of carbon dioxide and methane fluxes and trends in
varying conditions.
The Carbon Monitoring System, or CMS, has allowed us to
combine observations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere with
other types of measurements to give us a better understanding
of the Earth system processes such as the carbon cycle. CMS
projects have provided insight into the role of forest and
cropland in greenhouse gas fluxes, including whether certain
lands under agricultural use are carbon sinks, sources, or both
under varying conditions. For example, Midwestern cornfields
are carbon sinks during most years, while during years of water
stress, they release carbon, even as Oklahoma winter wheat
might show no notable change under similar environmental
conditions.
CMS-funded scientists built a new series of maps detailing
the global geography of methane emissions from coal, oil, gas,
and other sources. Using publicly available data reported, the
research team plotted fuel exploitation emissions that arise
before the fuels are ever consumed.
NASA's greenhouse gas research and its applications depend
also on partners and their assets from NOAA's Suomi-NPP
(National Polar-orbiting Partnership) to the European TROPOMI
(TROPOspheric Monitoring Instrument) and the Japanese GOSAT
(Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite), and we work with
partners at NOAA, EPA, and NIST to assimilate many sources of
data to help understand the nature of greenhouse gas emissions.
NASA is working with other agencies through the new
Greenhouse Gas Monitoring and Measurement Interagency Working
Group to maximize the impact of agency resources, enhance the
Nation's ability to measure and monitor emissions and removals,
and accelerate the transition of relevant research capabilities
to operational use. And we at NASA are building on these
efforts toward an Earth Information Center with an initial
focus on prototyping capabilities for greenhouse gas monitoring
information that will integrate the data from these variety of
sources with the goal of making that data more accessible and
usable to Federal, State, local, and tribal governments, as
well as researchers, the public, and other users.
NASA's $2.4 billion request for Earth science in the ' 23
President's budget will allow us to continue to make this
strong progress in observing and understanding the Earth as a
system, including greenhouse gas emissions and, just as
importantly, understand how the widely varying impacts of the
changing climate are affecting our communities from the coasts
to the heartland.
NASA stands ready to work with our Federal, State, tribal,
local, and commercial partners to address the challenges posed
by greenhouse gases and their effects. And I want to thank this
Committee and Congress for its support of Earth science and the
entire Federal Government's efforts to tackle the challenges
we're discussing today. And I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. St. Germain follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Fabulous. And with that, we'll hear
from Dr. Hubbell.

TESTIMONY OF DR. BRYAN HUBBELL,

NATIONAL PROGRAM DIRECTOR

FOR AIR, CLIMATE, AND ENERGY,

OFFICE OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT,

UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Dr. Hubbell. Good morning, Chairman--Chairwoman Stevens and
Sherrill and Ranking Members Feenstra and Bice. My name is Dr.
Bryan Hubbell. I'm the National Program Director for the Air,
Climate, and Energy Research Program in U.S. EPA's Office of
Research and Development, known as ORD. I have 24 years of
experience at EPA applying, conducting, and leading research on
the health and environmental effects of air pollution and
climate change. A key element of the ACE program is development
and application of methods for measuring air pollutants and
greenhouse gases. I appreciate the opportunity to talk with you
today about ORD's important work to advance greenhouse gas
measurement.
Accurately quantifying greenhouse gas emissions is an
important part of EPA's work. Greenhouse gas data are used in a
variety of ways to inform decisions that help protect the
health of our Nation. Accurate and comprehensive source-based
greenhouse gas emissions data provide the foundation of EPA's
emission reduction programs and allow EPA and others, including
Congress, to evaluate the effectiveness of those programs.
Emissions data are also used by States and communities to
understand their emissions and develop mitigation strategies
for their particular needs.
EPA's Office of Air and Radiation also uses source-based
emission measurements and modeling for the U.S. greenhouse gas
inventory. While ORD does not make policy decisions, we work
hard to ensure that EPA program offices, other Federal
agencies, States, tribes and communities have the highest
possible data quality so they can make well-informed decisions
with competence.
ORD's research is currently focused on source-based
measurements of methane and other non-CO
2
gases.
This work is critical to informing both national and
international greenhouse gas inventories, and it supports
regulatory and voluntary emissions reduction programs. It also
contributes to EPA's broader efforts to close the gap between
source-based, bottom-up inventories and top-down emission
estimates. Our work in this area includes exploring ways to
more accurately quantify methane emissions from oil and gas
operations, improving mobile ground-based remote-sensing
technologies to measure methane concentrations at facility
fence lines, and evaluating methane emissions from municipal
solid waste landfills.
In addition to this in-house research, ORD is also
developing a request for applications through our Research
Grant Program to study methane emissions from landfills. We're
planning to award $1 million in research grants under this
request, which we anticipate releasing by the end of the year.
While methane emissions from landfills and oil and gas
facilities is a focus, our researchers are also looking at
other greenhouse gas emission sources. For example, our
research has significantly improved the understanding of
greenhouse gas emissions from freshwater reservoirs, lakes,
rivers, and other water bodies, which can be sources of
methane, CO
2
, and nitrous oxide. Accurate
measurements of these emissions are crucial to understanding
the big picture of greenhouse gas emissions. New techniques
developed by ORD researchers have already improved national and
international greenhouse gas methodologies and inventories.
And finally, we plan to evaluate how aquatic systems such
as watersheds and wetlands can remove and store CO
2

from the atmosphere. And we plan to research the role of blue
carbon and how protecting coastal estuaries can benefit local
communities, while also reducing atmospheric CO
2
.
Monitoring and measuring all sources and sinks of
greenhouse gases requires the combined expertise of multiple
Federal agencies. EPA partners and coordinates with NOAA, NIST,
NASA, DOE (Department of Energy), and USDA (United States
Department of Agriculture) at multiple levels to ensure we're
using the best available data and measurement technologies and
practices. This includes engagement through the U.S. Global
Change Research Program and the Greenhouse Gas Monitoring and
Measurement Interagency Working Group, and also on other
research efforts. For example, ORD is collaborating with NIST,
NOAA, the California Air Resources Board, and others to combine
airborne, satellite, and ground-based measurements for landfill
greenhouse gas emissions assessments.
While EPA and other Federal agencies have made great
strides in greenhouse gas measurement, there are gaps in
knowledge that we are working to address. This work includes
resolving uncertainties in various airborne and satellite
systems, establishing approaches that capture information about
source locations and operational status, and identifying
locations and events that can account for disproportionate
amounts of greenhouse gas emissions. Even though my office does
not directly make decisions regarding greenhouse gases, I'm
proud of the research we do that helps ensure that our EPA
program partners, other Federal agencies, States, tribes, and
communities have the data and information they need to make
decisions to protect health and the environment. We look
forward to continuing this research and to addressing key
research needs the future.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today, and I'm happy to take any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hubbell follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Well, thank you so much.
And at this point, we're going to begin our first round of
questions, and the Chair is going to recognize herself for 5
minutes.
So you all have spoken today about the fantastic work your
agencies are doing and the interagency partnerships that are
going to enable the success of much of the work at hand. Given
all this collaboration, I wanted to dive a little deeper on the
idea of integrated greenhouse gas observing system. So what is
the ultimate vision of an integrated greenhouse gas observing
system, and what do we need to do to achieve such a system? And
anyone of you can start with that. Dr. St. Germain?
Dr. St. Germain. Certainly, thank you for the question.
So--and I think that all of the members of the panel may have
something to contribute to this one.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes.
Dr. St. Germain. I think it's really about doing the data
assimilation. There are two elements, right, bringing together
the data and the models that we that we have and the strengths
of those from each of the agencies, but then also creating the
interface that makes that easy to access, so, you know,
unleashing the power of that science by making it easy to
access and understand by users at all levels to inform the
decisions they have before them.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes, Dr. Stein?
Dr. Stein. An integrated system will require going from
global measurements and models all the way to the local realm.
I would envision the idea of using satellite, in situ, tower,
airborne platforms, along with the integration of models
together. We also need vertical profiles of the atmosphere in
order to understand the three-dimensionality of that, and going
again from the global to the local and also taking into account
the sectors that we are going to study. Each sector is going to
require a different solution. The stacks or industrial sectors
do not have the same--do not--are not looking for the same
solutions as the urban areas. The forest problem or the uptake
from forests requires a different set of tools. So all of the--
that integral way of responding to this problem is key for
tackling it.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes. And, Dr. Lin, as we answer this
question, just for the folks who are watching back at home, and
given the division of NIST that you oversee, could you just
give some examples of the units of measurement that we're
talking about?
Dr. Lin. Well, probably the most important one is the
concentration level. So of all the greenhouse gases, you need a
concentration, so you need a composition measurement of the
quantity of any gas within a given environment. That would be
one. Another one would be basically all of the quantities that
are used to connect to those concentration levels, so those
would be like spectroscopic measurements where you need to know
wavelengths and those types of units. But I'd say concentration
is probably the most important.
Chairwoman Stevens. And those are global measurements? It's
a universal unit of measurement----
Dr. Lin. Yes, yes.
Chairwoman Stevens [continuing]. Not subject to the pain of
the imperial system----
Dr. Lin. No, it's part of the system, international system
of measurements, the SI system. The relevant one here is really
the mole and the gram, so it's a measure of quantities. And we
say concentration is a quantity per unit volume, which is
related to mass. So these are all very universal and tied to
the SI system. And we work very closely with our partners to
take these fundamentals of something as straightforward as
concentration and mass and we have to connect it to
concentration in the reference materials that are done in
partnership with NOAA as the official reference materials,
primary laboratory for the international system.
Chairwoman Stevens. And so, Dr. Hubbell, how does this
system of--enable us to meet the goal to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions? This is the Integrated Greenhouse Gas Observing
System.
Dr. Hubbell. Right. So I just want to point out that in
addition to these kind of global measurements, it's really also
important to get very local to be able to inform mitigation. So
the ground-based measurements that we typically are engaged
with are looking at things like emission rates and looking at
emissions coming from specific parts of the production process.
So it's really important to--as we're thinking about global
measurements of concentrations, to also remember that we need
to get a good understanding of emissions from individual
sources and parts of sources so that we can create mitigation
strategies. That's a critical part as we're moving forward with
thinking about these integrated systems.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes. Great. Well, I know Dr. St.
Germain mentioned that in her testimony, and we're very proud
in Michigan of our border relationship with Canada and the
great work that we do, and this is another phenomenal example.
So I'm just slightly over time. I'm going to yield back.
I'm going to recognize my hardworking colleague, Mr. Feenstra,
for 5 minutes of questions. Thank you.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, thank you so much, Chairwoman. And I
want to thank each of you for your testimony. It was very
impressive and good information.
Dr. Lin, as you know very well, NIST's expertise lies in
standards, and NIST has initiated the development of technical
standards to help support accurate greenhouse gas emission
measurements. Could you provide us with an update where NIST is
in the process and how NIST is working with the industry to
develop these standards?
Dr. Lin. Thank you very much for the question. So for us at
NIST, as you know, we work in standards as a voluntary,
consensus-based system, and so we really look for forums to
where we can gather industry and other stakeholders in order to
develop the standards that are needed. So NIST is currently
very active in the international standards arena of really
trying to provide technical expertise and focused on the
technical standards that'll enable transparency and consistency
across all the measurements that are needed to track emissions
and sinks.
Currently, we are working in the technical groups and the
International Organization of Standardization, ISO, and also
within the American National Standards Institute, ANSI, and
with a subcommittee that is focused on these greenhouse gases
and related activities. It's very active, and a lot of progress
is being made.
Mr. Feenstra. That's exciting to hear. Are you going to get
consensus? I mean, this is a global thing. I mean, do you see
some consensus happening in the next 2 years?
Dr. Lin. On the technical front I think we are making
progress, and since it's a technical foundation and focus for
the areas of work we're concentrating currently, then it's a
yes, I believe that's certainly----
Mr. Feenstra. Well, that's great to hear.
Dr. Hubbell, a study conducted by Argonne National
Laboratories revealed that the use of corn ethanol reduces
greenhouse gases, very important to me. I am No. 1 in the
country in ethanol production. From 2005 to 2019, corn ethanol
production nearly quadrupled in the United States. During that
same time, scientists found a 23 percent reduction in ethanol's
greenhouse gas emission intensity. EPA's greenhouse gas
reporting program collects greenhouse gas emission data from
individual facilities and suppliers of certain fuels and gases.
So the question is this, it sort of begs the question, is
corn ethanol one of those things that can help us and at what
level of engagement can we see from this sector? I mean, is
this something that we should promote and that's positive?
Dr. Hubbell. So I can only really speak to the research
that we're doing, which has been focused on the oil and gas
industry and on landfills. I think that this question of
emissions from ethanol is a very important one, and we have
folks within our Office of Air and Radiation who can probably
speak better to the question of how that feeds into greenhouse
gas inventories and the role that they play. So if--I'm happy
to take that back to our colleagues in the Office of Air and
Radiation if you'd like.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes, to me, it's really interesting. And for
me, it's about the regulatory environment with the EPA and when
it comes to agriculture and ethanol and where that's going.
With that, I've got another question for Dr. Lin. You know,
our farmers in Iowa, we can all say that carbon in the soil is
a great thing because it because it can increase crop yields.
That's a fact. And in fact, land absorbs approximately 26
percent of the total emissions humans put into the atmosphere
each year, so this is really big. But when it comes to
specifics, exactly where sinkholes are located, how they work,
and how long they will continue to absorb carbon dioxide,
there's a lot of uncertainty.
So my question is, how do we increase the knowledge related
to greenhouse gas sinks and their single area of research and
whether there's--you know, what type of data collection and
modeling and verification can we do that can be beneficial?
Again, I come from an agricultural State, and this is sort of a
big deal.
Dr. Lin. Certainly, those are worthy of research, as we've
heard from my colleagues, and we work in partnership for that.
And basically in the scientific enterprise is really focusing
attention and resources to do the best possible way to both
understand and to quantify the effects that you named. So I
think it really takes a whole system approach of many different
types of measurements and modeling, especially modeling
approaches to really get at the detailed answer that we need to
be able to answer that question.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes. So my time is running out, but, Dr. Lin,
would you agree that farming, agriculture promotes the
reduction of carbon in the atmosphere?
Dr. Lin. That's not my area of expertise, but I would say
that can be monitored and measured and quantified.
Mr. Feenstra. OK. Thank you. Thank you for that. And I
yield back. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And with that, we're going to
hear from Mr. Tonko for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I thank you and
Chair Sherrill and Ranking Members Feenstra and Bice for
holding today's hearing and to the witnesses for being here
today.
The concentration of greenhouse gases in our atmosphere due
to human activities hits record levels every year. Without
major cuts to emissions, the driving force of the climate
crisis, humanity and our environment will continue to endure
the consequences of an increasingly warming planet.
The work that all of you are doing at your respective
agencies is indeed critical to ensuring that we have the
scientific and technical data. These data are then utilized to
improve our understanding of greenhouse gas emissions, their
sources, and indeed their solutions. I believe our first
priority in climate action is to mitigate our emissions in
every possible way.
So, Dr. Hubbell, how does ORD's research on greenhouse gas
emissions measurement support innovation?
Dr. Hubbell. So we work very closely with industry
partners, as well as with other agencies and with States to be
able to identify the best new technologies that can help us to
be able to characterize emissions, especially from leaks that
are coming from oil and gas operations and in landfills. And we
do this in a number of ways. We have cooperative research and
development agreements that we enter into with industrial
partners. We've worked with close to 20 industrial partners
over the last number of years to be able to develop and test
these technologies. And these cooperative research and
development agreements allow us to more easily share data and
expertise, including proprietary information, so that we can
get the best technologies developed.
We also have our Small Business Innovation Research program
that allows us to fund developers of innovative instruments to
be able to address the emissions from these important sources.
And we also have a prize challenge program that we work on with
other agencies to encourage innovation by putting out a problem
and then asking for creative solutions that we then are able to
promote and support. So we have a number of different ways we
work on innovation, but it's always in a partnership, and
that's a really key part of the work we're doing on emissions
measurement.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I appreciate that. And you stated in
your testimony that you have helped improve greenhouse gas
inventories. Can you share some examples, please?
Dr. Hubbell. Sure. So one of the other areas that we work
on in addition to landfills and oil and gas is we identified
there was an opportunity to better characterize the emissions
coming from reservoirs, as well as other freshwater bodies like
lakes and rivers. And there was a recognition that these water
bodies can be a significant source of CO
2
, methane,
and nitrous oxide and that it'd be very valuable to be able to
characterize these sources so that we got a better overall
picture of the national greenhouse gas inventory.
So our scientists have worked with others in the Federal
Government, including USGS (United States Geological Survey),
to be able to characterize these emissions, especially for
methane. That information has already been included in national
and international greenhouse gas inventories. It's been
recognized by the IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change) and as useful to other nations, as well as the United
States. In addition, the work has got some very specific
benefits to operators of these managed aquatic systems, as
they're looking for ways to address multiple objectives like
managing water flows, as well as trying to reduce emissions. So
this has been very important research that we've conducted
recently.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And would you cite additional
opportunities within your agency for collaborations with the
private sector, with research institutions, and other
stakeholders to address both community-level and broader
measurement concerns?
Dr. Hubbell. Yes, we are always looking for opportunities
for additional collaborations with industry partners. We do
also have a Science to Achieve Results grant program that
provides funding to academic institutions. And in fact, we
are--as I mentioned in my testimony, we are issuing a request
for applications this year, hopefully, to be able to address
landfill emissions, and we hope to be able to fund about $1
million in grants to help address this important sector.
Mr. Tonko. Great. Are there any--are other members on the
panel wishing to comment on that given set of opportunities
that you see for your agency? Dr. Stein?
Dr. Stein. In terms of interacting with the private sector?
Mr. Tonko. Private sector or institutions for research----
Dr. Stein. Yes, in terms of the private sector, as I
mentioned in my testimony, we are closely working with the
airline industry to include measurements of greenhouse gases in
their airplanes and basically to detect changes in the
vertical, which is key to link the satellite images with
concentrations so we can utilize that in a unified system that
can provide information to the stakeholders.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Anyone?
Dr. St. Germain. And I'll just add that we are working with
the private sector to transition our technologies, our
observation technologies to them so that they can play a role
and we can move on to the next, more difficult science
questions, as well as interacting with industries like
agriculture so that they can understand both how their crops
are serving as sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, but also
how their crops may be impacted by the climate change and how
that may drive changes in how they interact in the carbon
cycle.
Mr. Tonko. Wonderful. Thank you. Well, I've used up my time
and more, and so I appreciate the patience of the Chair. And
with that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. All good stuff. And if there are
Members who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added the record either at this point or
from the time when we concluded opening statements.
I'd also right now like to recognize Dr. Baird for 5
minutes of questioning. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you, Ranking Member Stevens and--or
Feenstra, and, Madam Chair Stevens, I appreciate you
coordinating this Committee. And I always appreciate the
witnesses sharing their expertise about these subject matters.
And so with that, Dr. Hubbell, I'm interested that--and
from the fact that in my district, Purdue University has the
Climate Change Research Center, which is focused on the
interdisciplinary aspects of climate change. My question is, so
how does each agency translate monitoring and the numbers to
people on the ground? For example, agricultural communities
seem particularly capable of immediate actions that slow
climate change and enable them to benefit economically. So how
is greenhouse gas data like that coming from NASA and NOAA
satellites being translated to the actionable farming community
and farming practices?
Dr. Hubbell. So I'll certainly let my colleagues at NASA
and NOAA speak to translate their satellite and other
information. We do work to try to provide information in usable
formats for different types of decisions, and one of the things
that we've been working on in ORD is trying to, for example,
develop more opportunities for community-engaged research where
we work with the communities directly to understand
measurements and be able to interpret them for supporting their
decisions. And, you know, we are hoping that the work we're
doing to reduce the cost and increase the ease of use of
different measurement technologies will allow communities like
the ones in your State to be able to better understand the
measurements they're seeing and use that information to support
their decisionmaking. So we are working to try to not just
reduce the cost and improve the accuracy of measurement
technologies, but also to make them easier to use and for us to
make it easier to share information that's collected by those
technologies.
Mr. Baird. You know, along in that same vein, it just
occurred to me about, you know, we're collecting a lot of data
on the farms with our machinery and our equipment. Is there--or
do you have access to that kind of information or do you get
feedback from the agricultural community and the monitoring
that they do?
Dr. Hubbell. So as I've mentioned, we're not doing any
current research with the agricultural community looking at
measurements with the ground-based measurements. Certainly, you
know, EPA has worked with USDA and others to be able to think
about ways we can address emissions from the agriculture
sector, but for right now, we're not doing any current research
in that area.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Dr. Lin, do you have any additional
concerns that you might share with us regarding this question?
Dr. Lin. I think that we have models of which we are
testing with the Urban Dome testbed is an approach that is
looking at how to integrate multiple sources of information
into a whole so we can get holistically a lot more accurate
picture of that. That idea certainly could be extended into
rural areas and as a conceptual idea, and so I think any
information certainly is useful to obtain.
Mr. Tonko [presiding]. And, Dr. St. Germain, I think that
earlier they referenced NASA in regard to Dr. Baird's question,
so perhaps you want to comment there?
Dr. St. Germain. Yes, absolutely. We have a lot of work
going on with the agriculture sector in terms of exchange of
information and understanding. And there are three, I'll say,
principal mechanisms by which that happens. One is through
other agencies like USDA or Department of Interior that--where
we integrate our information into data products and tools that
are already accessible to these communities so they don't have
to learn another one.
In cases where we can make tools, information, insight
available to them where such a tool doesn't exist through
another agency, we do direct applications. We build
applications, generally making them openly available, web-
based, and that sort of thing.
And the third--and this is a recent thrust area is working
directly with the agriculture sector. That is everything from
the direct--the farmers themselves to agribusiness, to actually
learn more about what data they have on the ground that may be
useful to us to improve our models and capabilities, and
likewise, how they need information delivered to them. And I
just spent a week this summer or earlier this spring at the
Commodity Classic meeting with the major commodities groups to
really figure out how to tighten up that coupling. Thanks.
Mr. Baird. Great. We really appreciate you doing that. So,
Dr. Stein, we only got about 30 seconds. Do you have any----
Dr. Stein. Yes, I can give you a couple of examples of what
NOAA is doing in terms of actionable data for agriculture. We
run the National Integrated Drought Information System, and in
climate.gov you can have that information readily available.
And also we have our Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite Series that are providing operational and long-term
measurements of changes in land use that can be very useful for
the agricultural sector.
Mr. Baird. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Representative Conor Lamb. You're recognized for 5 minutes,
please.
Mr. Lamb. Thank you, Mr. Chair. My first question is for
Dr. Lin.
You know, Dr. Lin, in western Pennsylvania, there's a fair
amount of natural gas drilling taking place and has been for a
long time. And what you hear from some of these companies is
that they are basically being rewarded by their own investors
and stakeholders for continuing to try to reduce methane
emissions below 1 percent if possible. And, you know, that is
also their strongest argument for being a progressive
alternative to coal in terms of, you know, our progress toward
climate change. But both of those claims rest on accurate
measurement of what their methane emissions actually are all
throughout their system.
And so my question for you is about your level of
confidence in what drilling operators are using to sense and
detect and report their own methane emissions, as far as the
reliability of the equipment, the accuracy, whether they're
measuring everywhere that they should be measured, whether the
standards for this equipment are what they need to be, or, you
know, sort of how far we have to go in terms of making sure
that the measurement being used onsite from the wellhead all
the way to the end user is as accurate as it should be.
Dr. Lin. Thank you very much for the question. Certainly,
those are very important questions for the reasons that you
stated and also for us as a measurement institute for the
interest of making sure the data is consistent, transparent,
and accurate. At this point, as I understand it is that the
industry is using a range of technologies to do these
measurements and reporting them, and new technologies are being
developed every day. So, I think this is an area where a
standard [inaudible] based on the best [inaudible] would be
appropriate. I'm not exactly sure how that is related to this
specific industry at this point but that is an area where I,
where we could look into.
Mr. Lamb. It looks like the hearing room froze on us. I'm
not sure what it looks like in there.
Staff. Yes, it looks like it has. Mr. Lamb, I am checking
with folks right now, and I'll check in the room as well.
Mr. Lamb. Oh, it looks like he's back if you could just
unmute the hearing room. It looks like Dr. Lin is back. You're
still muted, Dr. Lin, so just hold on a second.
Staff. Yes, they probably don't hear. I'll let them know.
It looks like we have audio back in the room. We're just
waiting for the video to return.
Staff. Hearing room audio test, test.
Staff. We've got that coming through.
Staff. Larry, I can hear you.
Staff. Yes, and I can hear you.
Staff. Testing 1, 2, 3 audio in the hearing room, test.
Staff. Yes, I'm hearing. Can you hear me?
Staff. I can hear you, Larry.
Staff. OK, great. We've got audio. We just got to get the
video back in the room. Thank you.
Staff. OK.
Chairwoman Stevens. Mr. LaTurner, can you hear us? OK.
Can--well, what about Dr. Hubbell?
Staff. Mr. LaTurner is not connected.
Chairwoman Stevens. Oh, good, but Dr. Hubbell can hear us?
Dr. Hubbell. Yes, I can hear you.
Chairwoman Stevens. Oh, good. Well, so this--I mean----
Staff. Yes, we've got----
Chairwoman Stevens [continuing]. Well, we'll----
Staff [continuing]. Audio back, ma'am. We're just waiting
for the recording studio to return the video picture back, and
then we can start back up.
Chairwoman Stevens. OK, thanks. We're going to get the
video started and we'll get started. Thanks.
Staff. Yes, and there's the video, so we can start back up.
We were still with Mr. Lamb.
Chairwoman Stevens. Congressman Lamb, we're going to
recognize you for another several minutes of questioning. Thank
you.
Mr. Lamb. All right. Yes, we don't need too much more. I
just--I'm going to restate it because we didn't get a whole lot
of Dr. Lin's answer.
But my basic question is that it's increasingly important
that drillers and natural gas distributors and everyone who's
responsible for that whole kind of ecosystem are able to report
accurate results as to their methane emissions. It's very
important for their own investors. Obviously, it's important
for any future scheme in which we are trying to either pay for
or tax, you know, carbon emissions or savings.
So my question is really a technical one about your level
of confidence in the quality of the sensors and equipment that
they're using right now and whether new standards and rules are
needed in order to make sure that what they're using actually
provides us with accurate information.
Dr. Lin. So for our point of view at NIST as a measurement
institute, the problem you described is a very real one. And we
would go more toward the voluntary standards arena for where
the stakeholders within the problem space you described could
get together to to really tackle exactly what are the standards
measurements for the technologies and how to report them. Since
there's a range of technologies, each one has its strengths and
weaknesses. I'm not really in a position to comment on any of
those. Perhaps my colleagues who also have equities in this
space could have more to add.
Mr. Lamb. Yes, I thought Dr. Hubbell potentially, I mean, I
believe it's the EPA that has actually published some of the
data showing the way that methane emissions are underreported
and have been for some time. So I don't know if you had
anything to add to that as far as just kind of weighing in on
the quality of the equipment that we're talking about. You
know, sometimes we talked about just are they monitoring it at
all? Are they monitoring it in the right places? But even--I
guess my question is even where they are monitoring methane
emissions, are we using equipment and sensors to do so that are
up to the proper standard?
Dr. Hubbell. So just as Dr. Lin said, I think it depends on
the technologies and there--and there's a wider range of those
technologies that are used. You know, and again, we're focused
right now on trying to improve the technologies for leak
detection and repair so that we can quickly identify these
sources of methane and stop them. So that's really our focus
right now is on developing better ways to do that. And also,
you know, it's not just the accuracy of the measurements, but
it's also, you know, making them at a low enough cost that they
can be used----
Mr. Lamb. Right.
Dr. Hubbell [continuing]. And to trying to make them easier
to use because some of these very accurate measurements are
more costly and more difficult to operate, so it's really
important to think about all those----
Mr. Lamb. Well, I guess what I'm getting at is I don't
believe that we have any real requirements in place to sort of
force operators to choose the highest quality equipment or
whatever, the cutting edge of what you're discovering, right? I
mean, to Dr. Lin's point we're still in a very voluntary world
when it comes to choosing, you know, the best the best
equipment to use.
Dr. Hubbell. Yes, and again, I think it's important to work
with our industry partners to understand what the needs are in
the particular industries in then different parts of the
country as well.
Mr. Lamb. Great. Well, thank you very much for your
participation and for all your hard work. And Madam Chair, I
yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. And now we're going to
recognize the Congresswoman from North Carolina for 5 minutes
of questioning, Ms. Ross.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you so much for
your leadership on this important topic. And thanks to the
Ranking Member and all of our witnesses for joining us.
Before being elected to Congress, I was a renewable energy
lawyer in North Carolina and worked with companies there to
mitigate and repurpose captured greenhouse gases, some of the
first methane and also biogas projects I got to work on. And in
my State of North Carolina, we're home to a unique kind of
carbon sink ecosystem called pocosin, which is naturally
occurring wetland. In fact, in the 1960's, North Carolina was
home to over 2 million acres of pocosin ecosystems, nearly 75
percent of the country's total. And the measurement of carbon
emissions of these ecosystems is vital to land management that
keeps carbon locked in the soil rather than in the atmosphere.
My first question is for Dr. Lin. In your testimony, you
discussed how vegetation and wetlands in cities complicates
measurements of urban methane and carbon dioxide emissions that
make it difficult to identify their sources. Can you talk about
why the presence of vegetation and wetlands in cities
complicate these measurements and what is needed to improve the
accuracy and attribution of urban and regional methane and
carbon dioxide emissions to specific sources?
Dr. Lin. Thank you very much for the question. It's
certainly a complicated system to look at. Basically,
vegetation and wetlands near cities complicates measurements
because they are fluctuating, and they're fluctuating at levels
that would impact the accuracy of the overall measurements of
what the greenhouse gases emissions and sinks are. And so what
we need is a much better idea, a study about the modeling about
how vegetation and wetlands and their fluctuations have an
impact on greenhouse gases. And we'd also need to advance ways
which we have been doing of how to detect greenhouse gases that
are coming from organic and vegetation sources as opposed to
human and more urban sources. So there's a lot of work to do
there. And certainly, we're doing that with our partners here
across the government, which have very extensive efforts in
attacking the details of how to understand that.
Ms. Ross. And picking up on Congressman Lamb's last point,
how can the private sector be involved and be helpful in these
efforts, if at all?
Dr. Lin. Well, certainly the private sector is very much
engaged for many of the drivers that have been shared earlier.
So at NIST, our approach is to really build consensus and to
convene parties to try to address them collectively. So our
Urban Dome testbed program is an example where industry and
multiple stakeholders come together, share information, and
contribute to the overall quality of the measurement of the
overall system, in this case, an urban testbed.
Ms. Ross. OK. Thank you. And then I wanted to take a little
bit of a broader view because, as you've all indicated, we're
not just measuring greenhouse gas emissions from the United
States but from all over the world. And to anyone who wants to
use this next minute and 30 seconds, why do we need global
measurements of greenhouse gas emissions if the primary focus
of Congress is on the United States? And I'll open it up to
whoever is interested in answering.
Dr. St. Germain. Yes, Congressman Ross, thank you for the
question. It's the Earth--as I mentioned earlier, the Earth
operates as a system and so emissions in one location, of
course, don't stay put. They mix in the atmosphere. They affect
the entire carbon cycle. Likewise, regions around the world
absorb carbon dioxide in different measures. And that's really
where the power of merging surface-based observations with
space-based observations can be most impactful. It's the
satellite observations that can give us those insights in
regions of the world where we don't have the surface-based
observations because they, too, are impacting the global
system.
Ms. Ross. Does anyone have anything to add?
Dr. Stein. Yes, in terms of the--we need a global view
because everything, as Dr. St. Germain presented, it's
intermingled. And we also not only want to detect changes in
the United States, but we also want to detect changes in other
countries and see if other countries are really--and holding
them responsible for their commitments. So that is really an
important thing.
And let me just give you an example. Going back to your
question about wetlands, the work that we are doing at NOAA in
terms of detecting changes in natural environments like in
wetlands, we can use isotopes of carbon to distinguish between
natural and anthropogenic sources there. And we--we're able to
distinguish, for instance, that the latest increase in methane
that we have observed--that we have been observing in the last
10 years globally is due to changes in biological activity.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much for your indulgence, Madam
Chair, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Indulge away. With that, we're going to
hear from Ms. Stansbury from the beautiful State of New Mexico
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Stansbury. Well, thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and also
to the Ranking Member, and thank you to all of our esteemed
panelists for being here today. You know, I know we've been
talking a lot this morning about the science specifically and
how we address the issues around monitoring, around
standardization of how we measure greenhouse gases, and then
what do we do with that information to help inform our climate
action?
And I want to kind of direct the panel toward the policy
side of the equation now and specifically science policy. You
know, we all know we're at a global tipping point. We know that
we have to take action as quickly as possible. And part of
being able to take effective action on climate change requires
that we know that the methods and the tactics that we're using
to tackle emissions and sinks is actually effective and that we
are making the investments that have the biggest bang for the
buck.
And so I know we've already touched on some of this this
morning, but I want to ask each of the panelists since you sit
in different agencies and work on these with your other agency
partners, are there specific policy actions that you feel
Congress or the Federal Government as a whole could take that
would help to standardize the way that we do measurement, the
way that we deploy instrumentation across the United States on
measuring carbon emissions and sinks as a sort of network of
monitoring, and, as I said, standardizing the ways that we do
it, and then how we deploy that information in terms of
determining where to make investments as the Federal Government
in both emissions reduction and in sinks? So if we could, why
don't we go ahead and start with the panelist from NASA and go
down the line.
Dr. St. Germain. Yes, so I think NASA's contribution in
this space is really to provide the global, transparent,
repeatable, open, trusted science on which policy decisions can
be made. And that is reliant upon the sustained support and
open process for calibrating our surface observations, and as
well as our airborne and spaceborne. So I think the sustained
focus on having that open--those open sources of data is really
going to be foundational to informing the policy choices that
Members of this Committee and others have before them and
assessing the efficacy of those as we move along in time.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And let's go to Dr. Lin next. You
know, are there things that we can do as a Federal Government,
like I said, either as Congress or in the administrative branch
that would help to standardize the way that we're doing
emissions tracking and that would help to bring more coherence
to all of the science that you all are talking about today?
Dr. Lin. I think the progress in the interagency working
group has been really outstanding, and that is the forum in
which these questions you're asking are being addressed. And so
I think it's really as a continued, sustained--as my colleague
stated, a sustained support of encouraging and facilitating
that exercise. It's very difficult to pull all these multiple
measurements and different points of view into a coherent whole
that's precise, transparent, and we can have confidence in it.
But a tremendous amount of progress has been made, and
certainly there's more room to go.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And Dr. Stein?
Dr. Stein. Yes, we're making--I'm part of the interagency
working group, and we are making strides to tackle this problem
from day one. And we see this as a big challenge in terms of
harmonizing and sharing data sets. Also, the World
Meteorological Organization is tackling this problem at this
right moment. So you're asking the right question. And we are
trying to provide an answer as soon as we can, so we're working
on that.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And Dr. Hubbell?
Dr. Hubbell. Yes, I just wanted to start by saying that,
you know, the current inventory that we have is very high
quality. And really what we're trying to do is being able to
identify those few areas where there's an opportunity for
improvements that can help us inform mitigation actions, but
what we have now is very high quality.
I think in terms of the interagency effort, I think, as the
other panelists have said, the interagency working group has
been really a great place to be able to work on these
challenges. And one thing I did want to add to that is that
it's important as we're getting new research and getting these
systems linked to be thinking about having a steady flow of
high quality data so that we can track trends and not just a
snapshot in time, so being able to do this over time is really
important.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And I know I'm out of time, Madam
Chairwoman, but I just want to add that myself and other
colleagues are very interested in looking at opportunities for
Congress to partner with the Administration to help bring a
policy framework to coherence and how we measure and deploy
different climate strategies. Obviously, this is the most
important and pressing question of the day is how do we meet
our goal of reducing our carbon emissions by 2035, 2040 so that
we don't cross this catastrophic tipping point? And so I look
forward to working with all of you on that, as well as climate
resilience and climate justice. And really thank all of you who
are working in our Federal agencies for your service in this
area. You are doing some of the most important work on the
planet, and we thank you for your service.
Mr. Tonko [presiding]. The gentlewoman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois. Dr.
Foster, you're recognized for 5 minutes, please.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I'd also like to
thank Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Member Feenstra, Chairwoman
Sherrill, Ranking Member Bice, and our witnesses for joining us
here today. Much of the testimony today has emphasized how this
area of research is really reliant on a number of stakeholders,
both throughout the Federal Government, as well in--as other
sectors. Drs. Stein and Hubbell, in both of your testimonies
you mentioned several partnerships that your departments are
involved in. Could you expand on what partnerships your
departments have with the Department of Energy and our national
labs and the impact that these partnerships have on monitoring,
measurement, and verification of sources and sinks of
greenhouse gases?
Dr. Stein. Thank you for the question. We have a long-term
partnership with the Department of Energy, mostly working on
modeling of climate variables. We also have worked with and
continue working with the Department of Energy in terms of
developing measurement techniques mostly for boundary layer,
the lower part of the atmosphere, measurements, mostly in terms
of meteorological variables. There is a very long-term
relationship between the Department of Energy and NOAA in
particular in that area.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
Dr. Hubbell. And I'll just add that, you know, our work
right now on the oil and gas sector, we do have some
collaborations and coordination going on with DOE, as well as
with our other Federal partners, to be able to better
understand how we can characterize emissions from this sector.
And we've also worked with DOE and--we've also worked with DOE
and other agencies in addressing the overall inventory for
almost 30 years. So it's been a long-term partnership, and it's
something that we expect to continue going forward.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. And, Dr. Lin, your testimony
highlights how NIST has initiated a documentary standards
effort aimed at advancing the implementation of mature,
measurements-based scientific tools and methods. This aims to
lead the development of global standards as well. And so how
does NIST incorporate the best practices of the research
community into their standards development?
Dr. Lin. Thank you for the question. Our research and our
attention to the research environment directly informs our work
in the standards forums. So in these forums, those are
voluntary consensus areas which are focused on the technical
solutions and standardization, and we bring all the knowledge
and the input from the research space that we know into that
arena so that the best technical solutions can be determined.
Mr. Foster. OK. And could you speak a little bit about the
importance of developing these global standards as we continue
to understand the global impact of greenhouse gas?
Dr. Lin. Well, I think, as my colleagues have very well
stated is that the global system is one as a whole. There's no
boundaries for gases as they traverse the globe. And so as we
are monitoring our own emissions and sinks, that we need to
have a consistent way of how to know where the greenhouse gases
and other things we're monitoring are, and to put it on the
same baseline is a critical step in that.
Mr. Foster. And how important is the impact of the loss of
contact with Russian scientists going to be in this field? And
I know from my experience in physics that the Russians are some
of the most brilliant and well-trained scientists on Earth. And
they've also been very involved in things like understanding
what Siberia is going to do to greenhouse gas emissions. And
some--in light of the current situation in Ukraine, some
Russian scientists are heroically standing up, others not so
much, but we're going to lose contact with a lot of them. And
how big a hit is that going to be in our ability to deal as a
planet with greenhouse gases?
Dr. Lin. For our point of view--so I'm not sure--I don't
know directly on this particular field of the impact of of what
you noted. But in general, we've concentrated on multilateral
fora which--it's a multilateral engagement and so it's not
really dependent upon one country or another. And even in that
environment in the technical arena where we work on, largely
that is still in place because we're looking at technical
solutions.
Mr. Foster. Yes. Anyone else want to comment on that?
Dr. St. Germain. Likewise, when our interactions with
Russian scientists have generally been through multilateral
fora, we haven't historically had access to Russian space-based
data, so we aren't seeing a loss there. And we'll--we're
continuing to use the data from U.S. systems, as well as other
international partners to understand all regions of the globe,
including the--Russia.
Mr. Foster. Yes. And I think, you know, Russia, as a
country has not always been interested in having the numbers
well known as they apply to Russia, but it's--you know, it's
going to be--my guess it's going to be very important because
this is a whole-of-planet effort. Anyway, I am now out of time
and yield back.
Mr. Tonko. The gentleman from Illinois yields back, and I
believe that concludes the list of colleagues who choose to
question our panelists.
Before, however, we bring the hearing to a close, I thank
our witnesses for testifying before the Committee today, and I
offer those thanks certainly on behalf of the the Chairs and
Rankers who hosted this Committee hearing.
The record will remain open for 2 weeks for additional
statements from the Members and for any additional questions
the Committee may ask of the witnesses. I ask, if you would,
please, respond in a prompt fashion.
And with that, the witnesses are excused, and the hearing
is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:24 a.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
