- THE NEW NORMAL: PREPARING FOR AND ADAPTING TO THE NEXT PHASE OF COVID 19

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE NEW NORMAL:
PREPARING FOR AND ADAPTING TO
THE NEXT PHASE OF COVID 19

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 31, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-51

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-330 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAY OBERNOLTE, California,
AMI BERA, California                   Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 31, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Jay Obernolte, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    14

Witnesses:

Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, Vice Provost for Global Initiatives, Co-
Director of the Healthcare Transformation Institute, and Levy
University Professor at the Perelman School of Medicine and The
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    19

Ms. Karen Ayala, Executive Director, DuPage County Board of
Health
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Dr. Lucy McBride, Practicing Primary Care Physician in
Washington, D.C.
Oral Statement...............................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34

Dr. Mariana Matus, CEO and Co-Founder, Biobot Analytics
Oral Statement...............................................    48
Written Statement............................................    50

Discussion.......................................................    62

Appendix: Additional Material for the Record

Report submitted by Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, Vice Provost for Global
Initiatives, Co-Director of the Healthcare Transformation
Institute, and Levy University Professor at the Perelman School
of Medicine and The Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania
``Getting to and Sustaining the Next Normal: A Roadmap for
Living with COVID'' (Executive Summary)....................    80

Letter submitted by the National Association of County and City
Health Officials (NACCHO)......................................    83

THE NEW NORMAL:

PREPARING FOR AND ADAPTING TO

THE NEXT PHASE OF COVID-19

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building and via Zoom,
Hon. Bill Foster [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Well, the hearing will now come to order.
And without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess at any time.
Before I deliver my opening remarks, I wanted to note today
that the Committee is meeting both in person and virtually. And
I want to announce a couple of reminders to the Members about
the conduct of this hearing. First, Members and staff who are
attending in person may choose to be masked, but it is not a
requirement. However, any individuals with symptoms, a positive
test, or exposure to someone with COVID-19 should wear a mask
while present.
Members who are attending virtually should keep their video
feed on as long as they are present in the hearing. Members who
are--are responsible for their own microphones, and so please
keep your microphones muted unless you are speaking. Finally,
if Members have documents they wish to submit for the record,
please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose email address
was circulated prior to the meeting.
Well, good morning, and welcome to our Members and to our
panelists. Thank you for joining us for this hearing on
preparing for the next phase of COVID-19. Over the past two
years, this Subcommittee has held a number of hearings on the
pandemic, often with an eye to how lessons learned can pave an
easier path through health crises to come. But the current
fight against COVID-19 looks far different than it did in March
2020, and we must consistently evaluate how existing tools meet
our needs as case counts ebb and flow.
Fortunately, national COVID cases have been going down
since the January omicron peak. And after a difficult winter,
where the death rate has surpassed the rate during the delta
surge, spring has arrived. Around the country, mask mandates
have relaxed, schools have opened, and now I'm chairing this
Subcommittee hearing in person for the first time in two years.
But we learned from previous lulls that we cannot expect this
period to last forever.
Now is the time to invest in research and infrastructure
that can detect the next pandemic variant as early as possible,
determine what communities will be at high risk of surges, and
implement protective measures and communication strategies to
minimize incidence of severe and fatal infection.
Our witnesses here today exemplify a broad umbrella of
COVID preparedness and response. Today, we'll discuss the great
strides that have been made in vaccines and therapeutics to
prevent and treat COVID-19 and what more research must be done
to ensure a robust response to future variants. We'll talk
about public receptiveness to behavioral mitigation measures
and how these tools can be scaled up or eased back based on the
best available information. We'll unpack what goes into that
information, what metrics must be--we must get better at
collecting, and how we can most effectively analyze these
metrics to determine the relative risk in our communities. And
we'll discuss how that information is best communicated at the
individual level, to ensure that people are empowered with the
facts and tools that they need to protect themselves and their
families.
Entering a new phase of the pandemic does not mean we've
declared victory over the virus, nor does it mean that we are
resigning ourselves to a never-ending state of crisis. The
landscape has changed immensely in the past two years, and that
is a testament to the incredible research that's been done on
how the virus and how we behave.
Unfortunately, as public health guidance shifts to
incorporate new information, it's all too often interpreted as
being flaky or unreliable. Changing recommendations regarding
mask-wearing are looked at with skepticism, and research on
vaccine efficacy in the face of new variants causes everything
from cynicism to panic.
I am often struck by how navigating through this crisis
resembles the job of an ancient sea captain. A captain should
not be criticized for changing course as the wind shifts, but
any captain who deliberately ignores signals of an approaching
storm has no place at the helm. Today's fair weather may
indicate the end of the storm, or we may be simply passing
through the eye of the cyclone. And a captain will receive
advice from everyone from the grizzled old salts who have
survived many stormy passages, to young seamen terrified of
stories of sea monsters and falling off the edge of the Earth.
And that was even before social media. And the captain must
also answer both to his investor's desire to get the cargo to
market on time, and to the mothers and children of every person
onboard.
But in the end, what has made sea travel far safer today
has been science: the tools of navigation, weather forecasting,
ship construction, understanding and treating the chronic
vitamin C deficiencies of his crew, and maintaining a proper
written record of lessons learned.
And we've learned so much about this virus that reached our
shores two years ago, but if this knowledge is not thoughtfully
communicated to the public, misinformation will fill in the
gaps. It's unlikely that we've seen the last surge of COVID-19.
And the good news is that we are more prepared than ever to
confront what comes. We must seize the opportunity to build
upon what we've learned. It's imperative that we continue to
invest in data tracking and communication capabilities at every
level, and to ensure public health decisionmakers have the best
information to make recommendations. Misinformation must be
confronted thoughtfully and aggressively.
Outstanding questions on issues such as long COVID,
infection-based immunity, and therapeutic cocktails should be
aggressively pursued by scaling up clinical studies. And while
we may not be out of the woods yet, we have the opportunity to
meet future COVID surges with clearer eyes and stronger tools.
So I look forward to the hearing today from our witnesses,
and learning about how we can bolster preparedness efforts in
the next phase of the COVID-19 pandemic.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Foster follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to our members and our panelists.
Thank you for joining us for this hearing on preparing for the
next phase of COVID-19. Over the past two years, this
Subcommittee has held a number of hearings on the pandemic,
often with an eye to how lessons learned now can pave an easier
path through health crises to come. But the current fight
against COVID-19 looks far different than it did in March 2020,
and we must constantly evaluate how existing tools can meet our
needs as case counts ebb and flow.
Fortunately, national COVID cases have been going down
since the January omicron peak. After a difficult winter, where
the death rate has surpassed the rate during the delta surge,
spring has arrived.
Around the country, mask mandates have relaxed, schools
have opened, and now I'm chairing this subcommittee hearing in
person for the first time in two years. But we learned from
previous lulls that we cannot expect this period to last
forever. Now is the time to invest in research and
infrastructure that can detect the next problematic variant as
early as possible, determine what communities will be at high
risk of surges, and implement protective measures and
communication strategies to minimize incidence of severe and
fatal infection.
Our witnesses here today exemplify the broad umbrella of
COVID preparedness and response. Today we'll discuss the great
strides that have been made in vaccines and therapeutics to
prevent and treat COVID-19, and what more research must be done
to ensure a robust response to future variants.
We'll talk about public receptiveness to behavioral
mitigation measures, and how these tools can be scaled up and
eased back based on the best available information.
We'll unpack what goes into that information--what metrics
we must get better at collecting, and how we can most
effectively analyze these metrics to determine relative risk
level in our communities. And we'll discuss how that
information is best communicated at the individual level, to
ensure that people are empowered with the facts and tools they
need to protect themselves and their families.
Entering a new phase of the pandemic does not mean we've
declared victory over the virus, nor does it mean we are
resigning ourselves to a never-ending state of crisis.
The landscape has changed immensely in the past two years,
and that is a testament to the incredible research that has
been done into how the virus--and we--behave. Unfortunately, as
public health guidance shifts to incorporate new information,
it's all too often interpreted as being flaky and unreliable.
Changing recommendations regarding mask-wearing are looked
at with skepticism, and research on vaccine efficacy in the
face of new variants causes everything from cynicism to panic.
I am often struck by how navigating through this crisis
resembles the job of an ancient sea captain. A Captain should
not be criticized for changing course as the wind shifts, but
one who deliberately ignores signals of an approaching storm
deserves no place at the helm. Today's fair weather may
indicate the end of the storm, or we may simply be passing
through the eye of the cyclone.
A captain will receive the advice of everyone from the
grizzled old salts who have survived many stormy passages, to
young seamen terrified of stories of sea monsters and falling
off the edge of the flat earth.
And the captain must answer both to his investor's desire
to get their cargo to market on time, and to the mothers and
children of every person aboard.
But in the end, what has made sea travel much safer today
has been science: the tools of navigation, weather forecasting,
ship construction, understanding and treating the chronic
Vitamin-C deficiencies of his crew and maintaining a proper
written record of lessons learned.
We've learned so much about this virus that reached our
shores just two years ago, but if this knowledge is not
thoughtfully communicated to the public, misinformation will
fill in the gaps.
It is unlikely that we've seen the last surge of COVID-19.
The good news is that we are more prepared than ever to
confront what comes. We must seize the opportunity to build
upon what we've learned. It is imperative that we continue to
invest in data tracking and communication capabilities at every
level, to ensure public health decision makers have the best
available information to make recommendations. Misinformation
must be confronted thoughtfully and aggressively.
Outstanding questions on issues such as long COVID,
infection-based immunity, and therapeutics cocktails should be
aggressively pursued by scaling up clinical studies.
We may not be out of the woods yet, but we have an
opportunity to meet a future COVID surge with clearer eyes and
stronger tools.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
how we can bolster preparedness efforts in the next phase of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
I now yield to Ranking Member Obernolte for his remarks.

Chairman Foster. And I now yield to Ranking Member
Obernolte for his remarks.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Captain Foster.
Chairman Foster. Aye, aye.
Mr. Obernolte. And thank you to the Chair for convening
what as usual is a very timely and I'm sure will be a very
informative hearing.
You know, it's--we're here in the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee, and I think it's, you know, a very timely
discussion to have to think about the application of science to
fighting the spread of COVID and to reflect on the lessons that
we've learned over the past couple of years because, as the
Chair said, this is not something that's over and done with.
It's something that we're going to be dealing with for many
years. And it also is something that we have to learn from
because this--you know, we would hope that this would be the
last pandemic the world experiences, but history shows that
it's probably not going to be. And we certainly would be doing
society a disservice if we did not apply the lessons that we've
learned here.
So I'll tell you a couple of things that I'm looking
forward to talking about in this hearing. First of all, I think
that we need to be more holistic about considering what our
goals are when we institute public health measures in response
to a pandemic because it seems pretty clear looking at what has
happened with COVID that focusing on merely containment is
probably not the right thing to do. Containment proved to be
impossible with many of the variants of COVID. The countries
that were the most draconian in trying to contain rather than
trying to manage the spread of the virus are some of the ones
that did the worst in terms of healthcare outcomes. So I look
forward to having that discussion.
And I also think it's time that we acknowledge the fact
that when we are contemplating what to do to mitigate the
spread, that we contemplate all of the societal costs that are
borne, not just the health costs, and that's something that we
kind of learned to our more misfortune through the recent
pandemic is that we've got a lot of societal costs that public
health officials were not considering when they made some of
these decisions, for example, things like learning loss in
children, for example things like behavioral health issues,
things like substance abuse issues that occur when people are
not allowed to socialize with each other, and certainly the
economic costs that are imposed on society by actions like
lockdowns.
Not to say that any of those are more important than
stopping the spread of a variant, but we would be foolish not
to consider the fact that the actions that we take as a
government do have societal consequences. And I think that
we've determined kind of through this process that making these
decisions is more complex, that we have to kind of weigh all of
these different factors. And although it is difficult to
balance something like an economic cost against lives lost, we
have to somehow parse that metric.
And to something that the Chairman just mentioned,
communication I think is something that we've learned is much
more important than we ever thought it was. The words that we
use when we communicate with the public about the science of an
epidemic are critically important and the fact that we need to
maintain the public's trust. In many cases I think that we
were--we had kind of a scientific arrogance in our
communication with our public over the last couple of years,
and that's something that we need to avoid in the future
because only through being transparent and honest with the
public can we get them to trust us when we tell them that a
certain action is the best thing for society.
We certainly can't hide things like uncertainty and tell
people that this is the right thing and then tomorrow tell them
that the science has shifted and something else is now the
right thing to do. That's going to shatter their trust. We need
to be upfront and honest with them when uncertainty exists.
And then lastly--and I'm--I don't think any of our
witnesses today would have the sand to tell us this, but, you
know, we as public leaders, I think we need to learn by
example, and that's something that we've learned to our
misfortune over the last couple of years. The words that we use
are very important, and the actions that we take are very
important. And I think that events in my home State of
California and States around the country have proven that when
public officials are caught not following their own guidance,
that is incredibly destructive to public trust. So that's
something I think we need to keep in mind as we not only go
through this hearing but as we contemplate the way to handle
epidemics in the future.
So, Mr. Chairman, I'm looking forward to the hearing with
you and looking forward to see what our witnesses have to say.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Obernolte follows:]

Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening
this hearing. And thanks to our witnesses for appearing before
us today.
We are here today to discuss ``the New Normal'' and how we
can best prepare for and adapt to the next phase of COVID-19
and beyond. I'm glad that we're here today looking forward at
what's to come, and I believe to be successful we need to
examine what worked and what didn't over the past two years of
this pandemic. I think we can all agree that the government's
response hasn't been perfect. So we need to consider what
lessons we've learned so that we can avoid making similar
mistakes in the future.
First and foremost, to establish a ``new normal'' we need
to set specific goals for combating COVID-19 to guide the
implementation of reasonable policies. We can't expect zero
transmission, so we need commonsense policies that not only
protect the most vulnerable, but also allow our schools,
workplaces, and business to return to normal operating status
as quickly as possible. Containing the virus must be a
priority, but so is avoiding additional long- term
consequences, like those being reported in children from mask
mandates.
Second, we need public health officials to clearly
communicate these goals and policies so that Americans know
what to expect as we move forward. I can't emphasize this
enough.
Americans were told to ``trust the science'' but the
science wasn't being fully and clearly communicated. That led
to a lot of mistrust and vaccine hesitancy. So we must clearly
communicate up front what we do and don't yet know about the
virus itself. And we need to give people the facts on the
various mitigation measures that are being proposed. Public
health leaders and the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention) must also avoid missteps of the past two years.
They should not withhold data from the public due to fear that
such data could be misinterpreted. This only serves to erode
trust and create a perception that the government is hiding
something. Public health decisions aren't based on medical
factors alone--they must take into account other factors
including social, economic, or other risks. That should be
communicated. Only through clear and concise communication
about what is known, what is unknown, and what is changing can
we hope to restore Americans' trust in the public health
apparatus.
Additionally, we need to look at past COVID relief funding
to inform future appropriations. There is no doubt that more
funding is needed for testing, vaccines, therapeutics, and the
infrastructure necessary to allocate each where it is needed.
Moving forward, however, we absolutely must be more responsible
with hard-earned taxpayer dollars, especially given the high
rate of inflation. This means investing in areas where we can
get the most bang for our buck. For example, rather than
blanket handouts to states for things like luxury high-rise
hotels and minor league baseball stadiums, future COVID relief
funding should be measured and targeted to ensure that those at
high risk and our most vulnerable populations get the vaccines,
treatments, and testing that they need. Indiscriminately
throwing money at the problem is not a solution-it just creates
further problems.
We also need to take a good hard look at various health
issues that have taken a backseat to COVID-19 during the
pandemic. We should examine the adverse health consequences-
physical, social, and mental-that have either cropped up during
or been exacerbated by our response to COVID over the past two
years. We are just beginning to see the tip of the iceberg in
terms of looming mental health challenges, developmental issues
in young children, and other adverse consequences of COVID-19
beyond the disease itself. These challenges cannot remain
unaddressed.
Finally, we in Congress should lead by example. I'm
disappointed but not at all surprised that earlier this week
the Speaker extended the ``covered period,'' allowing remote
committee proceedings and vote-by-proxy to continue in the
House until at least May 2022. This was done under auspices of
a public health ``emergency,'' making the ``new normal'' look
more and more like the old normal. What's the justification for
this when our kids are back in school?
How can we in good faith ask Americans throughout the
country, in both the private sector and Federal workforce, to
get back to work when the House refuses to do the same? How can
we ask the American public to adhere to public health guidance
and mitigation measures, and to follow CDC recommendations,
when the Speaker isn't doing that? Throughout the pandemic,
we've seen far too many examples of ``rules for thee but not
for me.'' As we move forward to the ``new normal,``public
leaders must lead by example and adhere to the same rules that
they expect the American people to follow. This, too, would go
a long way in restoring Americans' trust in their public health
officials and elected leaders.
In closing, we can't move into the new normal without
reestablishing trust with the American people. We do that by
establishing specific goals for public health, by clearly
communicating and empowering Americans to make informed
decisions about their own health; by spending judiciously, and
by returning to normal here in Congress. We represent the
American public here in the House, and we should trust our
constituents to do what is needed to overcome this pandemic. If
we do this, just maybe we can begin to reestablish Americans'
trust in our public health apparatus. If we don't, I'm afraid
the new normal may be nothing more than the old normal. And
that is unacceptable.
Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening this hearing. And
thanks again to our witnesses for appearing before us today. I
look forward to our discussion.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And if there are Members who
wish to submit additional opening statements, your statements
will be added to the record at this point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Thank you Chairman Foster for holding this hearing, and
thank you to all of our esteemed witnesses for appearing before
the Subcommittee today. The fight against COVID-19 today looks
much different than it did in March 2020. That progress is
thanks to the tireless healthcare workers, researchers, public
health officials, and citizens everywhere working to protect
their families and communities. We must continue to build on
our successes and learn from the hardships of the last two
years. Today's witnesses bring a wealth of experience from many
facets of pandemic response. I am looking forward to their
testimonies on how we can best prepare ourselves for the next
phase of COVID-19.
As we've discussed before on this Committee, this is a
global battle. It will not be solved anywhere until progress is
made everywhere. So long as low- and middle-income countries
remain under-vaccinated, the virus will continue to circulate
and mutate. Surveillance of emerging variants requires strong
international research partnerships, so our world-class
scientists can offer their expertise and get real-time
information about variants emerging abroad.
On a national level, we must position our public health
authorities to receive and share timely, good quality data. To
get reliable projections of COVID surges, we need a wealth of
data. We need to know the test positivity rates, which gets
more difficult as take-home tests become more common than PCR
tests. We need insight into how immunized a population is,
whether their immunization comes from vaccines, natural
infection, or a combination. We need to know whether hospital
systems are overwhelmed by dwindling capacity or worker
shortages. Public health communication is a two-way street.
Bolstering communication among individuals, healthcare
facilities, and public health officials will be imperative to
detect COVID surges early and equip our communities with the
tools they need.
So much of the fight happens in the last mile. We've made
such great strides in answering the grand scientific questions
of how this virus spreads and kills. And how vaccines and
therapeutics can save lives. We must also focus on translating
knowledge to health outcomes. We need more research into how
misinformation can derail effective public health
communication, and how we can deliver accurate information to
counteract these lies. We need to be thoughtful about reaching
those who remain unvaccinated. We need to learn from past COVID
surges when it comes to how we implement personal protective
measures. Researching these issues can help us overcome future
hurdles in public health messaging.
It is tragic that we are still battling this virus more
than two years after it reached the U.S. But it is truly
remarkable to reflect on the progress that has been made. We
can now face the next phase of the pandemic building upon the
knowledge and the infrastructure we've put in place since March
2020. I thank our witnesses for joining us today and I yield
back.

Chairman Foster.  And at this time I'd like to introduce
our witnesses. Four old salts who have weathered many stormy
passages. Our first witness is Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel. Dr. Emanuel
is the Levy University Professor at the Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. He's an oncologist,
a world leader in health policy and bioethics, and has authored
or edited over 350 publications and 15 books. Dr. Emanuel is
currently Special Advisor to the Director General of the World
Health Organization. He previously served as the founding Chair
of the Department of Bioethics at the NIH (National Institutes
of Health) and as a Special Advisor on Health Policy to OMB
(Office of Management and Budget) and the National Economic
Council.
And I will now yield to Mr. Casten to introduce his
constituent and our next witness.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are not only the
master of your fate, you are the captain of your soul. It is--
we're going to push this all hearing.
I'm so grateful and honored to introduce my good friend and
Illinois Sixth District community health champion and expert
Dr. Karen Ayala. Dr. Ayala serves as the Executive Director
with the DuPage County Health Department. Prior to that role,
she served as the Director of Community Health and Public
Health Services since 2007. Throughout her career, Dr. Ayala
has worked in community services and public health, bringing a
strong commitment to social justice and a creative approach to
system design.
I'm particularly proud that Dr. Ayala was responsible for
the opening and management of a mass testing and vaccination
facility in the district that allowed DuPage County to be one
of the most successful examples in the country of why high
vaccination rates could mean a quicker return to normal for
businesses and students.
Just as a personal note, I am--I cannot tell you how
grateful I am for all your great work, Dr. Ayala. The--you
know, those moments through the crisis when we had uncertainty
about the status of the disease, uncertainty about how supplies
of testing and vaccines were going to be allocated from the
feds to the States, from the States of the counties, learning
the science as we went, and of course the growing
politicization of that and all the slings and arrows that were
thrown in directions of anybody, including you. You were just
consistently such a rock and a beacon of strength and you made
us all look better and I know you made our constituents all
feel like they were in good hands.
So thank you, Dr. Ayala, for your service to our State, to
our country, and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And following Ms. Ayala, our
next witness is Dr. Lucy McBride. Dr. McBride has worked on--as
an internal medicine physician in Washington, D.C., for nearly
two decades. She is also a prominent healthcare educator,
mental health advocate, and author of a COVID-19 newsletter, as
well as articles published in The Washington Post, The
Atlantic, and USA Today. Dr. McBride's work aims to increase
the awareness of the inseparability of mental health and
physical health.
Our final witness is Dr. Mariana Matus. Dr. Matus is a
computational biologist by training and the CEO (Chief
Executive Officer) and Co-Founder of Biobot Analytics. Biobot
won multiple entrepreneurship competitions at MIT
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology) for its wastewater
epidemiology platform. The subject initially used its platform
to track opioid usage patterns before pivoting to COVID-19
detection at the beginning of the pandemic. They were selected
by HHS (Health and Human Services) to execute a national COVID-
19 wastewater monitoring project and have expanded their
platform to analyze wastewater treatment plants across the
Nation for early warning signs of new COVID outbreaks and
variants.
As our witnesses should know, each of you will have five
minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will
be included in its entirety in the record of the hearing. When
you've all completed your spoken testimony, we will begin with
questions. Each Member will have five question--five minutes to
question the panel, and we will attempt, if time permits, to
have two rounds of questions.
And we will start with Dr. Emanuel.

TESTIMONY OF DR. EZEKIEL EMANUEL,

VICE PROVOST FOR GLOBAL INITIATIVES,

CO-DIRECTOR OF THE HEALTHCARE

TRANSFORMATION INSTITUTE,

AND LEVY UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR

AT THE PERELMAN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE

AND THE WHARTON SCHOOL

OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA

Dr. Emanuel. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Obernolte,
thank you for having me. It's a privilege to be before this
Committee at this critical juncture for COVID response in our
country.
As you know, this month marks 2 years since our first surge
and our first lockdown in the country. We've experienced almost
1 million deaths, 80 million cases, tens of millions of
students whose learning has been affected, and hundreds of
millions of Americans who have suffered socially and
economically because of this pandemic.
At this moment, we are at a critical juncture, as I
mentioned. We need to confront the situation with some
humility. We're certainly going to have another surge. How bad
it is, no one here in the room knows. We know that we're going
to confront some waning immunity from the vaccines. We are
going to confront some resistance from the virus to some of our
interventions. How bad all of these things are, we don't know.
The only way to stay ahead of SARS-CoV-2 virus and to get a
handle and to go into the next normal smoothly is to scale up
our physical, our virtual, and our human infrastructure to
combat this.
As human beings, as a society, we are bad at prevention.
Prevention does something in the future. It requires investing
today for a return tomorrow, and we're not constitutionally by
nature good at that. We always underinvest in prevention. There
are loads of data about how individually we do that and how
socially we do that. But we can't do that going forward.
Over the last few months, I've convened 25 of the country's
leading experts on COVID to create a strategic roadmap for the
country. I've submitted that roadmap as written testimony. I
want to highlight six points from it.
First, we need a viral dashboard to follow to determine
when we need to impose public health measures, when we can
relieve them safely, how to go forward, and when we're going to
be in the next normal. That dashboard has to include at least
five critical items: vaccination rates, seroprevalence of the
virus--of immunity in the community, wastewater testing--and
you'll hear about that from others--the health system stretch,
how close to the peak we are, and of course death rates in the
community. All of those need to be looked at.
Truth be told, we're not there yet in measuring these five
elements. We need a surveillance infrastructure that is
bolstered up to measure four important things on a continuous
basis: The wastewater in this country, we need standardization
of that wastewater. We need it for more communities than we
have it. We need to measure population immunity, which we don't
do a good job of. We need to measure genetic variants. We don't
do a good job of that. And we need to measure animal
reservoirs, zoonotic surveillance, and we need to have a
platform and have that data available in real-time. We don't
have that today. That is the second item.
The third item is we need to invest in vaccines, right? Our
scientific agencies need to rapidly prioritize different kinds
of vaccines, mucosal vaccines, different pan-coronavirus
vaccines. We need a heavy investment in that.
Fourth, we need to invest in therapeutics. Yes, we have
Evusheld today, we have Paxlovid, but they're not enough. Our
virus becomes resistant to these things and will more and more
as they come out in the community. So we need a heavy
investment in therapeutics, especially oral therapeutics that
people can take readily.
Five, we need an investment in indoor air quality. It was
good that OSTP (Office of Science and Technology Policy)
yesterday had a major event--or Tuesday a major event on indoor
air quality, a first recognition by the government of its
importance. We need to standardize what good indoor air quality
is and enforce it. We also need to use some of our rescue funds
to get indoor air quality in schools and childcare centers up
immediately using portable filters or improvements in the HVAC
(heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) systems.
Finally, we need an urgent, very rapid research into long
COVID. The NIH and the CDC have not prioritized this. They have
studies, for example, the NIH RECOVER study, but it's got an
aim of 40,000 people and it's only enrolled 1,000 people to
date. We need half a million people studied to get going.
Let me just remind you, what I've said are investments in
the future. They're investments in prevention. They are--should
not be considered spending and wasteful spending. This is how
we're going to prevent serious complications from the next
surge or the next virus that comes along. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Emanuel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And next is Ms. Ayala.

TESTIMONY OF MS. KAREN AYALA,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, DuPAGE COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH

Ms. Ayala. Good morning, and thank you for this opportunity
to share testimony and for the warm welcome.
DuPage County Health Department is considered a large
suburban local health department serving nearly 1 million
residents in northeast Illinois. Incredibly, today marks the
800th day on the frontlines of our local public health COVID
response. Since January of 2020, we have based our local
response on the best available public health data. What are the
best data to communicate to our residents? As a local public
health official who routinely interacts with residents,
community leaders, healthcare partners, the best data are those
that are locally and consistently available as near to real-
time as possible.
Early on at the health department we invested in developing
interactive dashboards and easy-to-use platforms for sharing
information that was available within our county. Still, we
know being able to describe and analyze detailed in-depth
information about who is becoming affected and potential
outcomes and opportunities for treatment is critical to allow
us to intervene more effectively and strategically.
Unfortunately, due to lingering data system and
interoperability issues, we are yet to meaningfully respond to
these reasonable expectations of our constituents. A new
challenge around data infrastructure is related to the rapid
rise in at-home tests in the absence of a robust reporting and
surveillance system to capture these results and information
about those testing positive. As a result, we once again risk
creating ad hoc, uncoordinated, inefficient efforts that will
ultimately limit our ability to analyze broader trends and
waste precious resources in the absence of a coordinated
effort.
We request investments in electronic data-sharing practices
across healthcare and Federal leadership to promote the
development of data-sharing standards. Those are critical to
our ability to collect, analyze, and report back to our
communities in standardized ways.
We have repeatedly learned that when communicating with the
public, it is critical for public health agencies to be
speaking in a coordinated fashion with one voice. While the
CDC, the executive branch, and our other Federal agencies are
responsible for formulating national guidelines across our
response efforts, many of these announcements were made
suddenly or unexpectedly. Local health officials were left in
an avoidable position of scrambling to evaluate and develop
local messaging that would assist our residents both to
understand as well as to implement those guidelines. What is,
after all, the value of even the most sound public health
guidance if no one can explain what it means or how it applies
to me? We must refocus our collective work to coordinate
communication between local, State, and Federal agencies now in
order to be better prepared for the next surge and the next
public health emergency by rebuilding that structure.
Finally, I'd like to highlight the need for sustained
investment in local public health departments and the public
health infrastructure to enable us to address the ongoing
public health challenges that already existed, as well as to be
prepared to respond to future emergencies. We know there is a
huge chasm between the per capita spending for public health
services when compared with spending for traditional healthcare
services.
Now is the time, however, I believe we can agree that our
priorities for preventing severe disease, illness, and death
can be and must be in closer alignment with the priority of
simply treating those conditions through our funding decisions.
Local public health departments need sustained, predictable
disease-agnostic funding that can be used to support poor
public health infrastructure activities upon which disease-
specific funding can build when the situation and the need
further arises. Investing in these core public health
capabilities will strengthen and support all the work done by
local health departments, and it will also assure more
effective use of all healthcare resources.
Thank you so much to Chairman Foster, to Congressman
Casten, and all of the other esteemed Committee Members for the
opportunity to share my perspective and for your work to ensure
that we are better prepared tomorrow to protect the health,
safety, and security of our residents.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ayala follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And after Ms. Ayala is Dr.
McBride.

TESTIMONY OF DR. LUCY McBRIDE,

PRACTICING PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN IN WASHINGTON, D.C.

Dr. McBride. Good morning, and thank you to Chairs Johnson
and Foster and Ranking Members Lucas and Obernolte for inviting
me today. My name is Lucy McBride. I'm a practicing primary
care doctor here in Washington, D.C. I've been practicing for
over 20 years. I see patients from teenagers to 90-year-olds,
and I've dedicated my life and my career to helping people
understand the inseparability of mental and physical health.
As we inevitably face more COVID waves and variants, I
worry about the ongoing devastation from the virus itself and
about the collateral damage from the mitigations. But perhaps
most of all I worry about the ongoing confusion and anxiety
from not knowing--for people not knowing who to trust in a
global health crisis.
I'm not here today with any political agenda but rather to
share with you what I've learned firsthand caring for patients
almost every day during COVID, patients who are real people on
the receiving end of often confusing guidance and the
unfortunate politicization of science.
In patient care, trust is the glue. To help patients manage
everything from mental and behavioral health to end-of-life
care, I first have to establish a relationship and a rapport.
But unfortunately, trust in medicine and public health hangs in
the balance, as is our ability to help people get the
information and services they need because we have not
appropriately acknowledged uncertainty and we've lost sight of
what I see is the four fundamental pandemic truths: No. 1, the
effectiveness of the extraordinary vaccines; No. 2, the
sophistication of the human immune system; three, the ability
of patients and the public to understand nuance; and four, the
complexity of human behavior.
I'll give you some examples of how trust has been
threatened. The mixed messaging around school safety, booster
shots, masks, and infection-acquired immunity has inadvertently
sparked confusion, fear, and vaccine hesitancy. We've scared
parents by suggesting that schools are inherently unsafe. We've
terrified vaccinated folks about breakthroughs when the primary
three-shot series continues to hold up beautifully against
death and hospitalization for most people. We've alienated
recovered patients by not validating their prior immunity until
recently. And we've accelerated mask culture wars by not
adequately explaining the difference between a mask mandate and
the benefits to an individual of one-way masking when they need
added protection. We should have more appropriately
acknowledged the realities of the vaccines, of the immune
system, and of human beings' ability to live in a constant
state of emergency to better manage people's expectations and
to build trust. People are more likely to take in information
and follow guidance when the advice is nuanced, when it's not
rooted in fear, and we don't moralize human behavior, also when
we communicate uncertainty with humility and candor and provide
reassurance when appropriate.
Just to be clear, I don't blame the CDC or any one person
or political party for these challenges. Had our prior
President, for example, messaged vaccine competence, we could
have saved countless lives. But when we don't talk straight
with the American public and when people lack a trusted guide,
the vacuum of trust gets filled with the cacophony of political
opportunism, lots of media opinions, and celebrities and
internet influencers. And that's exactly what's happened. I see
the effects every day in my patients.
So how do we build back trust? First, we must acknowledge
our past mistakes and abandon mitigations whose harms outweigh
the benefits like school closures, mask mandates, and
asymptomatic testing in schools.
Second, we must be honest about ongoing uncertainties about
COVID like about long COVID, while reassuring people about how
well the vaccines and therapeutics drop the risk of serious
outcomes.
Third, we need to ramp up public health measures that we
know work from ventilating public buildings and scaling up
outpatient treatments to legislating paid sick leave. We must
surge resources like vaccines and rapid tests to our most
vulnerable populations.
And last, we must arm people with the tools and guidance
they need to manage the future variants and a myriad other
health issues that are--that plagued us before the pandemic and
that only got worse during COVID, specifically the epidemics of
obesity, substance use disorders, and the worsening mental
health crisis, particularly among young people.
To that end, we must allow every American unfettered access
to a primary care hub with integrated behavioral and mental
health services. We should heavily invest in school-based
health centers, starting with marginalized communities to meet
teens and kids where they are, exactly like the ones run by my
pediatrician friend Dr. Ana Caskin here in D.C., clinics that
are annexed to those high schools that serve our highest-risk
teens.
Primary care providers specialize in building trust and
rapport. We get the medical vulnerabilities of our unique
patients. We get their biases and beliefs. We understand their
unique resources and risk tolerance. Being human is risky.
Eliminating risk is impossible. It is the job of public health
and primary care to help people manage the everyday risk they
inevitably face.
COVID is here to stay, and we are not done. We'll never be
done protecting the most vulnerable. We must give people a
place to go, someone to trust. By investing in primary care,
we're investing in people, and that is the workplace of trust.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. McBride follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Well, thank you. And next is Dr. Matus.

TESTIMONY OF DR. MARIANA MATUS,

CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, BIOBOT ANALYTICS

Dr. Matus. Good morning, Chairman Foster and Ranking Member
Obernolte. I am Mariana Matus. I'm the CEO and Co-Founder of
Biobot Analytics, a wastewater epidemiology company based in
Cambridge, Massachusetts. It is an honor to testify before you
today about how wastewater epidemiology can help the United
States and the world better manage the next phase of the COVID-
19 pandemic.
Biobot was founded in 2017 with a mission to transform
wastewater into actionable public health data. Just yesterday,
we had the honor of being recognized as one of the most
influential companies of 2022 by Time magazine for our novel
approach to COVID-19 tracking. Everything we eat, the
infectious pathogens in our bodies, and the medicines we use
are all excreted in our urine and stool and end up in the
wastewater. Biobot collects this data in order to understand
population health trends.
In March 2020, our team was the first in the United States
to successfully report the detection and quantification of
SARS-CoV-2 in the wastewater. To date, we have tested samples
from more than 700 communities across all 50 States, including
U.S. territories and tribal nations, helping local officials
track the spread of the virus, as well as variants of concern.
In fact, our work includes analysis from wastewater from almost
every congressional district represented by this Subcommittee.
Wastewater data is a leading indicator of new COVID-19
cases because infected individuals shed the virus in their
waste several days before they develop symptoms. And this type
of monitoring is holistic and it's equitable. It captures
anyone who uses the bathroom, including people who are
asymptomatic or lack access to healthcare. This means that
wastewater data allows us to better understand the presence of
COVID, regardless of socioeconomic status or racial
composition.
Another advantage is that it preserves individual privacy
as wastewater represents an aggregate sample of all human waste
in a community. One sample drawn from a wastewater treatment
plant is representative of tens of thousands of people, and
testing wastewater is much cheaper than the alternative of
testing each of those persons individually.
At this stage of the pandemic, we are witnessing fewer
reported COVID-19 cases because at-home antigen tests are now
widely available, and vaccination has boosted the population's
immunity. As a result, clinical testing data has become less
reliable, and public health officials are forced to rely on
lagging indicators of the disease such as hospitalizations and
deaths.
That is why we believe wastewater monitoring will play an
even more important role in containing the spread of the virus
as life returns to the new normal. Our work in Massachusetts
has already demonstrated how powerful this data can be to
inform decisionmaking. Our data is public. From Governor Baker
receiving weekly briefings on wastewater data, to a Chief
Medical Officer at Boston Children's Hospital, down to me as a
new mom to a baby, we all review these data to determine how to
manage our little piece of the world.
To help facilitate the adoption of this new type of data,
Biobot recommends Congress and the Administration take the
following steps: First, assist States and localities who have
started their own wastewater monitoring programs through
consistent funding. Second, empower relevant Federal agencies
to support wastewater monitoring efforts across the country,
especially by standardizing testing and data collection
methods. Third, align Federal support behind wastewater as a
pathogen-agnostic technology that can monitor for many
different public health threats beyond COVID-19, for example,
the seasonal influenza. It can be as simple as a health map
similar to a weather map or as complicated as an electronic
health record. It's up to us to decide how to handle this new
resource.
I look forward to answering your questions, and thank you
again for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Matus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Well, thank you. And at this point we will
begin our first round of questions. The Chair will now
recognize himself for five minutes.
Dr. Emanuel, to oversimplify a bit, transitioning into the
new normal for COVID-19 means assessing the risk level to a
particular individual or community at a given time and
adjusting the precautions accordingly. While the COVID-19
pandemic puts this calculation on a massive scale, this is an
exercise that the public health community must conduct in real-
time on myriad issues. So what are the lessons that we can draw
from past public health crises and even just ongoing public
health risk? And when considering the level of risk that might
be considered acceptable by the general population, and how do
we quantify at what point increased mitigation measures are
actually worth the cost?
Dr. Emanuel. I keep forgetting to unmute myself. Chairman
Foster, that is an excellent question. And as I said, there's
not one indicator we can follow. We need five indicators at
least, and we need thresholds on those indicators. Again, they
need to be vaccination rates, population immunity in the
community, we need to have wastewater testing, we need to look
at hospital and health system overload, and we need to look at
the death rate.
But, as you point out and actually as Ms.--Dr. Matus--sorry
if I mispronounce your name--has just pointed out we need to
bring it down to the local level, and we can do that because
each one of those metrics can be done on a population basis,
and we need the information in each community and be able to
give them a dashboard for the country but a dashboard for the
community. And they need to see where the lines are where we
need to take added protections and where we can ease off the
protections. And I think adding in population immunity and
wastewater testing will give us a very good handle--not a
perfect handle but a good handle on what's coming down the pike
in a week or 2 weeks so that people can prepare.
I think this is something that's going to be critical going
forward for having that kind of dashboard, and I do appreciate
the CDC's new dashboard. I don't think it encompasses
everything we want. But remember, the dashboard is only as good
as the data, and as you've heard from others on this panel,
which I totally support, is we need an upgrade in those data,
more real-time data, more standardization, and getting all
communities to give it. And the Federal Government needs to
give funding in exchange for people collecting the data in a
reliable way and giving it to the Federal Government and
localities to use.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I guess, Dr. McBride, how
do we deal with recognizing that different costs are imposed on
different segments of the population and different benefits?
You know, we ran into this with one of the major reasons to get
younger people--young, healthy people vaccinated was simply to
protect the elderly in our society. And so you couldn't argue
this only on an individual basis but for a population which may
be different than your own group. So what is--what are the
lessons learned and the best approaches to trying to deal with
that?
Dr. McBride. Well, I think we have to realize, first of
all, that in the panicked spring of March 2020 it made sense to
treat children and elderly people the same because we didn't
know exactly who was most at risk for severe outcomes from
COVID. But we're now in March 2022. We have abundant data to
show exactly who is at highest risk for poor outcomes. It's
older patients, it's patients with immune-compromised states,
it's people with underlying health conditions, and it's people
in marginalized communities who don't have the access to needed
information and resources to protect themselves and their
families and their communities.
So I think what we need to do is, as Dr. Emanuel was just
saying, make sure we have evidence and data on hospitalizations
that's stratified by age, by vaccination status, race so that
we understand exactly who's at higher risk so that we can surge
our limited resources to the most vulnerable populations and
then appropriately calibrate the mitigation measures to the
level of actually--actual risk in that population. For example,
subjecting young, healthy college kids to mandates for boosters
when they, for example, had COVID-19 and have had two or three
shots already, does it make sense? It does make sense, though,
to focus on surging the fourth shots to people who have, A, not
had recent COVID, and B, who are at highest risk, and of course
getting first shots, second shots in first and foremost.
But I think the larger question here is really how do we
message to various populations? How do you tell my
immunocompromised patient, you know, one piece of advice and a
college student whose risk for depression and anxiety is more
than their risk of COVID, and that is ultimately the job of the
primary care doctor to help take broad public health advice and
marry it to the person in front of us.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And my time is expired, and I
will now recognize the Ranking Member for five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I'm fascinated by this discussion about the data
necessary to make good decisions in the future and how those
decisions are made. And so let me start with Dr. Emanuel. You
in your testimony talked about the need for a viral dashboard
with reliable data on things like vaccination rates, wastewater
testing, community immunity, things like that. And I agree that
all of those are things that we need better data on. But, you
know, as scientists sometimes we pretend that if we had all the
right data, we can make the perfect decisions, and I think
everyone would acknowledge that in the case of decisions about
COVID, the decisionmaking process is more complicated. And some
of the things that we did not consider over the last couple of
years are the societal costs that are concomitant to the
decisions that we make about things like shutdowns and
mandatory vaccination and things like that.
So I'm fascinated because your background in bioethics, I
think this is something you've probably thought about. You
know, how do you navigate that space, and don't you need data
about when you're considering a shutdown what the economic
costs are, what are the costs on behavioral health? You know,
how do you parse all that?
Dr. Emanuel. So, first of all, I think you're 100 percent
right. We are making tradeoffs, and we're making tradeoffs on
major things that don't look, as we say in the field,
commensurable, mental health versus, you know, getting kids
back to school or mental health versus putting people into
poverty because we've shut down businesses. I don't want to
look self-interested, but I think understanding better and
trying to create more models about how we do as human beings
make those decisions is something that is worth thinking about
and investing in.
But I would tell you, I do think there was a false
narrative out there that, well, the public health people
weren't considering these other factors like education or the
economy. We saw from the public when rates went way up of
COVID, they themselves, before any public health measures were
introduced, stepped back from engaging in commercial activity,
not being social, keeping their kids home from school. And so
there was a very close correlation between fighting the
infection and getting the economy going. It's very hard to get
the economy fully going until we've got this fully under
control, and the risks to us of COVID and other respiratory
illnesses are at a low enough threshold that we think they're
worth taking.
I don't think we're quite there in large measure in my
opinion because we don't know anything really about long COVID,
and we need to get understanding of long COVID. We know that if
you're vaccinated with three doses--three shots, your chance of
dying are about 1 in 30,000. That's a very low risk, and we go
back to normal if there were no long COVID. The long COVID
element to it, unknown, unknown who gets it, unknown what the
risks actually are I think complicates this and complicates
weighing all the things you said.
Let me finish with one point. I think going forward it's
quite clear to all of us here that closing the schools was a
mistake, that we could put in better indoor air quality,
wearing masks, and have in-person learning, which would have
been so important for the students. Schools should be the last
thing we close, and they should stay open as long as possible.
We shouldn't be opening restaurants before we open schools.
That seems like we have our values quite wrong.
Mr. Obernolte. Yeah, thank you. Yeah, I mean, I think
you've illustrated some of the fundamental problems there. And,
you know, the economic decision is actually, as you say, the
most difficult. But, I mean, even in the space of public health
when you talk about the effect on something like a future
substance abuser, domestic violence, you know, I think it's
really hard to--you know, to make decisions just based on
stopping the spread of a contagion.
Let me ask one last question of Ms. Ayala. You know, in
your testimony you were talking about the need for the
availability of more of the at-home testing information. And
I'm of the opinion that we actually made some bad decisions
early in the pandemic about prioritizing PCR testing over
antigen testing because PCR testing we know to be more
reliable. But in reality antigen testing, we would've gotten a
lot more data about that. I'm curious, do you think that that
was a bad decision? And then if you could also address the
privacy issues involved with gathering the data, I'd appreciate
it.
Ms. Ayala. Thanks so much for those questions. Yes, I think
that acknowledging that PCR testing has unique components and
is considered to be the gold standard for testing--for viral
testing is a no-brainer. However, if the goal is to get as many
people tested as possible and results turned around as quickly
as possible, then antigen testing is something that we probably
should have explored and built systems to support much earlier.
The idea of privacy issues surrounding testing is something
that public health has centuries of addressing in much--with
much more sensitive kinds of disease and virus activity, so I
think that even if we did a--an opt-in type of opportunity for
individuals who were getting antigen tested and using their at-
home tests, we still would be further ahead than we are right
now.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Well, thank you. I see my time is
over. Thank you for the indulgence, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and we will now recognize
Representative Dr. Bera for five minutes of questions.
Mr. Bera. Great, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, I
really appreciate the panel and the witnesses, super important
information.
I'll plug a piece of legislation that we've just
reintroduced, the Tracking Pathogens Act, which would, you
know, plus-up the budget for both gene sequencing but also for
what you've talked about in terms of wastewater surveillance,
you know, throughout the country. So, you know, it's a good
bill. Folks should sign on to it.
Dr. Emanuel, let me ask you a question, and this is--maybe
a one-off, but something that we talked about a little bit
previously, one of my biggest concerns is we obviously have
seen vaccine hesitancy, you know, spring up around the COVID
vaccines and so forth. And, you know, in my home State of
California, you know, we previously did have, you know, an
anti-vax movement, but it was really largely a small percentage
of the population. I have a big fear as, you know, we come out
of COVID or we go into this next phase what that spillover
effect may be. We know COVID, you know, does minimal harm to
our children, but if the anti-vax movement now spills over into
routine childhood vaccines like measles and so forth, I really,
you know, worry very much about what may happen. And that,
again, are you seeing any of that trend in terms of routine
vaccination rates?
Dr. Emanuel. You're 100 percent right, Dr. Bera, which is
we have seen in the country a substantial drop in childhood
vaccinations. Some of that is being able to get to the doctor,
feeling safe going to the pediatrician's office, some of that
is a spillover effect of the anti-vax movement. And I do think
this is something that we have to confront dramatically. We
need to make it clear that this is both a personal and--a
responsibility and a community responsibility, and that these
vaccines are very safe. They're very safe whether they're COVID
vaccines or DPT (diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus) or MMR
(measles, mumps, and rubella) compared to almost anything else
we do like driving a car, going swimming. And we have to change
the mental attitude in this country that vaccines are something
we have to do and we're obliged to ourselves, our family, and
our community to do. We care about all of that, and people have
to see these vaccines as helping make a healthy community.
Mr. Bera. Dr. McBride, you're on the frontlines still
practicing, and I'd be curious what you're seeing in your
practice with your patients and then, you know, again, what we
should be thinking about from the congressional perspective to
change this narrative in the most effective way.
Dr. McBride. Thank you, Dr. Bera. I really appreciate the
question because I have a lot of patients--most of my patients
are vaccinated and firm believers in vaccines, as I am. I have
a handful, though, who are vaccine-hesitant. And the way I've
been able to convince my patients to get vaccinated or even
consider getting vaccinated is by using that trust and rapport
that I've built over time, by listening to their understanding.
I mean, let's face it, people in the United States have
historical and ongoing real reasons for distrusting the medical
institution, and that needs to be heard. People need to be
seen, and they need to be understood and not shamed or blamed
for not getting vaccinated.
The second thing I would say is that there's a recent study
in JAMA (Journal of the American Medical Association) from last
month showing that vaccination rates increased with the number
of PCPs (primary care physicians) per capita. So, again, I'm a
little biased, I'm a primary care doctor, but that is what we
do. You know, I can't--I can have the best vaccine in the world
like we do now, but if I don't have the trust of my patients
and I can't convey nuanced information and meet people where
they are, respecting their lived experience and their biases
and beliefs, then I really can't make headway or deliver the
services that person needs. And so, again, I think we need
primary care to help meet people where they are.
Mr. Bera. Well, I'm a primary care internist, so--I'm not
practicing right now, so I hear that. I guess in the short time
that have left--and maybe I'll throw it back to you, Dr.
Emanuel--with regards to long COVID, it is something that, you
know, we're concerned about, we're thinking about allocating
the resources and trying to better understand it. Where would
you want Congress to focus right now in terms of better
understanding long COVID?
Dr. Emanuel. So first thing is we need to make sure that
the NIH and the CDC understand this is an emergency and not
usual academic research. And I can say that as an academic.
This has to be turbocharged.
Second, we knew to expand their trials. The estimate by the
GAO (Government Accountability Office) is at least 8 million
people have long COVID, 10 percent of the people who've gotten
COVID, maybe as high as 23 or 24 million. There are many
millions of people we can enroll. We need to enroll them in
studies to find out what the actual rate is, what the risk
factors, what increases the chance of long COVID, what
decreases it? Do vaccines protect? Does Evusheld protect? Do
other treatments protect?
The last thing we need to do is we need to start
immediately doing clinical trials. We don't understand the
biology. That doesn't prevent us from trying things like, you
know, steroids or statins or SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors) inhibitors, things that have been shown or
suggested to lower the risk of COVID, maybe they lower the risk
of long COVID. Immune modulators, those three things, what's
the risk of COVID, what affects your risk of COVID, improves or
reduces your risk of long COVID, and finally, starting clinical
trials for therapeutics that might curtail long COVID, all very
important and need to be done immediately. Before the end of
2022 we should begin to have answers.
Mr. Bera. Great. I see my time is expired, so I will yield.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I will now recognize
Representative Bice for five minutes of questions.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you so much. Dr. McBride, did you want to
comment on that really quickly?
Dr. McBride. I just want to comment on the fact that what I
see in my patients and what I see in the public square is
necessary and real concern about long COVID. I have patients
with long COVID. I have a nurse who got COVID back in 2020 and
is still suffering from the fallout, loss of taste and smell,
brain fog. It's real. It is absolutely real.
At the same time, I think in the public, based on what I'm
observing and what I understand based on the studies that have
been done that are not well-controlled--they're not well-
controlled studies, is that there seems to be an outsized fear
of long COVID that, again, this is not to dismiss people's
fears, this is not to dismiss people's lived experiences, this
is not to dismiss people who are living with long COVID. My
point is about the messaging and the difficult threading of the
needle that we need to do as clinicians and that we need to do
as public health leaders, reassuring people where reassurance
is warranted because we see, based on the data so far, that
vaccines do reduce the risk of long COVID. We need more
research. We also can reassure people and not scare people
unnecessarily when they've been vaccinated.
Mrs. Bice. So on that note, first of all, I want to thank
Dr. Emanuel for mentioning not, you know, sending kids home
from school. I think that's incredibly important. And we have
seen the detriments of that across the country. Every
socioeconomic demographic is being affected by kids being home,
so I appreciate your comments on that.
Dr. McBride, I want to ask you this question. I had a
conversation with a pediatrician recently who was asked--
obviously is very interested in these conversations, and she
asked the question, do you think a fourth booster is going to
be required or recommended by the CDC? And I said, you know, I
doubt it. But her concern was the virus that we're seeing
today, these sort of mutations that we're seeing today are
vastly different than what we saw 2 years ago. And her concern
is that the vaccines have not been modified at all to be able
to affect that. What are your thoughts on that?
Dr. McBride. So lots of thoughts. One is that I think we
need to do a better job of managing people's expectations of
what the vaccines can do. The vaccines are no doubt the
clearest way forward through the pandemic and through the next
waves and set of variants. But we also need to make clear to
the general public that vaccines are not magic force fields and
that they don't protect us against infection like they did pre-
delta. So we shouldn't be surprised, for example, if someone
has a breakthrough infection despite three or even four shots.
But the fact that they're not in the hospital, they're not
severely ill is a vaccine success.
And that messaging is the nuance that has unfortunately I
think been lost so that people like in my practice have been
terrified by getting a breakthrough infection saying, oh my
gosh, my vaccine doesn't work when actually if you're at home
with the flu, not that it's the flu, it's a different virus
altogether, that is your vaccine working.
So to answer your question, I don't have a crystal ball,
and I would be lying if I knew what was happening in the
future, but I do think we will see new variants and we will see
more waves. And I think ultimately what we'll end up seeing is
new formulations of the vaccine to target the variant at hand
not unlike what we do with the flu.
Mrs. Bice. Right. And that's, I think, what her point was.
The flu is an annual mutation or variant, and we're having to
re-create those vaccines every year. We should be looking at
that for COVID as well because we are seeing these mutations as
we move through time and they may change.
I also want to say I agree 100 percent with your assessment
about communication. I thought from the very beginning it
should have been OK for the CDC, NIH, and others to say we
don't know yet, we don't know yet, we're still doing research.
But instead of that, we heard a lot of information that ended
up being either incorrect or modified later on, no masking,
double masking, no masking if you're vaccinated. And I think to
your very well-made point, people become distrusting if the
message is constantly being changed, right?
And so one of the things I want to see from our health
officials here is, you know, understand that you can say I
don't know. This was a disease that we had never seen before
and we didn't know--if you think back to March 2020, people
thought that you could get it by touching, you know, your
groceries at the grocery store. I mean, it was really sort of
kind of crazy times. But now we know a lot more about it, and I
think that messaging builds confidence in the medical community
so that people will be more comfortable taking the vaccine,
being, you know, willing to get a booster if necessary. But
this constant shift in that messaging makes people incredibly
distrusting, and that's why we're seeing, I think, such high
numbers.
The other thing I'll quickly add, too, is we mentioned
vaccination rates. I think there are two reasons. Certainly not
having access is a big deal, especially for low-income families
when you have health departments that have been closed or
clinics that have been closed only to COVID vaccines, that
becomes a problem for children. And then the other piece of it
is educating these parents that the vaccines that we've been
taking, you know, DPT, the MMR vaccines are safe and effective
and that's why we don't have those diseases across the country.
So, my time is expired. I appreciate your indulgence. And
at this time I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And for our Members, there will
be a second brief round of questions as well.
And we'll now recognize Mr. Casten for five minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ayala, I have to start with a confession. I've never
admitted this publicly, so bear with me. The Harvard School of
Public Health has maintained a list throughout the whole COVID
pandemic showing the vaccination rate by congressional
district, and I have taken sole credit for the fact that the
Sixth District of Illinois has consistently been the most
vaccinated district in the State, and I really don't deserve
that. You're 50 percent of my constituents, so credit where
credit is due. You deserve credit for that. And of course
you've led on testing as well, and it's--and I--you know, I
meant everything I said about how fortunate we are to have you
there. I also don't think I'm putting any words in your mouth
when I say that both of us probably wish those numbers were
higher.
And I want to start just by asking you to reflect a little
bit. Throughout--certainly through the first year of this
pandemic, there was a--the demand for everything exceeded the
supply, whether that was the demand for PPE (personal
protective equipment) or for ventilators and then for testing
and then for vaccines. And in theory there's an optimal public-
health way to allocate those scarce resources. In practice, as
you and I know too well, some of those decisions were
political. There were situations where, you know, we certainly
got in a challenge here as far as intrastate allocations, and
then once they were at the State level on the county
allocations.
And I wonder now that we're sort of, you know, hopefully on
the back end of this, was all of that tension completely
inevitable, or do you think there are things that we could have
done better at the Federal or State level to ensure that that
scarce resource allocation was done collaboratively rather than
competitively?
Ms. Ayala. So that's a very provocative question. And I
think that to a certain extent when you're allocating limited
resources, there will inevitably be contentiousness and
unhappiness. However, I think the lesson learned--and I
remember the conversations that you and I had--transparency
around those decisions at the time, as well as benchmarks or
metrics for how the decisions are being made, I think those are
the tools that could not eliminate but certainly reduce some of
that unnecessary angst.
Mr. Casten. Well, hear, hear. We could talk for a long time
about that. I want to shift, though, if we can to the mental
health issue that's come up a couple times. I think we're all
keenly aware of how much we as a people need social engagement
and how much we've become a little bit sort of socially
crippled for lack of a better word as we've been in our bubbles
over the last year.
At the same time, there's a part of me as an American that
gets confused and in some ways angry at the fact that the same
country that was willing to completely transform the way we
travel, our rights to data privacy, enter into 20-year wars
after 9/11 is not even talking about the fact that we lost two
9/11's last week. Almost a million Americans. And somehow we've
either at best decided that we're just inured to it and, at
worst, decided that that's an acceptable price to pay so that
somebody's kid doesn't have to wear a mask or that somebody can
have the freedom not to get vaccinated because that's more
important.
And I don't want to trivialize those mental health issues,
but you of course oversee a pretty robust mental health
division as well out in Wheaton, and I wonder how you think
about the tradeoff between the public health issues of saving
lives and the real mental health issues you see, how you think
about that, how you communicate it, how we should think about
it.
Ms. Ayala. Sure. So when we talked about--earlier in this
hearing when we talked about the impact of COVID on children, I
think one of the opportunities that we did not take full
advantage of from the public health standpoint in working with
families around the need for children to get vaccinated, as
well as the importance of masking and some of the others is the
impact of the loss of someone close to them. When we look at
the reports around children who have been orphaned and lost
that primary caregiver, again, the most dramatic losses have
occurred in our marginalized, underserved populations. Those
children--not that any child needs to, you know, experience
trauma to build any sort of character going forward, but those
are kids who absolutely need people in their lives who are
steady and supportive for them.
I think that--I share your concern that when we talk about
the numbers--and in DuPage County alone we have nearly 2,000
deaths that have occurred over the last 2 years in large part
unnecessarily and tragically too soon and preventable now that
we know that there's--this is a vaccine-preventable disease. I
think that to us in public health and health, the most tragic
outcome is having a death in an otherwise healthy individual.
And so when we talk about the concerns of economics and
concerns about restaurants and bars staying open, I think that
we need to take a really deep look at what is important from a
community standpoint. And I know I'm over, but one of the
issues that we've all talked about is the need for schools to
have been open. Without a doubt. However, when we had other
facets of our society who were unwilling to abide by some of
the prevention strategies so that we could get back--kids back
in school, I think that's when we--that's when the priorities
of a community are felt more than they're heard.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And at this point we'll start a
second round of questions for Members who are interested. And
I'll now recognize myself for five minutes.
Dr. Emanuel, you mentioned three interesting technologies
that you thought we should--that we should pursue actively,
seroprevalence surveillance, mucosal vaccines, and antiviral
cocktails. So, first, in terms of the seroprevalence
surveillance, does technology exist to really, you know, take
one of these little blood spot tests where you, you know, you
prick your finger and put it on something that looks like a
business card, you mail the business card back in, and then
that can be analyzed for antibodies, for example, that may be
present? But is there a way--does technology exist to actually
use that sort of test to predict whether or not you're actually
immune to a specific variant?
Dr. Emanuel. It can't predict whether you're immune to a
specific variant. You can predict whether you've got antibodies
to variants and you don't need to get people to actively prick
necessarily. We can use what's called the excess blood from
laboratory tests. We do millions of tests every day in this
country, and we can use some of that excess blood to monitor
these antibodies.
The other problem I would mention with that is that we have
cellular immunity, which is what gives us our long-term
immunity against COVID, and that's much harder to monitor in
the way that you suggest. But the other technologies we need,
mucosal vaccines, pan-coronavirus vaccines, multidrug
cocktails, those are all very important and we're doing
research. We need to, again, turbocharge the research.
Let me just conclude with one other item, which is not a
technology so much as research. You can't tell me, I can't tell
you, and no one in the country can tell you what the optimal
vaccine schedule is. We have different kinds of vaccines. We
probably know that mRNA first and mRNA repeatedly is probably
not optimal, but we can't tell you is having J&J (Johnson &
Johnson) first and then an mRNA optimal? Is maybe having the
new Novavax vaccine, assuming it gets approved, with mRNA, is
that optimal? We need research on that, too, because we may
actually get better community protection and immunity with a
different schedule of just the vaccines we have. And we just
don't know what's optimal out there, again, another research
hole that we need to fill.
Chairman Foster. And one thing that's not really a
technical issue but I've been very struck, as all of us have,
trying--you know, we're trying to convince people who are
hesitant to get vaccinated. And we've all spent hours and hours
doing that. And very often at the end of the discussion you
haven't succeeded. And then one of the things that I have tried
doing is to ask people that if instead of a vaccine it was
simply a pill that you took, almost universally people say, oh,
yes, sure, I'd take a pill. And so even though it's not a
technical issue on the performance of such a vaccine, it seems
to me that if we prioritize the development of, say, an oral
vaccine or one of these, you know, nasal spritzer things, I
think that there might be a huge increase in vaccine
acceptance. And is there anything--do any of our witnesses
know, has that sort of thing been studied as a technique to get
past vaccine hesitancy?
Dr. Emanuel. I totally agree with you. It's--that's why I
call for mucosal vaccines. Having a variety of approaches for
people is absolutely pivotal, and you're 100 percent right.
People are more inclined to do a pill or a spritz in the nose
than they are--for whatever reason, shots have very, very bad
overtones for people.
Chairman Foster. Yes, I think we're kind of built that way.
You know, I recently became a granddad, and so babies will
often put stuff in their mouth with no hesitation at all, and
I've never seen a baby eager to be injected with something.
Now, in terms of the antiviral cocktails, this is something
I've been frustrated by because I don't see, frankly, much
Federal action on this. We led a bipartisan letter a while ago
that doesn't seem to have had much effect. There--one of the
problems, there is no real commercial incentive for the
manufacturer of a reasonably successful antiviral to be
enthusiastic about sponsoring a cocktail in clinical trials.
And it's my understanding that actually held back the
development of HIV cocktails for actually years. And so is
there any observations that any of our witnesses have about the
importance there or what Congress might do to encourage the
development of antiviral cocktails?
Dr. McBride. I would just say if I could that I think the
development of Paxlovid, for example, as an oral antiviral is
really a gamechanger. And I applaud Biden's test-to-treat
initiative, and I think we need to really surge resources there
so that people, as you said, who are either vaccine-hesitant or
unvaccinated or vaccinated and still get COVID and are at
higher risk for poor outcomes can quickly get a rapid test,
show that they're positive, and get the appropriate antiviral
treatment to further reduce their risk for serious outcomes
from COVID-19.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
Dr. Emanuel. I do think advanced purchase agreements could
incentivize us, and specifically allocating money to conduct
rapid trials on multidrug regimens is something we have to
prioritize. And I think when you allocate money or appropriate
money to the NIH, that's something you ought to put in to force
them to do it. They have been resistant to these oral
medications right from the start. I can tell you that having
had discussions. And that's been a mistake. We have hundreds
now in either preclinical or clinical trials of antiviral
medications, and we need to turbocharge that, too.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And my time is up. I will now
recognize the Ranking Member for five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a really
fascinating discussion we're having, and I'd like to continue
the line of questioning about vaccines and vaccine hesitancy.
But let me just lead by saying that perhaps one of the things
that this has taught us is that we need to think more out-of-
the-box when it comes to widespread vaccine availability for
people because although I will agree that an oral vaccine would
be more accepted than an injectable vaccine, convenience is
also important. And I know it's--as people in the space of
public health, it horrifies us to say this, but for a lot of
people, the necessity of having to go to a healthcare provider
to get vaccinated, that's a big step for them. I mean, if you
got just--if your insurance company just sent you in the mail
the next vaccine dose, was an oral vaccine and they said scan
this QR code when you've taken it so that we know you've taken
it, we can update your medical records, and by the way, you
shouldn't take it if you have the symptoms, you know, I
actually think that would go a lot further toward making sure
that we have good vaccine penetration.
So, you know, let me ask, you know, along those lines, Dr.
McBride, I'll pick on you again here. You said some really
interesting things about vaccine hesitancy and the anti-vax
movement. And I'll be provocative and say I actually think that
the government and government action throughout the health
crisis has greatly contributed to the rise of the anti-vax
movement. I think that if we had just been more open and
transparent with the public about the fact that vaccines are
very effective, they're overall safe but they do have risks,
and I also think that if we had been more respective of
people's own ability to decide for themselves whether or not
vaccines were right for them, that people would be less
hesitant here. Do you agree or disagree with that? And what
mistakes do you think that we made during the crisis that might
have resulted in greater vaccine hesitancy?
Dr. McBride. So thanks for that question. I don't ascribe
ill intent to our Federal Government. I think we've been
building an airplane in the air----
Mr. Obernolte. Well, I can. You don't have to----
Dr. McBride [continuing]. But I do think----
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. But I do.
Dr. McBride. Oh, OK. Fine. Fair enough. And as I said in my
written testimony, had our prior President, you know, gotten
the vaccine as he did and told people about it, that would have
done a lot of good.
I think what--this goes back to, again, messaging and
acknowledging uncertainty, acknowledging the truth that we know
about the vaccine, and then allowing ourselves, giving
ourselves permission to give the public permission to have--to
feel reassured. So I have so many patients who are vaccinated
and boosted and walking around terrified to see their
grandkids, to go back to work when they need to know that COVID
isn't going away, tragically, but that the vaccine has taken
the fangs and claws away from the virus and that they can then
focus on their broad human needs. For example, my patients with
obesity, hypertension, substance use disorders, we need to be
focusing on those issues and take fear out of the driver's seat
from--the way they think about COVID while protecting
themselves and their families from this virus.
So the other thing I think we missed the opportunity of
doing is we didn't get the vaccines into primary care doctors'
offices. Again, trust is the ground game in primary care. And
if I had the ability to check--see a patient for their annual
checkup and say, oh, hey, by the way, there's this COVID shot,
it's excellent, what are your concerns and then have them go
get their lab work and their vaccine at the same moment, that
would be great. The problem is, as you know, 80 million
Americans, according to a recent study, don't have access to a
primary care medical home, which is why, again, I think we need
to invest in primary care and allow people to have that place
to get nuanced information. Because the CDC, even if it was
doing the best of jobs in the best of times, can't possibly
speak to every American. It can't possibly speak to a vaccine-
hesitant person and a vaccinated-anxious person. That's our
job, to be the lieutenants of the CDC, to help people get what
they need and to get the resources and information they need
that reflect their unique vulnerabilities and their unique risk
tolerances because there's really no one-size-fits-all
prescription for how to manage risk.
Mr. Obernolte. Sure. I completely agree. And I also think--
I mean, you've raised an interesting issue, which is we need to
be cognizant of behavioral science when we're making decisions
about how to increase vaccine adoption. And that's one of the
mistakes I think we made. You know, it's--we have a long
tradition of anti-authoritarianism here in the United States.
In fact, it's kind of part of our national ethos. And, as a
parent who's raised a couple of kids, I can tell you if I
wanted them to eat broccoli, the last thing I should do is tell
them they have to eat broccoli, right? If I instead say, well,
OK, you cannot eat the broccoli but you're going to miss out on
something good, they're a lot more likely to eat the broccoli
on their own. And, I mean, I really think that there are
lessons to be learned there in addressing vaccine hesitancy
because those are some of the mistakes I think that we made
during this process.
But it's been a fascinating discussion. Thank you,
everyone.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we will now recognize
Representative Casten for five minutes of questions.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. Two questions, first, one more for
Dr. Ayala and I want to get to Dr. Matus before we wrap up
here, who has been far too lonely on the screen. The--when this
pandemic first started, we had some experts come in--Dr.
Emanuel, you may have been one--advising us on how to talk to
the public through a crisis and the message that stuck in my
head was, for goodness sake, don't be the elected official who
some significant number of people didn't vote for and say I'm
the one who's right. Get the public health officials to stand
up next you and speak to that. And I certainly availed myself
of your skills in that department more than once, Dr. Ayala.
The trouble was that when we got home and social media was
ablaze with all sorts of completely garbage information that
was running contrary to that and we weren't sitting there with
the expert on hand. And I'm curious, Dr. Ayala, you must've
felt that as someone who was communicating this in your soul,
I'm curious what you think we can do better for future
pandemics about that role of social media and communication and
what advice you'd give to us if we were going in now about how
to anticipate that sort of nonsense in the future and inoculate
the public against it.
Ms. Ayala. Sure, sure. So I think that although I feel it
in my soul, I think one of the ways that I've survived the last
two years is to completely divorce myself from reading any
social media posts or many social media posts. However, I think
that as far as communication goes, I think that when we stay
silent around misinformation and disinformation from a public
health or a healthcare legitimacy, we undermine ourselves. And
so I think that, no, we can't possibly address all of the
issues that are brought up on social media. However, some of
the points that Dr. McBride, Dr. Emanuel have made about
communicating the nuances around vaccinations, around
communicating the nuances around the need to--for layered
mitigation that, just like there's no one metric, there's no
one prevention strategy that is going to be the silver bullet,
I think those would have gone a long way. And instead I think
we just took, I don't know, high road or didn't want to get
involved in those kinds of discussions. But I think it really
worked against us. And that would be definitely a lesson
learned going forward.
Dr. Emanuel. Can I raise one--or a few points? First, we
have to talk about misinformation. It's not just the government
giving information that might not be clear. There was plenty of
misinformation out there, intentional deception of people.
That--some of it came from foreign actors. We know that, and we
need to see this as a national security threat when they can
spread misinformation that compromises the public health of the
country. And I don't think we've done that and taken it on
seriously.
Second, the academic studies at least that I've seen trace
almost all of this back to Fox News and to the misinformation
Fox News started, then gets amplified by social media, then
comes back to Fox News, and it's a vicious negative circle
there. And I think we have to be very clear.
Third, we have to change those algorithms and prevent
people from staying in an information bubble. You have the
power to do it. It's not infringement of First Amendment rights
that people--that the companies just can't give you a loop of
the same misinformation you get, that you have to be open to
information. Those algorithms are quite dangerous to public
health, but they're also quite dangerous to democracy. And I
think it's very important for you to take seriously those
algorithms. They don't infringe the public free speech rights,
but they do allow us to be more in a democracy so we can hear
the opposing and alternative views very freely, just as freely
as we hear----
Mr. Casten. So, Dr. Emanuel, thank you, and I completely
agree. It's a rich conversation. I do just want to get to Dr.
Matus, and I'm seeing my time run down here.
We had a whole lot of complication early on, to some degree
probably still do, with data-sharing. Different hospitals have
different data systems. They didn't necessarily communicate
properly with the community health centers, with the public
health departments. And I realize that sewage testing is not
the entirety of that, but I'm curious to what degree your data,
which is aggregated, can tie some of that together just from a
data perspective.
And then, secondarily, to what degree have you been able to
work with that diversity of public health systems to use your
data to interface and maybe spot gaps and coordinate data
between those if that makes sense in the time we've got left.
Dr. Matus. Absolutely. Wastewater data has grown from being
this very obscure novelty that people found interesting or even
funny, to suddenly becoming the new pillar, the most trusted
source of truth about what's happening in the pandemic. Just
earlier this year during the omicron wave, the wastewater data
which we make publicly available took everybody just through
our website and social media indicated when the peak of the
clinical cases would happen 2 weeks ahead of time. It gave
hospitals, especially in the Boston area where there's lots of
awareness about this type of information, a 2-week leading time
to prepare for the peak. And it was equally useful to know when
the peak would happened, as well as to when it would end. And
that's the promise. That data can be communicated real-time to
everybody involved. And, as you say, the data is seen by the
Governor. It's seen by the State's public health department.
It's seen by the city-level public health departments from
Boston, Cambridge, Chelsea. It's seen by the hospitals in the
area. It's seen by the public and commented by the public on
social media. And as I see it--and I will just end with that.
You know, the poop data doesn't lie. And it's that trust, we
need to go back to the basics, and wastewater provides that to
the public, a public engagement tool.
Mr. Casten. Yes. Ending with a comment about the poop deck
is a great way to yield back to our captain.
Chairman Foster. All right. Enough of that. I will now
recognize Representative Bice for five minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you so much. And I actually just want to
pivot back to Dr. Matus. You haven't had the opportunity to
talk about some of these other topics. I just want to maybe
talk--ask you if you can maybe elaborate on communities that
you're utilizing these resources in across the country and how
we can educate municipalities and States to really invest in
the type of research and technology that you are currently
providing.
Dr. Matus. Absolutely. Something to mention is that of all
of the communities that currently do wastewater epidemiology,
there is a very big fraction of them that are small towns,
rural communities, tribal nations. And we work with them.
That's part of the beauty of this technology. All that you need
is the wastewater. You don't need any pre-existing
infrastructure in those areas in order to understand what
happening. In the State of Oklahoma, as well as in others, we
have done plenty of work with those communities. And what we're
seeing, what seems to be the most resonating with them is
feeling part of this story, telling part of it.
Mrs. Bice. Sure. Is there--what is the opportunity for us
to utilize wastewater research in other areas, maybe, you know,
are you able to identify variants of COVID? Are you--is it
parts per million that you can see the amount of, you know, per
capita maybe exposure? Like how does that technology really
move us forward?
Dr. Matus. Yes. The wastewater allows you to understand the
level of disease activity in an area, so the trend. You can see
if it's going up, if it's going down. Right now, the COVID-19
levels nationwide are quite stable at a low level, fortunately.
There's a little bit of an uptick happening but nothing yet too
concerning. At the same time and from the same sample we also
analyze for the variants of concern, so we do genomics
sequencing, which was mentioned earlier today as one of very
important tools to pandemic preparedness, and we can understand
which mutations are circulating of the known variants, as well
as new mutations that we don't understand yet.
And there's very interesting work there, not to mention
influenza, other infectious diseases, antibiotic resistance,
and something that has been mentioned multiple times during
this hearing, mental health. Mental health can also be
understood through wastewater, both the opioid side, the
stimulant side is all of information that can be collected from
the same source.
Mrs. Bice. That's fascinating. And I think that the comment
that you made that you can look at variants I think is
incredibly important as I think everybody on the panel can
agree. This isn't going away, and so being able to recognize
that's important--and can you tell us how long it takes you to
analyze this to be able to provide the data back to the
municipalities?
Dr. Matus. We provide it, yes, next business day.
Mrs. Bice. Wow.
Dr. Matus. Wastewater is a leading indicator for what's
coming. We have been--you know, it has been officially reported
by economic groups, by the CDC how wastewater gives you an
early warning about what you're going to see in the clinic when
it comes to the spikes but also to the variants. Omicron was
detected in wastewater before it was in the clinic in the
United States in the last wave.
Mrs. Bice. Why we are not utilizing these types of
technologies holistically I think is sort of beyond me, so I'm
glad to connect with you, and I appreciate you being on the
panel.
Dr. McBride, did you want to maybe chime in there?
Dr. McBride. I just wanted to say how impressed I am by
what--your presentation, Dr. Matus, and just to say how
excellent a resource wastewater management can be, particularly
when we see the harms of all of the--the potential harms of,
for example, asymptomatic testing in schools. When we have
these technologies like wastewater testing and we have the
ability to ventilate buildings, these are invisible and
private--they preserve the privacy of the public while, you
know, alerting people in advance of their risk and mitigating
the risk, whereas when you test someone, for example, an
asymptomatic child in the school and then send them home for a
quarantine when they aren't even sick, then, you know,
particularly in low-resource communities, you put that kid at
risk for everything from missed school altogether because they
don't have access to the internet to, you know, not getting fed
where they--so these invisible interventions, paired with
access to primary care to get the nuanced information that you
need for your individual risk, when Mariana Matus's wastewater
tests go up, I mean, that's really to me the wave of the
future.
Mrs. Bice. I love it. Well, thank you so much for our panel
being here today and, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I'm struck by the amount of
interest in this technology here in a very bipartisan manner,
and I'm wondering at some point if you may be asked to actually
predict the results of elections based on wastewater samples.
But before we bring this hearing to a close, I want to
thank our witnesses for testifying before the Committee today.
The record will remain open for two weeks for any additional
statements from Members and any additional questions the
Committee may ask of the witnesses. And this hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:32 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Executive Summary of a report submitted by Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[For full report, see https://www.covidroadmap.org]

Letter submitted by the National Association
of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
