- BRAIN DRAIN: REBUILDING THE FEDERAL SCIENTIFIC WORKFORCE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BRAIN DRAIN: REBUILDING
THE FEDERAL SCIENTIFIC WORKFORCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 17, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-4

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-704PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
JERRY McNERNEY, California           PETE SESSIONS, Texas
PAUL TONKO, New York                 DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                MIKE GARCIA, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
DON BEYER, Virginia                  YOUNG KIM, California
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAY OBERNOLTE, California
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                 VACANCY
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAY OBERNOLTE, California,
AMI BERA, California                   Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                PETE SESSIONS, Texas
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                VACANCY

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 17, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Jay Obernolte, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11

Statement by Representative Pete Sessions, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    12

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    12

Witnesses:

Ms. Candice Wright, Acting Director, Science, Technology
Assessment, and Analytics, U.S. Government Accountability
Office
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    16

Mr. Max Stier, President and CEO, Partnership for Public Service
Oral Statement...............................................    38
Written Statement............................................    40

Dr. Andrew Rosenberg, Director of the Center for Science and
Democracy, Union of Concerned Scientists
Oral Statement...............................................    55
Written Statement............................................    57

Dr. Elizabeth Southerland, Former Director of Science and
Technology, Office of Water, Environmental Protection Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    66
Written Statement............................................    68

Discussion.......................................................    74

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Max Stier, President and CEO, Partnership for Public Service.    88

Dr. Andrew Rosenberg, Director of the Center for Science and
Democracy, Union of Concerned Scientists.......................    90

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Report submitted by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``Scientific Brain Drain: Quantifying the Decline of the
Federal Scientific Workforce,'' Majority Staff.............    92

Statements submitted by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE) Local 3403   116
Climate Science Legal Defense Fund...........................   119

Report submitted by Dr. Andrew Rosenberg, Director of the Center
for Science and Democracy, Union of Concerned Scientists
``The Federal Brain Drain: Impacts on Science Capacity, 2016-
2020,'' Jacob Carter, Taryn MacKinney, Gretchen Goldman....   124

BRAIN DRAIN: REBUILDING
THE FEDERAL SCIENTIFIC WORKFORCE

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 17, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m.,
via Webex, Hon. Bill Foster [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. The hearing will now come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at
any time.
And before I deliver my opening remarks, I just wanted to
note the unusual circumstances under which we're operating
today. Pursuant to House Resolution 8, today, the Subcommittee
is meeting virtually. I want to announce a couple of reminders
to the Members about the conduct of this remote hearing. First,
Members should keep their video feed on as long as they are
present at the hearing. Members are responsible for their own
microphones. Please also keep your microphones muted unless
you're speaking. If Members have documents they wish to submit
for the record, please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose
email has been circulated prior to the hearing.
Well, good morning, and thank you to all of our Members
and panelists for joining us today for this Subcommittee
hearing on the brain drain from the Federal scientific
workforce. This is our first Subcommittee hearing of the 117th
Congress, and I'm very pleased to return as the Chairman of the
Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee to continue our
important work. I'm also pleased to welcome Ranking Member
Obernolte to the Subcommittee. I look forward to working
together in support of America's scientific community to ensure
that our country remains its position--remains in its position
as the global leader in science and innovation.
Today's hearing focuses on a subject close to my heart:
the Federal scientific workforce. The scientists of the Federal
Government are a pillar of some of America's greatest
achievements, and federally funded science is a key to long-
term economic growth. Today's hearing is doubly important.
First, the STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) workforce has been under stress in recent years,
as we will be discussing. And secondly, we stand on the cusp of
what we all hope will be kind of a Sputnik-like moment for
federally funded scientific research.
We're in a historic position where Democrats and
Republicans on this Committee and Republicans and Democrats in
the Senate have dueling proposals to double the scientific
research budget in this country. And maintaining proper
stewardship on what we all hope will be a historic return to an
adequate level of funding for scientific research will require
a top-notch and well-experienced federally funded STEM
workforce.
Government scientists oversee grants for priority research
areas, fund basic research that expands our horizons through
breakthrough discoveries, and lead the way in helping to
address the most pressing challenges of our time, from climate
change and clean energy to public health, to national security.
Whether pushing the boundaries of scientific knowledge or
informing policymaking with the best available science,
government scientists perform a vital public service.
Unfortunately, recent years have been difficult for many
career government scientists. The last Administration's
hostility toward evidence-based decisionmaking often created a
significant tension with scientists simply attempting to carry
out their duties. And as violations of scientific integrity
worsened and political interference escalated, scientists often
felt marginalized and demoralized. Far too often, they saw
their expertise ignored, their motives were impugned, their
work was dismissed. And this crisis arrived after years of
budget constraints had already slashed their funding.
Sadly, the consequences of--one of the consequences of
failure to properly support the Federal scientific workforce
are clear: In critical science-based agencies and occupations,
far too many scientists have recently decided to leave the
Federal Government. The statistics are alarming. According to
data reviewed by the Committee staff, EPA's (Environmental
Protection Agency's) workforce declined by 3.9 percent in the
last Administration and over 16 percent since 2009. The DOE's
(Department of Energy's) civil service STEM workforce has not
increased in four years. The EPA, DOE, and NOAA (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) have all lost large
numbers of STEM workers in key occupations such as the
environmental protection specialists, nuclear engineers, and
oceanographers. Even offices with broad bipartisan support have
not been spared. The DOE's Office of Nuclear Energy lost over
20 percent of its workforce in just the first three years of
the previous Administration. And in many science agencies, see
the remaining outsized gender, racial, and ethnic employment
disparities persisting in their STEM workforces. These facts
show just how much Federal scientific capacity is at risk of
being lost due to scientific workforce reductions.
The departure of so much scientific talent and
institutional knowledge from the government represents a
competitive disadvantage for the United States. We must fix
this. We can rebuild the Federal scientific workforce, but to
do so, we must recommit ourselves to strengthening scientific
integrity in the Federal Government and supporting career
scientists.
Today's discussion will help us understand how we got
here, the implications of the reduced scientific workforce, and
how best to reverse these trends and restore Federal scientific
capacity. I'm eager to hear from our expert witnesses, who are
strong advocates for career scientists and the role of science
in government. I look forward to hearing your ideas on how we
can address this issue. I'm also attaching a majority staff
report as part of my written statement for the record. The
report has been shared with the minority and represents the
majority staff view on many of the issues here.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Foster follows:]

Good morning, and thank you to all of our Members and
panelists for joining us today for this Subcommittee hearing on
brain drain from the federal scientific workforce. This is our
first Subcommittee hearing of the 117th Congress, and I'm very
pleased to return as the Chairman of the Investigations &
Oversight Subcommittee to continue our important work. I'm also
pleased to welcome Ranking Member Obernolte to the
Subcommittee. I look forward to working together in support of
America's scientific community to ensure that this country
remains the global leader in science and innovation.
Today's hearing focuses on a subject close to my heart: the
federal scientific workforce. The scientists of the Federal
Government are a pillar in some of America's greatest
achievements. Government scientists oversee grants for priority
research areas, fund basic research that expands our horizons
through breakthrough discoveries, and lead the way in helping
to address the most pressing challenges of our time, from
climate change and clean energy, to public health, to national
security. Whether pushing the boundaries of scientific
knowledge or informing policymaking with the best available
science, government scientists perform a vital public service.
Unfortunately, recent years have been difficult for career
government scientists. The last administration's hostility
towards evidence-based decision-making created an awful tension
with scientists attempting to carry out their duties. As
violations of scientific integrity worsened and political
interference escalated, scientists felt marginalized and
demoralized. Far too often, their expertise was ignored, their
motives were impugned, and their work was dismissed. And this
crisis arrived after years of budget constraints had already
slashed their funding.
Sadly, the consequences of the failure to properly support
the federal scientific workforce are clear: in critical
science-based agencies and occupations, far too many scientists
have recently decided to leave the Federal Government. The
statistics are alarming. According to data reviewed by the
Committee staff, EPA's workforce declined by 3.9% during the
last administration and over 16% since 2009. DOE's civil
service STEM workforce has not increased in 4 years. EPA, DOE
and NOAA have all lost large numbers of STEM workers in key
occupations, such as environmental protection specialists,
nuclear engineers and oceanographers. Even offices with broad
bipartisan support have not been spared: DOE's Office of
Nuclear Energy lost over 20% of its workforce in just the first
three years of the previous administration. And in many science
agencies, outsized gender, racial and ethnic employment
disparities persist in STEM workforces. These facts show just
how much federal scientific capacity is at risk of being lost
due to scientific workforce reductions.
The departure of so much scientific talent and
institutional knowledge from the government represents a
competitive disadvantage for the United States. We must fix
this. We can rebuild the federal scientific workforce, but to
do so, we must recommit ourselves to strengthening scientific
integrity in the Federal Government and supporting career
scientists. Today's discussion will help us to understand how
we got here, the implications of a reduced scientific
workforce, and how best to reverse these trends and restore
federal scientific capacity. I am eager to hear from our expert
witnesses, who are strong advocates for career scientists and
the role of science in government. I look forward to hearing
your ideas about how we can address this issue.
I now yield to Ranking Member Obernolte for his opening
remarks.

Chairman Foster. And now I'll turn it over to my
Republican colleague.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Foster.
I am honored to serve as the Ranking Member for the
Subcommittee. This Subcommittee's jurisdiction is near and dear
to my heart, as you know, and I think that the subject of our
hearing today is one of critical importance. We absolutely need
a strong, dedicated, and talented Federal scientific workforce,
and we need to make sure that we retain those people and that
we recruit the best of what is coming out of our Nation's
schools and universities.
I'm very much looking forward to hearing what our expert
witnesses have to say. We're focusing this hearing today mostly
on retention, and I think that that's of critical importance.
But I'd also like to see us focus a little bit on recruitment.
I think that our Federal Government needs to be entrepreneurial
in our approach to getting the best talent that we can, and
that means that we need to be cognizant of the fact that we're
competing against not only other government agencies but
against academia and against the private sector in recruiting
top scientific talent for our Federal workforce, so we need to
make sure that we've set the stage for success in that area.
Of particular concern to me is the fact that it takes 98
days to fully onboard a scientist into our Federal workforce
right now, and compared with private sector where I come from,
you know, that is shocking to me. You know, we can't be
surprised that we're failing to recruit the most talented and
the brightest people that are coming out of our universities
when our bureaucracy is that sluggish.
So I'm looking forward to hearing from the testimony of
our expert witnesses and looking forward to working with you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to ask unanimous
consent to speak.
Chairman Foster. Yes, granted.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much, and I appreciate this.
I would like for us also to keep in mind that during the period
of time that preceded this by a few years on a bipartisan basis
Republicans and Democrats changed processes, many of them,
including the NIH (National Institutes of Health) and how the
NIH not only gets its money but is able to make it mandatory as
opposed to discretionary and that there has been a substantial
amount of time and I believe progress that at least Chairman
Lucas and Mr. Perlmutter would recognize. We've not been
without understanding this challenge. We have made many
important things, but we also have the United States Air Force
using our government techniques, and they blew up 10 Titan
missiles, rockets, and we felt like we had to go to outside
sources, which really--the content and the technology exists
within America. It just may not be employed by the government.
And as an example of that is SpaceX, which is located in Waco,
Texas, which I represent. We have taken ideas from landing
capsules out in the middle of the Pacific to where they land on
the deck of a ship.
So, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, but I think it's
important for us to note this did not just happen. There has
been a lot of work that has been bipartisan that has included a
definite effort to make sure that we grew scientists and not
just those that work for the government. Thank you very much. I
yield back my time, sir.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I really concur with that.
You know, one of the proudest bipartisan achievements
particularly the last several years is that we've seen
proposals to really cut the Federal scientific budget, and
Republicans and Democrats have stood together to say no, that
this is--these things should be preserved. And that was one of
the--really the greatest bipartisan achievements of the recent
past.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning. I would like to begin by welcoming back
Chairman Foster as the Chairman of the Investigations &
Oversight Subcommittee for the 117th Congress, and by welcoming
Ranking Member Obernolte to the Subcommittee. I look forward to
working with both of you on a vigorous oversight agenda to
strengthen federal scientific research and promote the
advancement of American science and technology.
The subject of today's hearing is critically important for
the future of research and development in this country. Career
scientists in the Federal Government are instrumental in
shaping America's scientific priorities, funding cutting-edge
research, and ensuring that policies are crafted on the basis
of the best available science. These public servants frequently
dedicate their entire careers to essential scientific functions
as varied as supporting basic research, protecting clean air
and water, and preparing the country for outbreaks of
infectious disease. As a nation, we ignore them at our peril.
But in recent years, due to political and budgetary
pressures, the federal scientific workforce has struggled. Too
many career scientists have decided to leave. Fewer federal
scientists means less research, slower grant processes, less
mentoring for young scientists, and less specialized expertise.
It means less informed policymaking and weaker regulatory
enforcement. This is a problem for the agencies who employ
scientists, the academic and private-sector researchers who
work with them, and the American people, who benefit from their
knowledge and dedication. We need to understand the
implications of these staff departures for federal science
agencies so that we can properly address them.
Additionally, it is imperative that we continue to promote
greater diversity in the federal STEM workforce. Under my
leadership, this Committee has been a strong advocate for
increasing the opportunities available to women and communities
of color to enter STEM professions. It is vital for the future
of American science that the nation's scientific institutions
encourage greater participation among historically
underrepresented groups, because our strength lies in our
diversity and broader perspectives lead to better science. The
Federal Government must be a leader in this effort, and the
federal scientific workforce must reflect the diversity of the
country that it represents. Advancing diversity and inclusion
will be key to revitalizing the federal scientific workforce in
the years to come.
It is a longstanding priority of this Committee to
strengthen the scientific capabilities of the Federal
Government. A major part of those capabilities is a robust
scientific workforce. We must look for ways to boost the ranks
of career scientists, and to encourage scientists across the
country, from all regions and backgrounds, to join the effort.
I appreciate the work of our distinguished panelists in
furthering this goal, and I look forward to hearing your
perspectives.
Thank you. I yield back.

Chairman Foster. And now I'd like to introduce our
witnesses. Our first witness is Ms. Candice Wright. Ms. Wright
is an Acting Director of--at the GAO (Government Accountability
Office) and its Science and Technology Assessment and Analytics
Team. She oversees GAO's work on the management of federally
funded research, intellectual property protection, and
management and Federal efforts to help commercialize innovative
technologies and enhance the U.S. economic competitiveness. She
has also served as a congressional Detailee to the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs and as
the head of the GAO's office in Kabul, Afghanistan. Wow. You
know, people complain about being posted in Kansas City.
This--after Ms. Wright is Mr. Max Stier. Mr. Stier is
President and CEO (chief executive officer) of the Partnership
for Public Service, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization
dedicated to revitalizing our Federal Government--the workforce
of our Federal Government by inspiring a new generation to
serve. Previously, Mr. Stier worked in all three branches of
the Federal Government, including a clerk for Supreme Court
Justice David Souter. He is also currently a member of New York
State--the New York State Spending and Government Efficiency
Commission and the Brookings Institution's Public Sector
Leadership Advisory Board.
Our third witness is Dr. Andrew Rosenberg. Dr. Rosenberg
is the Director of the Center for Science and Democracy at the
Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS). He has more than 30 years
of experience in government service, as well as academic and
nonprofit leadership. Dr. Rosenberg has offered peer-reviewed
studies and reports on fisheries and ocean management and has
published in the--on the--at the intersection between science
and policymaking. He previously served as the Chief Scientist
at Conservation International, the Dean of Life Sciences at the
University of New Hampshire, and the Deputy Director for the
U.S. National Marine Fisheries Institute.
Our final witness is Dr. Betsy Southerland. Dr.
Southerland retired from her position as Director of the Office
of Science and Technology in the EPA's Office of Water in 2017
following a 33-year career with the agency. While at the EPA,
Dr. Southerland led the development of national regulations and
guidance manuals informed by science and through the--through
coordination with State environmental agencies, industry
representatives, and environmental groups. In 2015 Dr.
Southerland received the Distinguished Presidential Rank Award
for her career at the EPA.
And as our witnesses should know, you will each have 5
minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will
be included for the hearing. And when you all have completed
your spoken testimony, we will begin questions. Each Member
will have 5 minutes to question the panel. And so we will start
with Ms. Wright.

TESTIMONY OF MS. CANDICE WRIGHT, ACTING DIRECTOR,

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT, AND ANALYTICS,

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Wright. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Obernolte, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I'm pleased to be here today to
discuss the Federal science and technology workforce.
Agencies face the difficult task of keeping pace with
advances in science and technology. In our prior work, GAO has
seen how agencies often struggle to attract and retain a
workforce that meets their needs and positions them for the
future to address the complex social, economic, and security
challenges facing the country, not to mention the COVID-19
pandemic. Our long-standing concerns have led us to include
strategic human capital management in GAO's high-risk series
since 2001.
Today, I will highlight GAO's past work that can provide
insights in three key areas. First, workforce planning; second,
pay and hiring authorities; and third, the Federal work
environment. With regard to the first area, strengthening human
capital management, particularly for agencies with science and
technology missions, can help them build a highly diverse,
highly qualified and agile workforce. To successfully implement
their missions, agencies need to identify current skill gaps
and future needs in the workforce. They also need to select the
right human capital strategies to fill them.
However, our prior work has identified workforce strategic
planning challenges that agencies have not fully addressed. In
October 2019 we found that 18 of the 24 agencies we reviewed
had not fully implemented certain key workforce activities such
as establishing a workforce planning process or developing
strategies to address gaps in staffing. We recommended agencies
such as the National Science Foundation (NSF) fully implement
these activities, but not all agencies have done so.
We've also reported on NSF's use of rotators, who are
outside scientists and engineers on temporary assignment. We
made two recommendations aimed at improving NSF workforce
strategy for balancing its use of rotators with permanent
staff.
On the second area, improving Federal pay and hiring can
help agencies compete with employers in other sectors. Agencies
can tap an array of incentives when they need to recruit or
retain experts in fields such as cybersecurity, engineering, or
in other high-demand fields. Special payment authorities allow
agencies to pay higher wages, help pay off student loans, and
provide other incentives. In December 2017 we reported that
fewer than 6 percent of employees at 27 agencies reviewed
received special payments. Agencies reported that incentives
were helpful, but the extent of impacts was not known, and the
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) has not assessed how the
authorities help improve recruitment and retention. Similarly,
agencies have multiple hiring authorities but afford
flexibility in the hiring process.
In August 2016 we reported on 105 hiring authorities.
Among the most used authorities was direct hire, which allows
agencies to fill positions that have a severe candidate
shortage or a critical need such as for STEM personnel. OPM and
agencies have not analyze the effectiveness of such hiring
authorities. GAO made six recommendations to OPM to assess and
improve the use of pay and hiring authorities, and OPM is in
varying stages of implementation.
For the third area, our work has identified several
factors that, if left unaddressed, may negatively influence
agencies' ability to attract, hire, and retain a diverse,
highly skilled science and technology workforce. For example,
we reported last year that individuals who experience sexual
harassment at work are more likely to leave their jobs. We've
made recommendations to agencies to improve implementation of
their policies and procedures to prevent and address sexual
harassment both in their own workforce and also at the
university level as Federal research grant recipients can be
important part of the pipeline for the future Federal
workforce.
In April 2019 we reported that while selected agencies we
reviewed had taken various actions to help achieve the
objectives of their scientific integrity policies, additional
actions were needed. Here, we made 10 recommendations to six
agencies to address various issues, including developing
procedures to identify and address scientific integrity policy
violations.
In closing, science and technology is integral to how
agencies execute their mission. The Federal Government's
success in attracting, hiring, and retaining a world-class
science and technology workforce is tied to how it effectively
and strategically utilizes the wide range of available
authorities and other resources. As science and technology
continues to rapidly evolve, so too must the government's
recruitment and retention efforts. How the government responds
or doesn't to face its human capital challenges today will have
lasting effects for the future workforce it needs.
Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Obernolte, and Members of
the Subcommittee, this concludes my statement. I would be
pleased to respond to any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wright follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you very much for that. And thank
you for all the work that you and the GAO does, you know, every
year for us.
So reading over your written testimony earlier reminded me
of how important it is to have you around for--to lengthen the
attention span of the U.S. Congress.
And so next is Mr. Stier.

TESTIMONY OF MR. MAX STIER, PRESIDENT AND CEO,

PARTNERSHIP FOR PUBLIC SERVICE

Mr. Stier. Thank you, Chairman Foster and Ranking Member
Obernolte and all the Members of the Subcommittee. It is
tremendous to see the bipartisan approach that you've taken to
such a vital issue. Your Committee staff has done an
exceptional job at laying out the problem, and I thought I
would take my time to talk about why the problem exists and
offering a few recommendations about what you can do about it.
Starting with why the problem exists, if we don't
understand that in the right way, we'll never solve it. And
there are five big reasons that I would focus on in terms of
the problems that are facing recruiting and hiring top-tier
STEM talent begins with the fact that the Federal brand itself
has been damaged. Government shutdowns, hiring freezes,
negative rhetoric, political interference in science have all
tarnished that brand.
No. 2, opportunities for young people are hidden and
scarce. You can see this from one devastating statistic. Just 4
percent of new hires in the Federal Government are drawn from
Federal programs employing current students and recent
graduates. The talent doesn't know about the opportunities, and
therefore, they can't even pursue them.
No. 3 and really important, the hiring process is deeply
broken. The barriers to entry are many. I can take my entire 5
minutes and many more on this issue. One stat that has already
been cited is that it takes nearly 100 days to hire people on
average, which is more than double what you would see in the
private sector, but the barriers are way more diverse and
problematic than that.
And No. 4, very important here, even when people are hired
into the STEM field, we aren't retaining that talent once
recruited. The full-time employees under 30 who voluntarily
quit the Federal Government, nearly 3/4 of them have only been
there for 2 years. One of the key reasons for this is that
we're not creating an environment that is welcoming, that grows
them. We see that in our Best Places to Work employee
engagement scores, which are 15 points below in the Federal
Government than they are in the private sector.
And finally, clearly, diversity in STEM is a real issue in
the general workforce and a very prominent one in the Federal
Government itself. So now we need to do more than just admire
this problem. We need to actually do something about it. So
here are 10 quick ideas that I can extend on if they are
interested in the question-and-answer period.
No. 1, it begins with leadership. We need to create high
expectations of Federal leaders to own this problem, and that
includes in Congress the work that you're doing is fundamental.
We have a public sector leadership model. What does it look
like to be a leader in government, and I would advise that this
Committee and Congress more general hold executives to that
model. There's also in terms of accountability our Best Places
to Work rankings around effective leadership. And finally, I
would say we ultimately need to reduce the number of political
appointees, and that would make a big difference.
No. 2, we need to promote the government's mission, and
this is something that NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) has done very well as an example with their
custom-built career website that includes video stories and
great things that NASA people are doing. We have our Service to
America medals. We need to tell the stories that will then
encourage others to follow.
No. 3, we need to improve recruiting and hiring, again,
lots to be done here, but the beginning point is to enact the
civil service recommendations from the final report of the
National Commission on Military, National, and Public Service.
They did a tremendous job. That stuff is ready to go.
No. 4, we need to get young people in government, and one
of the key ways to do that is to have internships be the
primary mechanism of bringing them in. Government doesn't use
internships nearly enough, paid internships, and there's more
that can be done.
No. 5, we need to promote innovative talent models.
Partnership has the cyber talent initiative where we work with
several companies, MasterCard, Microsoft, Workday, and a dozen
Federal agencies to create a 2-year special fellowship for top
talent in cyber to come into government. Those kinds of special
channels work, and we need to invest in more of them.
No. 6, we need to overhaul the pay and classification
system. Think about it, the pay system we use today was
designed in 1949. No private sector company is in business
today operating under the same system as it did 70 years ago
with respect to compensation. It doesn't work.
No. 7, we need to invest in the H.R. workforce and create
a governmentwide STEM human capital strategy. It's one
government and yet it operates vertically, not good enough.
No. 8, we need to create a culture that embraces
technology, innovation, and collaboration. The pandemic has
created lots of innovation. It should serve as a future model
of how government can operate, lots to talk about there.
Nine, I mentioned DEI has to be a key part of this
workforce strategy: diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) at
all levels, including the leadership in government.
And number 10, we need your continued oversight. This
ought to be an annual hearing. We ought to learn from agencies
across the board, and you need to visit agencies and see what
they're doing. There's great things that are going on.
And finally, help with the government brand by telling
great stories about what's happening. Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stier follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. And thank you. And I think your--the last
thing--or second to last thing you said was spot on. The
importance of having Members of Congress visit the agencies,
you know, one of my biggest activities in Congress as the Co-
Chair of the National Labs Caucus where I drag Members of
Congress around to visit the Department of Energy national
labs, which is--you know, they are without exception just blown
away with the tremendous science that's being done there. And
equally important would be in-person visits to all of the
science operations in all of our Federal agencies, so I
definitely agree with that.
And so next is Dr. Rosenberg.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ANDREW ROSENBERG,

DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER FOR SCIENCE AND DEMOCRACY,

UNION OF CONCERNED SCIENTISTS

Dr. Rosenberg. Thank you, Chairman Foster and Ranking
Member Obernolte and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Andrew Rosenberg, and I direct the Center for Science and
Democracy at the Union of Concerned Scientists.
Federal scientists are on the frontlines of our Nation's
capability to respond to society's needs from forecasting
natural disasters to natural resource management to responding
to pandemics, and federally funded basic research that enables
scientific discovery and innovation is critical to economic
growth, employment, and sustainable development. All science-
based agencies from the Defense Department to NASA to the
Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Energy depend on a
strong, continuously renewed scientific workforce.
The last 4 years have seen a significant reduction in the
scientific workforce at many Federal agencies. Our report with
the Federal brain drain found that five of the seven agencies
we analyzed collectively lost more than 1,000 scientific staff.
Few agencies fared worse than the Environmental Protection
Agency. In the last 4 years EPA lost nearly 6 percent of its
workforce and more than 670 staff, including in regional
offices, especially in the West, Southwest, and Midwest.
For some agencies, growth stagnated. The CDC (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention) lost 187 scientific staff prior
to the pandemic. That's a loss of 2.2 percent. Now, we
recognize that demography was part of the driving force of this
loss, but the inflow of new talent was squeezed as well.
Fellowships were curtailed and recruitment was stagnant.
Morale matters, too, for retention, recruitment, and
productivity. We tracked more than 119 instances of attacks on
science during the Trump Administration, far outnumbering
previous Administrations. When we surveyed more than 4,000
Federal scientists in 2018, 80 percent of respondents said they
noticed workforce reductions and nearly 90 percent reported
that these losses made it difficult to fulfill their missions.
And at the EPA fewer than 15 percent of surveyed scientists
reported their morale is excellent or good.
In January, the Biden Administration issued a key
memorandum on restoring trust to government agencies through
scientific integrity and evidence-based policymaking. That's an
important step for restoring morale but more is needed.
Representative Tonko has reintroduced the Scientific Integrity
Act, which would codify in statute the prevention of political
interference or manipulation of scientific evidence.
The Administration and Congress need to rebuild and
strengthen Federal science--scientific capacity, diversify the
scientific workforce, and revitalize the pipeline that brings
early career scientists into civil service. Specifically,
increasing fellowship programs such as the management--
Presidential Management Fellowship, the STAR, the Sea Grant,
the Oak Ridge programs bring new talent to agencies, but they
have been curtailed and need to expand again.
New fellowship programs should be created that tackle
other science-related issues such as climate change or equity
in environmental justice. And to diversify the workforce,
agencies must also ensure that recruitment is broader and
compensation resources and benefits for fellows are sufficient
for those with economic challenges, not just the privileged
few.
Recruitment must reach new audiences and counteract the
tendency for hiring managers to recruit from a known set of
institutions again and again. Every effort should be made to
recruit by hosting far more events at historically Black,
Hispanic, and tribal institutions. The Administration must
learn from private and nonprofit sectors about recruiting
tools. Job fairs and other techniques must target a wider array
of institutions than in the past and account for historical
disparities in recruitment and hiring. And agencies must learn
to work effectively with institutions unaccustomed to steering
students toward civil service. If you want to see how outdated
the recruitment system is, just have a look at USA Jobs, the
website that we currently use.
Reaching scientific capacity quickly will require not only
recruiting and hiring to fill vacancies but also re-engaging
with those that have retired from Federal service to regain
lost knowledge, experience, and expertise. Federal agencies
must train mid- and senior-level scientists in leadership of
diverse staffs. Effective science leaders and mentors are not
necessarily those who publish the most papers or have been in
service the longest. These are learned skills critical for the
effectiveness of any enterprise. And young scientists today are
used to changing jobs and career paths frequently, so the civil
service must evolve accordingly. More extensively utilizing
programs for rotating assignments, remote work, joint
appointments, and joint institutes increases career
flexibility.
I appreciate the opportunity to share my views, and I'd be
happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Rosenberg follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. I have to unmute. Thank you. And next is
Dr. Southerland.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ELIZABETH SOUTHERLAND,

FORMER DIRECTOR OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,

OFFICE OF WATER, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Dr. Southerland. Thank you. Chairman and Ranking Member
and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, I had the
privilege of working at EPA from 1984 until August of 2017.
With my Ph.D. in environmental sciences and engineering, I
worked first as a scientist and then as a manager of scientists
in the EPA's water and superfund programs. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
While I know that EPA currently has a dedicated team of
knowledgeable, highly qualified career professionals, today's
staffing levels are the lowest they have been in 30 years. In
addition, several hundred career scientists have reported over
the past 2 years that their research findings were altered or
suppressed for other than technical reasons.
As a result, I believe the complex environmental
challenges of the 21st century cannot be successfully addressed
unless Congress and the Administration work together to
significantly increase EPA's staff levels, and EPA leadership
rebuilds the morale of the workforce.
Since my retirement, I've been a member of the
Environmental Protection Network, a bipartisan organization of
EPA alumni volunteering their time to protect the integrity of
EPA and its mission. I am here, however, in my personal
capacity.
EPA has experienced years of declining resources with
significant loss of buying power and reductions in staff
despite the fact that congressionally mandated responsibilities
have increased substantially over that time. In terms of
inflation-adjusted dollars, Administrator Regan will have 1/2
the resources that the agency had in 1980.
In 2013 and 2014 the Obama Administration gave early out
retirements to certain senior scientists in order to reduce
grade levels and the dollars for full-time equivalent (FTE)
employees. EPA had not backfilled all of those vacated
positions when the Trump Administration began. Former President
Trump requested huge cuts in the agency staff every year, and
his administrators did not authorize any significant hiring
until 2020. By 2020, over 670 career scientists had left EPA.
While Congress rejected President Trump's requested budget
cuts, the Agency's appropriations were basically flatlined
during these 4 years, further exacerbating the decline in
buying power.
I can tell you from personal experience that managers and
staff in the EPA are doing everything they can to compensate
for the critically low staff levels, while also struggling with
out-of-date information technology and lack of cutting-edge
scientific equipment.
The lack of staff and resources has forced EPA to focus
primarily on those rules with statutory or court-ordered
deadlines. Rules without deadlines, no matter how important for
public health and environmental protection, are often postponed
for years or take years to propose and promulgate. One recent
example of such a delayed rule is the Safe Drinking Water Act's
lead and copper rule, which was not updated for almost 30
years, despite the high risk lead poses to our children.
In order to fully restore the workforce, the new
Administration should work with Congress to get agreement on a
4-year goal to rebuild EPA's budget to its 40-year average
level. This goal would represent a 40 percent increase from
2021 funding levels.
Another key opportunity to restore the workforce is for
the new EPA leadership to reinstate the collaborative working
relationship with career staff that was lost during the Trump
Administration. The new leaders should also move quickly to
identify priority hires for entry-level and senior-level
scientists, to use all available authorities to speed hiring,
and invest in a hiring campaign over multiple years that's
focused on hiring 1,000 of the best, brightest, diverse STEM
graduates. They must also strengthen staff development and
strengthen partnerships with EPA bargaining units.
In conclusion, it is my hope Congress will take concrete
steps to provide the necessary funds to rebuild the staff and
core programs and to support critical new initiatives
addressing climate change and environmental justice. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Southerland follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Well, thank you. Thank you all. And at
this point we'll begin our first round of questions. So the
Chair will recognize himself for 5 minutes.
Before we get started, I have statements here from the
American Federation of Government Employees, Local 3403,
representing NSF employees in STEM fields, and from the Climate
Science Legal Defense Fund to be entered into the hearing
record. Without objection, so ordered.
I guess, you know, I concur with, I guess, all of our
witnesses here that the Federal Government needs to embrace a
more innovative and proactive approach in hiring and
recruitment efforts, especially for young and diverse
scientists. You know, there are really I think a real hunger
among this generation of scientists coming out of the--our
educational system to do something in public service. And
they're--they really--you know, this is something I've had many
discussions with about--professors. They said you should have a
job fair or something like that to--you know, just to make this
generation of scientists aware of the really tremendous
opportunities.
And I think it's also underappreciated how influential an
excellent scientist can be with a career at least partly in the
Federal science oversight business because you have--you know,
you have a tremendous influence that's not often appreciated
even by the scientific community. And so this is really for--I
guess for everyone on the panel. And how can things like job
fairs enhance fellowship programs, streamline hiring
procedures, and reduction of bureaucratic obstacles? What are
the most promising initiatives here to really accelerate the
rebuilding of the scientific workforce?
Mr. Stier, it looked like you were full of ideas here, so
we'll start with you.
Mr. Stier. You're very kind. Chairman Foster, I think it's
an excellent question, and my advice would be to not think
about this as an individual intervention but rather think about
a comprehensive strategy. The reality is is the system is
breaking down along multiple points, and unless you actually
deal with the full set of system failings, you'll wind up maybe
improving the situation but ultimately running into another
barrier simply further down the pike.
So absolutely career fairs are great if they're done at
the right time. Oftentimes, Government comes in the spring
rather than the fall when a lot of talent is actually thinking
about what they want to do. But if the people coming to those
fairs or even people more broadly at the university haven't
been introduced to the opportunities that exist in government,
if they're instead thinking about a brand that has been
tarnished, then you haven't helped yourself a lot. If the
process of hiring is so difficult that even if they're
interested once they get to the career fair they're turned
away, that's a big problem. If they ultimately get hired and
they leave quickly, then you simply created a bad brand for the
broader set of peers that they have.
So I think it's really important to be comprehensive in
thinking about how to put your arms around this problem and to
see it as a governmentwide issue for the STEM occupations and
to create that governmentwide strategy that individual agencies
can participate in but that they can collaborate in. Certainly,
there are things you can do in the meanwhile, but I think if
you really want to move the needle and recognizing the world is
changing, you need to actually address all those pain points
along the lifecycle of bringing talent in and keeping it.
Chairman Foster. Yes. Dr. Rosenberg?
Dr. Rosenberg. I certainly agree with that. I also think
that we sometimes--we hurt ourselves with the rhetoric that's
used around working for the Federal Government. It is really
public service, and you get to do great science with great
colleagues, but we need to help people understand that it
really is a public service job. You are serving the country.
I also think we sometimes hurt ourselves by implying that
there is a reduced pipeline. There actually isn't a reduced
pipeline, and it is very diverse, but we don't recruit fully
from that pipeline. So I mentioned recruiting from minority-
serving institutions, for example. There are literally
thousands of engineers, you know, Black engineers--we work with
the Society for Black Engineers who work with a lot of
historically Black colleges and universities. There are many,
many highly trained engineers and other STEM fields across the
country, but we're not reaching them because we go back to the
same places to look for staff over and over and over again.
And then, as the Ranking Member noted, our recruitment
methods and onboarding procedures are really archaic. And I
know this as a government management from years ago. I also
know it from my students when I was in academia subsequent to
that. You know, the mechanisms for bringing people onboard
erect so many barriers that by the time a real offer is in
place, then they've had other offers if they're really
excellent talent and really want to move forward.
So a lot of these are self-inflicted wounds. It's not
because there aren't people. There is a very diverse workforce
that we could bring onboard. It's just we're not doing it
effectively.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I guess my time is up, so
I'll now recognize Mr. Obernolte for 5 minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much. And thank you to
all of our witnesses. This has been a fascinating discussion.
My first question is for Dr. Rosenberg. In your testimony
you implied a causal relationship between the policies of the
Trump Administration and the declines in scientific staffing at
the EPA. And you mentioned the statistic that the scientific
workforce at the EPA declined by 3.9 percent during the Trump
Administration, but looking at a broader set of statistics,
between 2009 and 2020, the scientific workforce at the EPA
declined by about 16.6 percent. So on an annualized basis,
those declines were higher during the Obama Administration than
they were during the Trump Administration.
Now, I don't find that comforting. I find that alarming
because that tells me that this wasn't an isolated incident
just tied to the policies of one Administration. This is a
long-term trend. So, I mean, do you share that concern? Is this
isolated or is this long-term trend that we need to be
concerned with?
Dr. Rosenberg. Well, I do share the concern that it's a
long-term trend, and I did only very briefly mention the role
of demographics in the staffing at agencies. So several things
have happened at once, and I firmly believe that the policies
of the Trump Administration, if you like, harmed the brand in
those terms. But we also have many scientists of my generation
if you like--I'm going to be 66 in a month or so--that are
going to leave the workforce anyway. The question is do you
replace them or do you replace them only with contractors? And
so many previous Administrations have shifted to using contract
staff. And while that in some cases can be efficient and it
might be short-term cost-effective, it actually doesn't help
build the strength of an agency to do the long-term work
because contractors are always looking for the next opportunity
or more permanence. And so this is a long-term trend with
multiple factors involved.
Now, the Trump Administration isn't the only
Administration that has had challenges on certain issues
related to things like scientific integrity, the ability of
scientists to do their work without political manipulation or
censorship, but it was a more extreme circumstance. So all of
those combining factors I think are things that need to be
addressed to try to stabilize and improve the workforce. Now,
that doesn't mean that every scientist coming in will be a 30-
year Federal employee because that's not the way people go into
their jobs these days. So we need to think of alternative ways
for people to move in and out of government. And I happen to be
one person who has moved in and out of government, and it's
possible but difficult.
Mr. Obernolte. Great. Thank you. I completely agree with
you.
And just following up on that, a question for Mr. Stier.
You said something that I found absolutely fascinating about
how we need to rebuild the Federal brand and make sure that our
Federal branding is helping us recruit the talent that we need
to. And I think Dr. Rosenberg just mentioned something along
that same line. So I kind of think that we miss out sometimes
on the opportunity to, as Dr. Rosenberg said, play up the fact
that we are in the business of public service, so in addition
to being able to do great science, we get the opportunity to
serve our fellow constituent, you know, in ways that are
impossible to do in academia and in the private sector.
So I just wanted to give you the balance of my time to
talk about how we might go about restoring that brand and
burnishing that brand because I think it's extremely important.
Mr. Stier. Thank you so much, and I think you're 100
percent right. If you look at the data, our Best Places to Work
rankings, what you'll see, as I mentioned earlier, that
relative to the private sector, the employee engagement scores
are on average 15 points lower in the Federal Government than
they are in the private sector. But if you look at the mission
commitment, it's the one place where the Federal workforce
wherever you are, NASA, NOAA, NIST (National Institute of
Standards and Technology), it just beats the private sector
in--with a very big margin.
The government has something very special, and it's the
reasons why you're all here as well is the ability to serve the
American public, purpose, mission, and that mission is really
the basis for an incredible value proposition. If you wanted--
you look at, bluntly, the contractor firms, they try to present
their mission as what the government should be doing. You're
serving the American public, that's why you're here and on and
on. So the government is not utilizing its core value
proposition, and it needs to do that in a concentrated way. And
part of the way it can do that is by telling the story of its
own workforce. You think about the amazing people helping the
American public in extraordinary ways, innovative ways. Those
stories don't go out to the public. They don't even go out to
the broader workforce inside the Federal Government. We do not
have a recognition culture in government. There's a lot of
infrastructure to find a problem, not a lot of infrastructure
to find the good things. You actually build more strength and
deal with your weaknesses if you have an upside and if you
create that recognition culture. So that's where I would begin.
Begin from the core strength around mission and around the
achievements of the people that are there. Stories matter, and
the government has a lot of them that we need to tell better.
Mr. Obernolte. Right, thank you. I completely agree. And
just to tie into my opening, I think we need to be more
entrepreneurial in our approach to recruiting top talent. We
are never going to be able to compete in terms of salary with
institutions in the private sector, but we do have a unique
advantage in the mission that we fulfill, and I think that's
why we're all in government is this desire to serve our fellow
man.
So I want to thank you to all of our witnesses. It's been
a fascinating discussion.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I will now recognize our
colleague from Colorado, Mr. Perlmutter, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. And the Ranking
Member, I appreciate the comments of both of you. And just a
point, Mr. Obernolte said, you know, competition against the
private sector, competition against academia, there's also
competition with foreign governments. And we can't forget that.
And I'll get back to that in a second.
But my first question is to you, Director Wright and to
you, Dr. Rosenberg. You talked about contractors. And in my
area we have the National Renewable Energy Lab, we have NIST
labs, we have all sorts of labs, and we've seen the contractor
population really grow. Is there a reason for that in terms of
the law or what is it that's driving this move from civilian
employment to contractor employment if you could? And start
with you, Director Wright.
Ms. Wright. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Perlmutter. So I would say that, you know, with regard to
contractors, there could certainly be a more lucrative
opportunity financially that they may see, you know, working in
a contracting--contractor environment rather than in the
Federal Government.
You know, our work certainly has shown, you know, that you
really have to have good practices in place to retain employees
so that they will feel a commitment to the mission, commitment
to the work, and not necessarily, you know, just be focused on
the financial aspects. You know, there is certainly the
opportunity to really hone in on what the function of the
government's mission is for the employees, and they might then,
you know, consider Federal employment rather than, you know,
pursuing opportunities with a contractor.
But I think Dr. Rosenberg had touched on the contractor
issue, so I'll defer to him for additional comments.
Mr. Perlmutter. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Rosenberg. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I
think there's a number of factors at play. Every Administration
that I've been involved in, which is, you know, the last--going
back to the first Bush Administration when I was in Federal
Government beginning my Federal service--has wanted to be able
to point to statistics showing that they've decreased the size
of government. And one way you do that is you have fewer full-
time employees but you replace them with contractors. And so
there's a political reason here I would say, although you're a
better judge of that than I am.
There also is a reason around the concern for pension
obligations of course and for flexibility in staff as budgets
go up and down, and so stability and agency budgets is an
important part of this as well.
And more importantly every other sector, including the
nonprofit sector and certainly the for-profit sector, is sort
of thinking about jobs as what are the things that we need to
do and we know we're going to need to do tomorrow and we're
going to need to do in the long-term, and what are those things
that are shorter-term and we need more flexibility to do them?
And the government often doesn't do that.
So you hire more contractors at places like national labs
and within the agencies even for long-term tasks because you're
not allowed to bring on full-time employees under the hiring
system because of the way that budgets are constructed and FTEs
are allocated. And that does cause real problems because those
scientists are going to look for more stable opportunities, and
I know many young scientists who come in as contractors, and
that unfortunately is their situation. They're always looking
elsewhere.
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. Thank you. Let me ask one more
question of Mr. Stier. I noticed that you worked for Jim Leach,
and then you clerked for a Judge of the Second Circuit and the
Supreme Court and you also touted internships. So do you want
to expand on why you think internships or clerkships are
important for recruiting talent?
Mr. Stier. Absolutely. And if I could for 2 seconds I just
want to add that on the contractor point it's often a
workaround. If the hiring system is broken, the only way you
can get your talent is through contracting. It's obviously not
the right motivation, but it's really important to understand
that so much in government is about working around a crazy
system, and this is an example of it.
Internships, to your question, is a very important issue.
If you look at any knowledge-based organization in our country,
they get their entry talent primarily through internships.
That's true whether it's in the law like you just mentioned.
It's true if you work on the Hill. It's true if you're an
economist. It's true everywhere. That's not true in the
executive branch, and that's a big problem. By and large,
interns are not seen as a core piece or the core piece of the
entry pipeline in the Federal Government, and if anything, the
number of folks that are converting from internships into full-
time employees has been--is being reduced.
Some of this has to do with the fact that, again, leaders
don't own this, they don't see it as their responsibility, and
as a result, they're not focused on the longer-term pipeline
that they ought to be paying attention to. Some of it is just
bad rules.
Mr. Perlmutter. Mr. Stier, sorry, my time is expired. I
appreciate--I'm going to probably send you a note wanting you
to expand on the internships. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for that
extra time. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we will now recognize our
colleague from Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much,
interesting discussion. I don't believe I have a different
perspective than any of the other Members here, nor do I think
I have a different perspective, but I'd like to throw some
things in that simply acknowledge the parameters that we've
been talking about. I am well aware that we either made a
mistake or we did not when we made the R&D (research and
development) tax credit permanent. That meant that companies
that could not count on their R&D budget being a part of their
regular write-off as an expense changed overnight, and
companies began hiring long-term employees. That competed
against a lot of universities, against a lot of medical
institutions because the Federal Government does not in my
opinion pay anything that would be an end-of-year bonus that
competes with stock options or other things that other people
provide.
My point is is that we've got institutions, medical
institutions, we've got other areas, universities that just
bust their hump to get what they need. And the numbers of
people that are out there who are qualified is the issue.
And that's why I think, as I recall Ed, Dr. Bera, perhaps
you, too, have been involved in science-based projects back in
junior and senior high levels, Odyssey of the Mind, these robot
competitions, things that bring people to science in 7th, 8th,
9th, 10th grade with equivalent feel-good success stories that
continued them through this process.
My son, who's now 31, went to one of the leading-edge
institutions, private school, was a 35 out of 36 and was about
midrange of his class. A number of people just--was a great
school. He's the only one that chose to go into medicine.
Everybody else chose to go where they could make money.
And so the opportunities that we need to understand I
think, yes, they're in internships. I do agree with that, but
we also I think need to robustly have, Mr. Chairman, someone
who can tell us about the pipeline, about the pipeline of the
types of contests--yes, I said that word, but they might be
generated through competitions that bring these leading-edge
people to want to build something better and see what the
competition is through--and some of it is just double E,
electrical sciences, but I think we ought to hear from people
who also do understand the pipeline, junior high, high school,
but, you know, I also think that, as I went to the labs in New
Jersey, I was on the hiring team, and I'll just tell you, we
went to University of Chicago, we went to MIT (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology), and we went to Caltech, and we honed
our science of what we were after. And I think that these
institutions produce leading-edge people. We just need more
people in the pipeline.
So I don't know if anybody, Elizabeth, you may have
something on there. Andrew, you may have that--the young
doctors that are here, but I really want to focus on the
pipeline. Yes, we need to do a better job with the internships,
but we really need to build the number of people who want
science as opposed to us grinding each other down on the few
that we get. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll let panel take the
remaining 2 seconds that I have.
Chairman Foster. It seems like 40 seconds are sort of de
rigueur here, so if anyone wants to grab 40 seconds, that's
legit. All right. Dr. Rosenberg.
Dr. Rosenberg. Thank you. And thank you for the question.
I actually think that the pipeline is much bigger than people
appreciate, but as you noted, Congressman, the--you know, if
you go to the University of Chicago and MIT and Caltech and you
keep going back to those places, you're only looking at a
limited portion of the people who actually do STEM work.
On the other hand, you know, Texas Southern has great
engineering and science programs. All of the Houston schools
actually, you know, train scientists. But many agencies and
many scientists only go back to the places they know repeatedly
or the places that they were trained, and that's a very natural
tendency. But--and I've seen it in every institution that I've
worked in. But it does us a disservice when you're trying to
expand the opportunity for candidates across a much broader set
of institutions to think that it's only the elite institutions
that are training people who could do the job, and so that's
part of it.
Chairman Foster. I think the 40 seconds of forbearance are
sufficient.
Dr. Rosenberg. OK. Sorry. Sorry.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. I'll now recognize our
colleague from California, Dr. Bera, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bera. Great, thanks, Mr. Chairman. And this is
fascinating and certainly a long-term challenge. You know, one
idea that we've toyed with and, you know, as we think about the
debate that's taking place around student debt and whether you
retire student debts, I've always thought that, you know,
instead of just retiring that student debt and forgiving it, we
ought to use that as a mechanism to try to get folks to serve,
whether that's, you know, coming to work in the Federal
Government fulfilling critical needs or going out and doing
service, you know, through some other mechanism like the Peace
Corps, AmeriCorps, or other programs. And, you know, again, I
don't know that we get any benefit of just forgiving $50,000 of
loans or $100,000 of loans, but if we could get someone to come
fill a critical need and perhaps they work for 4 years and you
forgive $50,000 or $100,000 of loans. By that time they have
seen what they can do in the Federal Government. You know,
they're accruing retirement, they're doing some things, and
hopefully you can get a cohort of those young Americans to
continue to stay and consider a career in the Federal
Government. So that's one thing. And I think we ought to work
on that as a Subcommittee perhaps to address this critical need
and, you know, do something in a bipartisan way.
The second piece that, you know, we've thought a lot about
is there is a talented workforce that has been serving our
country in the military and in our armed services often doing
high-level skills perhaps without a degree, but they're
operating, you know, doing cybersecurity work, et cetera.
They've learned on the job. When they leave the military, the
challenge sometimes is we don't actually recognize and put a
value on that skill set. I know most closely in the medical
workforce where if folks are operating as EMTs (emergency
medical technicians) and--but they don't actually have that
formal degree, so now they come out, we don't actually provide
a value to that. We may ask them to go back and get a 4-year
college degree so then they can enter the workforce. I think it
behooves us to think about ways to take some of these folks as
they're exiting military service perhaps to figure out how to
value that, bring them into government service, you know,
provide some training while they, you know, continue to work,
and I think that's also another potential pipeline of folks
that, you know, have already demonstrated a commitment to
serving the country and now, you know, we could do them a
service by giving them a job, getting them--and perhaps while
they're working, continue to upskill them.
I guess, you know, to any of the panelists, you know,
thoughts on, you know, whether the idea of student loan
forgiveness, should----
Ms. Wright. So----
Mr. Bera. I guess Mr. Stier if you want to----
Ms. Wright. OK.
Mr. Bera [continuing]. You know, take that.
Mr. Stier. Ms. Wright, do you want to go first, and then
I'll go after you?
Ms. Wright. OK. So I was just going to note that,
certainly, the student loan repayment is one of the pay
authorities that agencies are using, and they do say that
it's--you know, in our work we've heard from agencies that they
do say that it is working well. What we don't know is the
extent to which it's working in terms of how long--you know,
what does it say about how long people will stay at the agency,
and so that's something that we've called on OPM to, you know,
look at the effectiveness of these various pay authorities and
to understand the extent to which it is working and making an
impact in recruitment and retention.
Mr. Stier. So just to follow up on Ms. Wright's comments
there, there is authority. Agencies use it very unevenly and in
my view not nearly enough. There's clearly more work, as Ms.
Wright [inaudible] understand how effective is, but anecdotally
we're seeing that this is a major deal for talent to be able to
have their debt forgiven and by and large, again, there are
very few agencies that use it to the extent they could.
If you want to think about this even more ambitiously,
you--I think there is room to create a program like the ROTC
(Reserve Officers' Training Corps) program that the military
has for the civilian side where you're actually getting talent
to come in with that service payoff commitment. You're helping
them pay for their education while they're getting it with the
expectation then that they will come serve their country in the
government. And we've done a bunch of work around this and
would love to talk to you if you're interested in that as a
concept.
Mr. Bera. Absolutely. We will follow up on that.
So anyone else in the last 18 seconds? Dr. Rosenberg?
Dr. Rosenberg. Yes, I would just point out that many
students that I talk to would like to go into public service,
are more interested in the academic sector, which has become
less attractive. And they want to do--you know, work for
government because they want to make a difference, and it--you
know, money is important, but there are huge barriers
particularly for lower-income students to doing so, not only
student loans but the ability to--for compensation on things
like internships and fellowships, and that actually needs to be
addressed so that you can, again, diversify the workforce but
also just a bigger talent pool of people who can actually
afford to take these opportunities.
Mr. Bera. Great, thank you, Chair, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And we will now recognize the
Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr. Lucas from Oklahoma,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Wright, in your
testimony you note that in October of 2020 GAO reported that
various factors such as unclear job application processes, long
wait lines for job offers have been identified as contributing
to the Federal Government's workforce deficiencies in certain
areas and job categories. Can you please elaborate on these
findings and how they relate to the USA Jobs portal?
Ms. Wright. Certainly, happy to take that question,
Congressman. So I would say with regard to USA Jobs, it's
certainly something that many people would say isn't the most
user-friendly experience, and GAO actually did work, as you
noted last year, looking at what steps OPM is taking to improve
the website.
Certainly, a couple of things that we identified is that
they have really taken a step looking toward looking at using
data analytics, using web analytics I should say to understand
where their users are coming from but also, too, putting in
place different features that would allow you to understand--
allow the applicant, I should say, to understand, you know,
what the status is of their application because that was
something that they were getting a lot of calls on.
There are other things that OPM is considering to help
improve the experience with USA Jobs, which would include, you
know, letting applicants know how many other applicants have
applied and then also notifying applicants when jobs have been
filled, so that's something that they're continuing to work on
for the future. They recognize it's a problem, and are taking
steps to try to improve the system.
Mr. Lucas. Is it true that sometimes it can take an
average of 90 days or more for new hires to be onboarded?
Ms. Wright. We've certainly heard those average
timeframes. I think one of the challenges is sort of
understanding when one starts the clock for estimating the
onboarding time. One of the things that we've heard is that is
consistently a challenge is--and contributes to the delays are
security clearances. That's something that GAO has reported on,
you know, quite a bit in terms of the challenges with getting
personnel security clearances on time, and we can see where
that is contributing to delays in onboarding.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Stier, can you provide some insights on how
this may be discouraging especially to recent graduates and
early career researchers just entering the workforce?
Mr. Stier. Yes, absolutely, I think it is a massive
problem, and it's not only the time to hire which you've
identified and it's a big problem. Great talent is going to
have options, and they're going to take the option that is
easier for them and more available than wait, especially when
they don't know how long it's going to take. So there's no
doubt that the government is losing out on a lot of talent.
I would note that there are other problems beyond that,
including the fact that 90 percent of the job searches involve
simply the review of self-reported qualifications or the
resume, not actual subject matter experts looking at their
resumes and talking to people to determine if they are in fact
best qualified for the jobs. And then 50 percent of the
searches wind up getting sent back and never even actually
used. This is a deeply broken problem. The front door of USA
Jobs is the starting point, but then there are a series of
issues where this process breaks down that also have to be
addressed.
Mr. Lucas. So it's fair to say that some of the brightest
people in the country who may very well have many job
opportunities, potential choices become essentially frustrated
even at the very beginning, let alone before they become a part
of the Federal process.
Mr. Stier. Absolutely.
Mr. Lucas. I can see why that would be so discouraging.
Staying with you, Mr. Stier, for a moment, I know we
discussed a variety of topics this morning, but you acknowledge
that internships are a critical component of the talent
pipeline and confirm that Federal agencies should strategically
recruit and hire college students, but you also emphasize the
benefits of reaching future scientists earlier in their lives.
Can you touch for a moment about how STEM education and
exposure to the work of Federal scientists provides fundamental
experiences for students at an early age, perhaps maybe even in
elementary school?
Mr. Stier. Sure. And I think Congressman Sessions had it
absolutely right that, you know, there is definite need for the
Federal Government to do better in its recruiting and retaining
top STEM talent, and we need to increase the pipeline more
broadly for our country writ large. And the way you do that is
starting earlier.
I would say the role model here is NASA. You know, you
hear from Charlie Bolden. You know, he participated--former
NASA Administrator for 8 years, astronaut. He did stuff early
on in his education. It's the way that the best-in-class
organizations actually encourage and improve their brand is to
touch people very early on, and there are great ways for the
Federal Government to do that.
Mr. Lucas. I'd say thank you to all of our witnesses, and
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And the Chair will now
recognize my colleague from Illinois, Mr. Casten, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you to my colleague from Illinois and
our Chairman, and thank you so much to our panelists.
The--Dr. Rosenberg, I want to start with you and
specifically about a report that UCS did in 2018 in part
because it jibed so closely with my own experience in
conversations with a lot of EPA staff. You have a report that
was detailing the crisis of morale in certain Federal
scientific agencies and specifically if I got this right nearly
1/3 of the respondents at EPA felt that, quote, ``influences of
political appointees in your agency or department or the
influence of the White House were the greatest barriers to
making science-based decisions at that agency.'' And it seemed
to have a pretty clear impact on morale. In 2018 less than 15
percent of EPA scientists surveyed by UCS indicated that their
morale was excellent or even good, and that compared with
nearly 40 percent who felt that way in 2007. As I mentioned,
that was extremely consistent with the conversation I had--
conversations I had informally with folks at EPA.
Could you just chat a bit with us about how scientific
integrity violations and the politicization of science have
contributed to staffing losses at those agencies, and I guess
on a more optimistic side how a scientific integrity statute
could help in retaining good scientists?
Dr. Rosenberg. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
And you very accurately cited our survey results. And I should
point out that we've been surveying Federal scientists for many
years now. This was not a one-off efforts in 2018, and so we
had the ability and have published the comparisons to previous
surveys.
A couple of things happened. Certainly, the politicization
of science was a concern with reports being altered or
censored, and I think Dr. Southerland can speak to that very
directly particularly at the EPA but not exclusively at the
EPA. You may have seen the report yesterday that in an
investigation at the CDC at least three major reports during
the course of the pandemic were altered by political appointees
or outside actors during the course of the pandemic that
related to things such as school opening. But at the EPA either
science was completely sidelined or censored or manipulated. It
became a recurrent problem. And the second part of that problem
was that for many decisions, the career professionals were not
even in the room, were not even involved in the decisionmaking
on some of the issues that we worked on. And I can see Dr.
Southerland nodding, and she may want to expand on that.
So scientific integrity policies, if they are strengthened
and codified in statute, can actually give scientists a way to
ensure that their scientific evidence will not be politically
manipulated. And while that's been articulated by the
Presidential memorandum, it's not codified in statute right
now, and so it could be backed away from in many cases or is
less--carries less weight than if the Scientific Integrity Act
went through. So that gives scientists more assurance that the
work that they do will actually be--present--the evidence that
they gather will actually be presented as scientific evidence,
not be manipulated for other reasons. Now, lots of other things
go into decisionmaking, but you shouldn't manipulate the
scientific evidence to justify a decision.
Mr. Casten. So I know we're short on time, so let me put
this--and I know that you have given a few shoutouts to Dr.
Southerland, so let me just put this to either one of you who
would like to answer. We need to atone for the sins of the
past, but we also have to deal with the realities of where we
are. And as we think about how to restore this workforce--and,
again, my own experience is that, you know, we lost some good
and senior talent. So how much of what we need to do going
forward is attracting people back when they have left the
agency early versus bringing new people in to fill those slots?
And what does that mean? Because preparing for the workforce of
the future is of course a little bit different than attracting
people back who are late career stages. And if--I'm just
curious if either of you have any comment about which of those
you think is more important to prioritize given the set of
cards we have dealt however much we may not like----
Dr. Southerland. So I think I'm finally unmuted by the
host. I'm having a lot of trouble with verbal. I think the
important thing will be to get the new employees. What we can
do with people who have left is we have the ability to bring
them on even as temporary mentors or part-time employees that
can help restore the institutional knowledge at the Agency. But
I think the real emphasis needs to be to get us new, qualified
young people who can really revitalize the mission.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And as we bring this to a
close, I'd like to recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Obernolte,
for some brief closing comments.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
all four of our panelists. This has been an incredibly helpful
discussion. I think we all share a unified belief that we need
to enhance the role of scientists in our Federal workforce and
to create an environment that is welcoming to them and that can
be successfully competitive against the other entities that are
seeking to hire this talent as it comes out of our schools and
universities. So let's definitely continue this discussion as
things move forward. I think there are lots of excellent ideas
raised here today, we stand with you unified ready to try and
implement some policy changes that will help us enhance the
competitiveness of the Federal Government in that respect. So
thank you, everyone. Happy St. Patrick's Day.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I'd like to reiterate our
thanks to the--to our witnesses, you know, not only for your
verbal testimony but the really high-quality written testimony,
as well as the documents that they referred to. I confess I
stayed up way too late last night reading your written
testimony, and, you know, I commend it to my colleagues and
their staff really because this is something that Congress and
this Committee is going to have to come back to repeatedly,
that when we hopefully come up with a plan to double the
overall scientific effort, that that is accompanied by a plan
to overcome the near-term emergency issues, as well as the
structural changes to ensure that we have the strongest
possible scientific workforce in our--for our government.
So I thank you all again, and before--and so the record
will remain open for 2 weeks for additional statements from
Members for any additional questions to the Committee that they
may have for our witnesses. The witnesses are excused, and the
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the Subcommittee was
adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Mr. Max Stier
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Andrew Rosenberg
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Report submitted by Representative Bill Foster
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statements submitted by Representative Bill Foster
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Report submitted by Dr. Andrew Rosenberg
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
