- EXAMINING R&D PATHWAYS TO SUSTAINABLE AVIATION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING R&D PATHWAYS
TO SUSTAINABLE AVIATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 24, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-6

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
43-797PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
JERRY McNERNEY, California           PETE SESSIONS, Texas
PAUL TONKO, New York                 DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                MIKE GARCIA, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
DON BEYER, Virginia                  YOUNG KIM, California
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAY OBERNOLTE, California
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                 VACANCY
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. DON BEYER, Virginia, Chairman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              BRIAN BABIN, Texas,
AMI BERA, California                     Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MO BROOKS, Alabama
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BILL POSEY, Florida
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          YOUNG KIM, California

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 24, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Don Beyer, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    16

Witnesses:

Dr. Karen A. Thole, Department Head and Distinguished Professor,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Pennsylvania State
University
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Dr. R. John Hansman Jr., T. Wilson Professor of Aeronautics &
Astronautics and Director, MIT International Center for Air
Transportation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Chair,
FAA Research and Development Advisory Committee (REDAC); Co-
director, FAA Center of Excellence for Alternative Jet Fuels
and Environment (ASCENT)
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    35

Mr. Steve Csonka, Executive Director, Commercial Aviation
Alternative Fuels Initiative (CAAFI)
Oral Statement...............................................    40
Written Statement............................................    42

Discussion.......................................................    50

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Karen A. Thole, Department Head and Distinguished Professor,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Pennsylvania State
University.....................................................    66

Dr. R. John Hansman Jr., T. Wilson Professor of Aeronautics &
Astronautics and Director, MIT International Center for Air
Transportation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Chair,
FAA Research and Development Advisory Committee (REDAC); Co-
director, FAA Center of Excellence for Alternative Jet Fuels
and Environment (ASCENT).......................................    75

Mr. Steve Csonka, Executive Director, Commercial Aviation
Alternative Fuels Initiative (CAAFI)...........................    79

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Don Beyer.....................    92

Letter submitted by Alternative Fuels & Chemicals Coalition......    97

EXAMINING R&D PATHWAYS
TO SUSTAINABLE AVIATION

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 24, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:01 a.m.,
via Webex, Hon. Don Beyer [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Great, thank you. Good morning. Welcome to
the first meeting or hearing of our Subcommittee on Space and
Aeronautics, ``Examining R&D Pathways to Sustainable
Aviation.'' So good morning. Welcome to our distinguished
witnesses. Thanks for being here. I also want to welcome our
new and returning Subcommittee Members to this first hearing. I
also want to say happy birthday to the Ranking Member Dr. Brian
Babin. I think you were 63 years old, Dr. Babin, something like
that, yesterday?
Mr. Babin. Absolutely. Absolutely. Thank you so very much,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Beyer. OK. These are exciting times, Dr. Babin's
birthday, humans are going back to the Moon in preparation to
Mars for advancing scientific discovery and transforming the
future of aviation. There's so much. And I really look forward
to working with Ranking Member Babin and Ranking Member Lucas
and our wonderful Chair, Chairwoman Eddie Johnson, on
supporting a strong and bright future for America's space and
aeronautics programs.
One of the immediate challenges is the climate crisis, and
today, we're considering aviation's role in how to address it.
Typically, aviation only contributes about 2.5 percent global
CO
2
emissions, and that seems low, especially
compared to, say, cars. However, with pre-pandemic global air
travel growing at annual rates of three to five percent, it
shouldn't come as a surprise that aircrafts'--aviation's global
CO
2
emissions increased from 710 million tons in
2013 to 905 million tons in 2018, and it's supposed to triple
by 2050.
Now, to its credit, the aviation industry has taken
consistent steps to improve aircraft efficiencies, in part to
reduce fuel costs. There are 70 to 80 percent more efficient
aircraft engines, than there were those old turbocraft jet
aircrafts in the 1950's, and efficiencies are expected to
continue at one or two percent annually. But while these are
important, they're not going to be sufficient to meet
aviation's carbon challenge.
The good news, in 2009 the industry adopted the goal of
reducing aviation's carbon emissions by 50 percent of 2005
levels by 2050, but that's going to need new technologies,
increased efficiencies, and cleaner sources of energy. And I
think we all believe that Federal Government R&D (research and
development) is essential for the testing, demonstrating, and
maturing solutions.
So today, potential approaches include electrified
aircraft, alternative airframe designs, more efficient
energies, and, obviously, alternative jet fuels. Some companies
are investing in one or more of these options. Europe, for
example, is betting on hydrogen as a cleaner aviation solution.
So how do these approaches compare, how do they
contribute, what are the potential impacts on noise, air
quality, cost, infrastructure, reliability, and safety? It's
important we get these priorities right because, unlike cars or
cell phones, changes to aircraft and aviation require very long
timelines to develop, test, demonstrate, certify, and scale
throughout the system.
A 2016 National Academies report on ``Commercial Aircraft
Propulsion and Energy Systems Research, Reducing Global Carbon
Emissions'' recommended priorities in aircraft-propulsion
integration, improvements in gas turbine engines, development
of turboelectric propulsion systems, and advances in
sustainable alternative jet fuels. So where does that research
stand today? What more needs to be done?
So bottom line, today, we need the cold, hard facts on the
strengths, limitations, feasibility, and timelines of the
pathways to sustainable aviation. In short, we need smart and
strategic R&D. And sustainable aviation is not only essential
for our climate; it's a competitive advantage and a cooperative
opportunity. And given the devastating impacts of the pandemic
to the aircraft industry, it's more important than ever that we
build back better.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Beyer follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to our distinguished witnesses.
Thank you for being here.
I also want to welcome our new and returning Subcommittee
Members to our first Space and Aeronautics hearing of the 117th
Congress.
These are exciting times. From returning humans to the Moon
in preparation for Mars to advancing scientific discovery and
transforming the future of aviation, there is much that lies
ahead of us. I look forward to working with you and Ranking
Member Babin on supporting a strong and bright future for
America's space and aeronautics programs.
Today we're considering the future of aviation and how we
can ensure that the U.S. remains the leader for next generation
aircraft and what R&D it will take to get us there.
With the climate crisis and as countries move to create
parameters for permissible aircraft--like Norway determining
that all short-haul flights will be entirely electric by 2040--
being a participant in the global marketplace of the future
will require sustainable aviation.
That means U.S. aviation won't have a competitive future
without addressing climate impacts.
Currently, aviation contributes about 2 1/2 percent to
global CO
2
emissions. In the U.S., transportation is
the most greenhouse gas intensive sector and in 2018 aviation
accounted for 5 percent of all U.S. emissions.
Pre-pandemic global air travel was growing at average
annual rates of 3-5 percent and is expected to rapidly return
as we get the pandemic under control.
It should come as no surprise that aviation's global
CO
2
emissions increased from 710 million tons in
2013 to 905 million tons in 2018, with a projected tripling by
2050.
And that's just looking at CO
2
.
According to the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, aviation's total climate change impact could be
from two to four times that of its past CO
2

emissions alone.
To its credit, the aviation industry has taken consistent
steps to improve aircraft efficiencies, in part to reduce fuel
costs. Aircraft engines are 70-80 percent more efficient today
than the turbojet aircraft of the 1950s, and efficiencies are
expected to continue at 1-2 percent annually.
But on their own, these improvements, while important, are
not sufficient to meet aviation's future challenge.
In 2009, the industry adopted goals to reduce aviation's
carbon emissions by 50 percent of 2005 levels by 2050.
Meeting even modest sustainability goals will require new
technologies, increased efficiencies, and cleaner sources of
energy. Federal government R&D is essential for testing,
demonstrating, and maturing solutions.
Today, potential approaches include electrified aircraft,
alternative airframe designs, more efficient engines, and
alternative jet fuels. Some companies are investing in one or
more of these options. Europe is betting on hydrogen as a
cleaner aviation solution.
How do these approaches compare and how would they
contribute to meeting aviation's climate challenge? What are
their potential impacts on noise, air quality, cost,
infrastructure, and reliability and safety?
The R&D opportunities are many, but it's important we get
the priorities right.
Because unlike cars or cell phones, changes to aircraft and
aviation require long timelines to develop, test, demonstrate,
certify, and scale throughout the system.
A 2016 National Academies report on ``Commercial Aircraft
Propulsion and Energy Systems Research, Reducing Global Carbon
Emissions'' recommended priorities in aircraft-propulsion
integration; improvements in gas turbine engines; development
of turboelectric propulsion systems; and advances in
sustainable alternative jet fuels.
Where does that research stand today? What more needs to be
done?
Bottom line: we need the cold, hard facts on the strengths,
limitations, feasibility, and timelines of the pathways to
sustainable aviation.
In short, we need smart and strategic R&D.
Sustainable aviation is not only essential for our climate,
it's a competitive advantage and a cooperative opportunity. And
given the devasting impacts of the pandemic to the industry,
it's more important than ever that we build back better.
Thank you and I look forward to our witnesses' testimony.

Chairman Beyer. So thank you. I look forward to our
witness testimonies. And let me--I recognize the Ranking Member
of the Space Subcommittee, Dr. Brian Babin.
Mr. Perlmutter. I think he decided to abandon us.
Chairman Beyer. Well, you know, failing that,
Representative Lucas, Ranking Member of the big Committee, I'd
be happy to recognize you.
Mr. Lucas. Well, I'll only pretend to be the esteemed
doctor until he's able to return to us, but thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for holding this hearing.
Oklahoma is no stranger to being on the cutting edge of
aviation. From the daring test pilots such as Tom Stafford and
Gordo Cooper to other pioneering aviators like Jerrie Cobb,
Oklahoma is well-represented by those who pushed the boundaries
of flight. To this very day, Oklahoma's connection to aviation
remains strong as the home of Tinker Air Force Base and FAA's
(Federal Aviation Administration's) Mike Monroney Aviation
Center.
The aviation industry is a vital part of our Nation's
economy. It contributes $1.8 trillion annually to the economy
and is directly or indirectly responsible for more than 10
million jobs.
The Science Committee has jurisdiction over several areas
of Federal aviation research, ranging from our drafting the
research title of each FAA reauthorization to our oversight of
NASA's (National Aeronautics and Space Administration's)
aeronautics research mission directorate. The research carried
out by NASA and FAA is then utilized by industry partners who
integrate this knowledge into their existing fleets.
Global air travel generates an estimated 2 to 3 percent of
global greenhouse gas emissions. While we saw a reduction in
the number of flights in the last year and a corresponding
decrease in emissions, we know that these numbers will
eventually rebound and increase. One estimate is that there
will be roughly 10 billion passengers flying more than 12
trillion miles annually by 2050.
Today's hearing comes 2 weeks after we held a Full
Committee hearing on the science of climate change. As that
hearing made clear, we should focus on investing in research
and development efforts, including R&D to give the aviation
industry the tools they need to reduce emissions from flight.
What we shouldn't do is allow ourselves to be subject to
burdensome and unequal international mandates at the expense of
our economic growth.
The good news is that the aviation industry is already
making progress in reducing emissions. Multiple domestic and
international aircraft manufacturers have already made
commitments to voluntarily reduce emissions. And we also will
hear today about the research community and industry are
teaming up to create innovative new ways to reduce emissions.
For instance, we can help reduce emissions by researching new
aircraft designs and the use of lighter materials to help
reduce aircraft weight.
Additionally, research is ongoing about the use of a
variety of farm-produced commodities which could be blended
into existing fuels and potentially reduce emissions.
I thank our witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to a productive discussion about how we can support
research and development efforts, which will assist our
aviation industry in the years to come.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman.
Oklahoma is no stranger to being on the cutting edge of
aviation. From daring test pilots such as Tom Stafford and
Gordo Cooper to other pioneering aviators like Jerrie Cobb,
Oklahoma is well represented by those who pushed the boundaries
of flight. To this very day, Oklahoma's connection to aviation
remains strong as the home of Tinker Air Force Base and FAA's
Michael Monroney Aeronautical Center.
The aviation industry is a vital part of our nation's
economy. It contributes $1.8 trillion annually to the economy
and is directly or indirectly responsible for more than 10
million jobs. The Science Committee has jurisdiction over
several areas of federal aviation research, ranging from our
drafting the research title of each FAA reauthorization to our
oversight of NASA's aeronautics research mission directorate.
The research carried out by NASA and FAA is then utilized by
industry partners who integrate this knowledge into their
existing fleets.
Global air travel generates an estimated 2-3 percent of
global greenhouse gas emissions. While we saw a reduction in
the number of flights in the last year, and a corresponding
decrease in emissions, we know that these numbers will
eventually rebound and increase. One estimate is that there
will be roughly 10 billion passengers flying more than 12
trillion miles annually by 2050.
Today's hearing comes two weeks after we held a full
committee hearing on the science of climate change. As that
hearing made clear, we should focus on investing in research
and development efforts, including R&D to give the aviation
industry the tools they need to reduce emissions from flight.
What we shouldn't do is allow ourselves to be subject to
burdensome and unequal international mandates at the expense of
our economic growth.
The good news is that the aviation industry is already
making progress in reducing emissions. Multiple domestic and
international aircraft manufacturers have already made
commitments to voluntarily reducing emissions. We will also
hear today about how the research community and industry are
teaming up to create innovative new ways to reduce emissions.
For instance, we can help reduce emissions by researching
new aircraft designs and the use of lighter materials to help
reduce aircraft weight. Additionally, research is ongoing about
the use of a variety of farm-produced commodities which could
be blended into existing fuels and potentially reduce
emissions.
I thank our witnesses for being here today and look forward
to a productive discussion about we can support research and
development efforts which will assist our aviation industry in
the years to come.Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Big Chair Ranking Member.
This is the first time I've done this, so I get things out
of order. So what we also say this hearing will come to order.
I brought my special gavel today. And without objection, the
Chair is authorized to declare recess at any time.
And I also want to note that the Committee is meeting
virtually, so please keep your video feed on as long as you're
present in the hearing. You're responsible for your own
microphones. That is, our wonderful staff is not going to turn
them on and off for you. And obviously, please keep them muted
unless you're speaking. And if you have documents you wish to
submit for the record, please email them to the Committee
Clerk, whose email address was circulated prior to this
hearing.
So now let me yield the chair to my good friend, Dr. Brian
Babin, who is the Ranking Member of this Space Subcommittee.
Dr. Babin?
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me?
Chairman Beyer. Yes.
Mr. Babin. Can you hear me?
Chairman Beyer. Yes, perfectly, Brian. Thank you, yes.
Mr. Babin. OK, good. It still shows that I'm muted on my
computer. That's what was confusing me a while ago, and I
apologize.
But I guess before my opening statement I also want to
just say thank you for what you said a while ago, Mr. Chairman.
You and I have worked together for a number of years on this
great Committee, and I really want to congratulate you on your
chairmanship, and I'm looking forward to working with you,
continuing to do that, and getting some great things done for
our country and our space program. So with that I'll start my
opening statement. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I had to hazard a guess, most of our constituents fly
budget airlines, not business class, and certainly not private
aviation. Roughly 1/3 of the cost of a flight comes from fuel,
and nearly half for budget airlines. The less fuel you burn,
the less emissions you produce. Passengers want cheap tickets,
and we all want less emissions. Both lead to the same free-
market forces that drive airlines to purchase efficient
aircraft.
This incentivizes aircraft manufacturers to produce more
efficient aircraft and engines with little government intrusion
into the market. Flights today are 50 percent more efficient
than they were back in 1990, and each new generation of
aircraft is 15 to 25 percent more efficient than the last.
Separately, our Nation's airline industry already committed to
carbon-neutral growth by 2030, and Boeing pledged to deliver
aircraft capable of flying on 100 percent biofuels by 2030 on
their own.
This isn't to say that there's not a role for the
government to play in advancing aviation sustainability. The
FAA conducts research to certify new technologies that are
safe, and NASA develops high-risk, high-reward technologies
that the private sector is willing--or unwilling or unable to
undertake.
But we should be mindful of government intrusion into the
market. The U.S. and Europe are embroiled in a nearly decade-
long dispute over government aircraft subsidies. And last fall,
the World Trade Organization (WTO) allowed Europe to implement
over $4 billion in tariffs on U.S. products over a disagreement
about the FAA and NASA research and development grants and
subsidies. This followed a 2019 ruling by the World Trade
Organization that allowed the United States to impose $7.5
billion in tariffs on Europe over European Union loans to
Airbus. Earlier this month, those tariffs were put on hold for
a few months pending additional negotiations. And as we look
toward supporting our Nation's aviation sector, we should
maintain the principles that made us the world leader in
aviation: free enterprise and free markets.
Another thing we must consider is the impact on safety,
which should be everyone's highest priority. Environmental
research and development within FAA's RE&D (research,
engineering, and development) account increased over 190
percent from 2008 to 2021. Over that same time, the budget for
safety research decreased.
Unfortunately, we may be seeing the results of these
policy decisions. In order to compete with the new Airbus
A320neo, Boeing designed the 737 Max to be more fuel-efficient
and produce less emissions. The existing 737 airframe was
modified by adding larger and more efficient engines. Because
of the larger size, the engines had to be moved forward and
higher on the airframe to maintain ground clearance. Doing so
altered the aircraft's aerodynamics and required a new
maneuvering characteristic augmentation system, or MCAS, which
we are familiar with over in Transportation. MCAS has caused
the aircraft to pitch downwards in certain configurations and
was featured prominently in the National Transportation Safety
Board's Safety Recommendation Reports.
Similarly, the Wall Street Journal published an article
last Friday highlighting a recent incident involving an engine
breaking apart over Denver. The article noted several other
incidents of engine failures and engine cover damage over the
last 5 years, one of which led to the first U.S. airline
passenger fatality in nearly a decade. I'm not saying these
accidents were caused by efforts to green aviation, but we
should be reminded of Hoover Institute economist Dr. Thomas
Sowell, who said ``there are no solutions, only tradeoffs.''
As we discuss the benefits of sustainable aviation today,
we should also discuss its costs, either at the potential
expense of safety or to other areas of our economy. Upending
existing infrastructure, promoting land-use change and
monocrops, raising commodity and food prices, increasing
transportation costs, increasing taxes, and the impact of
diluting the value of retirees' savings to pay for all of it
should all be reviewed very carefully and very critically.
Green aviation not only requires a whole-of-government
approach, but it also requires a whole-of-society approach.
Luckily, the United States is the leader in aviation and
science. Our industry and research communities are second to
none. With FAA, NASA, DOE (Department of Energy), and other
agencies providing fundamental basic research and industry-
leveraging, market-based incentives, I am sure that we can meet
any challenge presented to us.
And with that, I'll yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

If I had to hazard a guess, most of our constituents fly
budget airlines, not business class, and certainly not private
aviation. Roughly a third of the cost of a flight comes from
fuel, and nearly half for budget airlines. The less fuel you
burn, the less emissions you produce. Passengers want cheaper
tickets, and we all want less emissions. Both lead to the same
free-market forces that drive airlines to purchase efficient
aircraft.
This incentivizes aircraft manufacturers to produce more
efficient aircraft and engines with little government intrusion
into the market. Flights today are 50 percent more efficient
than they were in 1990, and each new generation of aircraft is
10-25 percent more efficient than the last. Separately, our
nation's airline industry already committed to carbon neutral
growth by 2030, and Boeing pledged to deliver aircraft capable
of flying on 100 percent biofuels by 2030 on their own.
This isn't to say that there's not a role for the
government to play in advancing aviation sustainability. The
FAA conducts research to certify new technologies are safe and
NASA develops high-risk, high-reward technologies, that the
private sector is unwilling or unable to undertake.
But we should be mindful of government intrusion into the
market. The US and Europe are embroiled in a nearly decade-long
dispute over government aircraft subsidies. Just last fall the
World Trade Organization allowed Europe to implement over $4
billion in tariffs on US products as a disagreement over FAA
and NASA research and development grants. This followed a 2019
ruling by the WTO that allowed the US to impose $7.5 billion in
tariffs on Europe over EU loans to Airbus. Earlier this month
those tariffs were put on hold for a few months pending
additional negotiations. As we look towards supporting our
nation's aviation sector, we should maintain the principles
that made us the world leader in aviation--free enterprise and
free markets.
Another thing we must consider is the impact on safety,
which should be everyone's highest priority. Environmental R&D
within FAA's RE&D account increased over 190 percent from 2008
to 2021. Over that same time the budget for safety research
decreased.
Unfortunately, we may be seeing the results of these policy
decisions. In order to compete with the new Airbus A320neo,
Boeing designed the 737 Max to be more fuel efficient and
produce less emissions. The existing 737 airframe was modified
by adding larger, more efficient engines. Because of the larger
size, the engines had to be moved forward and higher on the
airframe to maintain ground clearance. Doing so altered the
aircraft's aerodynamics and required a new Maneuvering
Characteristic Augmentation System, or MCAS. MCAS caused the
aircraft to pitch downwards in certain configurations and was
featured prominently in the NTSB's Safety Recommendation
Reports. Similarly, the Wall Street Journal published an
article last Friday highlighting a recent incident involving an
engine breaking apart over Denver. The article noted several
other incidents of engine failures and engine cover damage over
the last five years, one of which led to the first U.S. airline
passenger fatality in nearly a decade.
I am not saying these accidents were caused by efforts to
green aviation, but we should be reminded of Hoover Institute
economist Dr. Thomas Sowell, who said ``there are no solutions,
only trade-offs.'' As we discuss the benefits of sustainable
aviation today, we should also discuss its costs, either at the
potential expense of safety or to other areas of our economy.
Upending existing infrastructure, promoting land-use change and
monocrops, raising commodity and food prices, increasing
transportation costs, increasing taxes, and the impact of
diluting the value of retirees' savings to pay for all of it
should all be reviewed critically.
Green aviation not only requires a whole of government
approach, it requires a whole of society approach. Luckily, the
United States is the leader in aviation and science. Our
industry and research communities are second-to-none. With FAA,
NASA, DOE, and other agencies providing fundamental basic
research, and industry leveraging market- based incentives, I
am sure we meet any challenge presented to us.

Chairman Beyer. All right. Thank you, Dr. Babin, very
much.
At this time I'd like to--well, before doing that, any
other Member who would like to have an opening statement--
please--in the record, just please submit it in writing and we
will include it.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning. I would like to begin by welcoming Chairman
Beyer as the new Chairman of the Space and Aeronautics
Subcommittee for the 117th Congress. I also want to welcome
back Ranking Member Babin and all the Subcommittee Members. I
am excited about the future of space and aeronautics and I look
forward to working with you.
The climate crisis is affecting nearly every aspect of our
existence-weather, shelter, commerce, natural resources,
energy, environment, and so much more.
Research is imperative to understanding and mitigating
climate change impacts, and addressing climate change is an
important priority for our Committee.
We held our first Full Committee climate hearing last week.
And I'm pleased, Chairman Beyer, that today's hearing will
examine aviation's role in reducing carbon emissions.
Aviation is one of the few industries that has provided a
positive trade balance. Pre-pandemic, U.S. civil aviation
accounts for about 5 percent of gross domestic product,
including both direct and catalytic sectors, $1.8 trillion in
economic activity, and nearly 11 million jobs, including
285,000 jobs in my own state of Texas.
Even closer to home, Dallas is a hub for domestic and
international air travel, and I believe that developing
innovations to enable sustainable aviation is the industry's
future.
Aviation's infrastructure is immense and changes throughout
the system take time, in part, due to the need to meet high
safety requirements for passenger air travel.
That's why research and development is essential for
advancing sustainable aviation technologies.
However, the improvements that will lead to cleaner and
more efficient aviation can't happen on their own. The people
and workforce that bring the ideas from the labs and into the
engines and aircraft are instrumental. To that end, our
investments in R&D are also investments in sustaining our human
capital leadership in aviation going forward.
I thank our witnesses for being here and I look forward to
your testimony.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Beyer. At this time I'd like to introduce our
witnesses. Our first witness is Dr. Karen Thole or Thole.
Karen, you can fix it for me. Dr. Thole is the Department Head
and Distinguished Professor of the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at Pennsylvania State University. She co-chaired
the 2016 National Academies' study ``Commercial Aircraft
Propulsion and Energy Systems: Reducing Global Carbon
Emissions.'' Her area of expertise is gas turbine heat transfer
and using additive manufacturing to develop innovative cooling
technologies. At Penn State she established two research
laboratories that were both awarded the distinction of being
Centers of Excellence in aerodynamics and heat transfer. She
received--Dr. Thole received a bachelor of science degree and a
master of science degree in mechanical engineering at the
University of Illinois and her doctorate in mechanical
engineering at the University of Texas Austin, so she's a
Longhorn. So, Dr. Thole, welcome.
Our second witness is Dr. John--R. John Hansman, Jr., a T.
Wilson Professional of Aeronautics and Astronaut--Astronautics
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Hansman is
also the Director of the MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology) International Center for Air Transportation, and he
additionally serves as the Chair of the FAA Research and
Development Advisory Committee and Co-Director of the FAA
Center of Excellence for Alternative Jet Fuels and Environment,
also known as ASCENT. Dr. Hansman's research focuses on
applying information technology on operational aerospace
systems. He received his bachelor of science degree in physics
from Cornell University and a master of science and a doctorate
in some little college in Massachusetts called MIT. So welcome,
Dr. Hansman.
Our third witness is Mr. Steve Csonka, the Executive
Director of the Commercial Aviation's Alternative Fuels
Initiative, CAAFI, a public-private partnership working on the
development and commercialization of sustainable aviation fuels
(SAF). Previously, Mr. Csonka had positions--held positions at
GE Aircraft Engines, American Airlines, and GE Aviation where
he focused on a range of aircraft lifecycle activities,
including conceptual analysis, design, manufacture, test, and
certification, among other areas. He received his bachelor of
science degree in aerospace engineering from Parks College of
St. Louis University and a master of science degree in
aerospace engineering from the University of Cincinnati. So
welcome, Mr. Csonka.
So as our witnesses should know, you have five minutes
each for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony has--
will be included in the record for the hearing, and I think
most of us received your written testimony ahead of time, which
I spent a long time with last night, fascinating. And when we--
you have completed all three spoken testimonies, we will begin
with questions, so each Member will have five minutes to
question the panel. So let's start with Dr. Thole. Dr. Thole,
the floor and the microphone are yours.

TESTIMONY OF DR. KAREN A. THOLE,

DEPARTMENT HEAD AND DISTINGUISHED PROFESSOR,

DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING,

PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Thole. Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member Babin, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity to testify. As was stated, my name is Karen Thole,
and the opinions expressed in my testimony today are that of my
own and do not represent views of the Pennsylvania State
University.
Throughout my testimony, I will use information from the
2016 National Academies' low carbon aviation study, which was
commissioned by NASA and which I cochaired. Resulting from the
2016 Academies report, the Chief Technology Officers of seven
of the world's major aviation manufacturers jointly signed an
agreement on a unified commitment to reduce commercial aviation
emissions by half in 2050 relative to the levels in 2005.
As Chairman Beyer has already mentioned, commercial
aviation is responsible for between 2 and 2.5 percent of the
total global CO
2
emissions, of which 90 percent
comes from large single-aisle and twin-aisle aircraft.
Resulting from the 2016 Academy report, four research
approaches for sustainable aviation were recommended: 1,
advances in aircraft propulsion integration; 2, improvements in
gas turbine engines; 3, development of turboelectric propulsion
systems; and 4, advances in sustainable alternative jet fuels.
This past year, hydrogen has entered into the discussion
for aviation and is being explored by U.S. industries and
aggressively by the European Union. In my opinion, with strong
support we can develop solutions starting with the use of
sustainable alternative jet fuels progressing to turboelectric
and hybrid electric propulsion systems followed by the use of
hydrogen either for fuel cells or for producing synthetic
fuels.
In the near term, we should promote sustainable
alternative jet fuels. These fuels already exist as a drop-in
option certified for use in jet engines at up to 50 percent
blend with kerosene, and with further development it may be
possible to achieve 100 percent. Given our third panelist has
expertise in this area, he can further elaborate.
In agreement with the 2016 study, I believe the United
States needs to invest in the development of new aircraft
architectures that take full advantage and the potential
benefits of turboelectrics and of hybrid electric propulsion
systems. The Committee strongly recommended the development of
turboelectric systems, which differ from all-electric and
hybrid concepts because no additional batteries or fuel cells
are required, both of which can add significant weight.
Turboelectric propulsion systems do require high power
generators, cabling, and power electronics. Unlike other
propulsion systems--electric propulsion systems, they do make
beneficial concepts such as distributed propulsion more
feasible. Some hybrid electric propulsion systems may also be
feasible in my opinion.
Key to improvements, however, for both turboelectrics and
hybrid electrics are continued improvements in both propulsive
efficiency and in thermal efficiency of gas turbine engines,
which is likely to produce the power by--the power for both.
Many efficiency improvements can also be synergistic with the
needs of our military's propulsion needs.
Today's engines have propulsive efficiencies of up to 70
percent and thermal efficiencies of up to 55 percent, both of
which still have the potential to increase, which dramatically
reduce fuel requirements. To improve propulsive efficiency,
research is needed to make both evolutionary improvements, as--
such as reducing fan pressure ratios and revolutionary
improvements such as going beyond the traditional tube-and-wing
platform.
To support improved thermal efficiencies, we need to
shrink engine cores while meeting or even increasing thermal
efficiencies. Added to those recommendations in 2016, research
is needed on developing high-temperature materials and
coatings, as well as for 3-D metal printing. We need to be able
to integrate reliable sensors to support high-fidelity
simulation tools to reduce both development, time, and risks.
Despite the ongoing discussions related to hydrogen as an
aviation fuel, there are significant techno-economic and safety
concerns. However, the United States needs to develop a long-
term strategy on hydrogen for aviation to make sure we do not
lag our foreign competitors. In that regard, Mr. Chairman,
please make no mistake we are in a race particularly with China
in the aviation industry, and whoever wins will have an
economic and possibly military advantage that will result from
a talented workforce. We need to invest now to make sure the
United States is well-positioned to develop sustainable
solutions and maintain our leadership in the aviation industry
through strong partnerships between Federal agencies,
industries, and universities.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Thole follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Thole, very
much. It will provoke many questions, which is good.
I now recommend--or recognize MIT's Dr. John Hansman.

TESTIMONY OF DR. R. JOHN HANSMAN JR.,

T. WILSON PROFESSOR OF AERONAUTICS & ASTRONAUTICS

AND DIRECTOR, MIT INTERNATIONAL CENTER

FOR AIR TRANSPORTATION,

MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY;

CHAIR, FAA RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

ADVISORY COMMITTEE (REDAC);

CO-DIRECTOR, FAA CENTER OF EXCELLENCE

FOR ALTERNATIVE JET FUELS AND ENVIRONMENT (ASCENT)

Dr. Hansman. Chairman Beyer, Ranking Member Babin, and
Members of the Committee, thanks for the opportunity to talk
about this important topic today.
As you guys have already noted, the impact of aviation on
the environment is an increasing concern worldwide in that the
aviation community is really highly motivated both in market
reasons and international strategic reasons to improve its
sustainability. There's lots of things we can talk about. I'm
going to briefly discuss a few key areas today.
First, you know, the first thing that motivates
understanding how we mitigate aviation environmental impacts is
understanding the mechanisms of impact, and modeling the
impacts is sort of a full system level. So you mentioned
greenhouse gas emissions. There was other impacts that we need
to understand, for example, contrails. But we have to look at
it in terms of the system level. You have to think about all--
how we fly the airplanes, where we fly them. As you mentioned,
aviation contributes about 2 to 3 percent of the greenhouse gas
emissions, but they are injected high in the atmosphere where
they have a higher impact, so you have to think about where you
fly, what the markets are around the world. These things are
not necessarily symmetric. And you have to think about it in
terms of the lifecycle. So, you know, it may make sense to use,
for example, hydrogen as a fuel but only if you get it from a
sustainable source.
The other thing I just mentioned as a fundamentalist that
we need to think about aviation as a potential platform to
monitor climate change mechanisms and risks both in terms of
how we operate the airplanes but also as aviation platforms.
And when you think about mitigations, I'm just going to
separate them into three sort of timeframes. In the near term
in the next 5 to 10 years we're going to have to figure out how
to use the airplanes we have today more efficiently. You can't
quickly--you know, even if you had a new technology, airplane
technology, it's going to take 20 or 30 years to migrate into
the fleet.
So given that you have to use the existing airplanes,
there's two sort of approaches that--one of them has already
been mentioned. So drop-in sustainable aviation fuels are
clearly important and can be used in our existing airplanes.
Right now, we're limited to blends of less than 50 percent
sustainable aviation fuels, so there's a need to get to 100
percent so we can fully use that. The other thing you need to
think about--again, this is a lifecycle and a system-level
impact--is where do those fuels come from and do you have
sustainable aviation fuel pathways that make sense from an
overall societal standpoint?
The second thing you can do in the near term is to fly the
airplanes more efficiently. From a greenhouse gas emissions
standpoint, most of the fuel is burned [inaudible] altitude
improves or oceanic flight, so there are things that we can do
to operate the airplanes more efficiently at altitude in terms
of improving air traffic control, using the technologies of,
for example, space-based surveillance to allow more direct
routings to allow airplanes to be at their optimal speeds and
altitudes.
We can also slow down a little bit. It turns out we burn
probably a little bit more fuel than we need to from the
speeds. In the terminal area, arriving and departing, the main
opportunity for efficiency is going to be not only efficiency
but local air quality and noise.
In the midterm we can think about new airplanes. And
again, this is going to be 10 to 20 years out there. And the
main thing we can do in R&D is to enable and de-risk new
technologies and new configurations. NASA has shown in some
other studies, the N+3 studies, for example, that there are
potential for 50 to 70 percent improvement in fuel efficiency
from new configurations, but these are too risky for industry
to take on by themselves. [inaudible] been mentioned, I would
say that the battery-based systems are going to be probably
limited for short-range operations, but either hybrid systems
or fuel cells may have some potential.
Also in the midterm we need to think about how we scale up
the sustainable aviation fuels to the full level. In the far
term hydrogen might be an option. It's appealing because you
don't have to basically put the carbon back into the fuel to
make a synthetic electro fuel, but it's a tough problem. It's
got a couple key areas. One is really the safety issue, so, you
know, as we know from the images of the Hindenburg that, you
know, hydrogen is explosive. You have to think about how do you
protect a hydrogen airplane from, for example, a lightning
strike and how do you inert the fuel? [inaudible]
infrastructure of hydrogen. We have--there are design issues
because of the way hydrogen is held and stored. And we also
have to think about the indirect impacts of something like
hydrogen. Hydrogen puts out more water vapor, so does that
create, for example, more contrails where the contrails may
actually have a knock-on effect.
So there's a lot we can do, and I'm looking forward to the
discussion.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hansman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Dr. Hansman, thank you very much.
And I now recognize Mr. Steve Csonka for your five minute
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. STEVE CSONKA,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COMMERCIAL AVIATION

ALTERNATIVE FUELS INITIATIVE (CAAFI)

Mr. Csonka. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Esteemed Members of
the Committee and Subcommittee, thank you for your general
interest in aviation sustainability and your specific interest
in sustainable aviation fuels, or SAF, and that's the
nomenclature I'll use for the rest of this discussion with SAF
being the sole focus of my remarks today.
I'm going to dive right into the three themes that are
representative of questions extended to me by Committee staff
with respect to SAF.
First, big question, how does SAF fit into the larger
landscape of approaches and pathways to enable more sustainable
aviation? I believe SAF represents the only viable approach for
achieving any near-term, substantive, in-sector net carbon
reduction. Further out in time, we might see more radical tech
incorporated at rates that offset traffic growth driven by the
aviation value paradigm. In the meantime, SAF scaling and usage
can deliver a direct and proportional reduction in net carbon.
SAF incorporation has no impact on any other parallel
approaches to enable or improve sustainability via advancements
in technology, operations, or infrastructure.
Second question, what are the opportunities and challenges
of SAF for reducing the aviation sector's carbon emissions? The
opportunities include the fact that SAF is a drop-in fuel. It
obviates the need for significant investments outside of the
fuel production itself. Two, SAF are not hypothetical. We
started using them commercially 5 years ago. Three, SAF are
proven to lower net carbon emissions. Four, SAF will be free of
sulfur and likely have lower levels of certain hydrocarbons
responsible for tailpipe soot and criteria pollutants that
affect air quality. Five, SAF can be produced from a very wide
range of processes and feedstocks which recycle carbon from our
biosphere or feedstocks from 24/7 waste streams of various
human and circular economy industrial activities.
On the other side of the spectrum, the challenges include
SAF being a very nascent industry. We're just getting started,
and every new facility is high on the cost curve. Given the
nascent state, SAF production generally cannot compete with the
cost of PETROJET at the current range of oil prices. The carbon
reduction afforded by SAF is not yet broadly monetizable, and
as a result of the inability of free-market economics to change
this paradigm, policy is likely needed to affect change.
Industrial system cost reductions are typically achieved
through the continued introduction of new technology,
utilization of lower-cost inputs, and via learning curve
improvements and tech and supply chain scaleup. However, none
of these can be achieved without initiating the first steps of
expansion, again, likely only available through policy support
and regulation.
Third and finally, what research could be undertaken or
accelerated by NASA and FAA to support SAF development and
utilization to further reduce aviation environmental impacts?
NASA has expertise in measurement analysis and characterization
of the atmosphere and atmospheric impacts of aviation emissions
constituents. Questions associated with SAF in these areas
include, one, quantifying the impact of different hydrocarbon
molecules in jet fuel, the resulting combustion constituents,
and their contribution to greenhouse gas agents. Two, further
work can be done on physical emissions measurements both on
ground test and flying aloft using different formulations of
SAF with varying chemistry. Three, work can be done to address
the impacts and benefits of elimination of certain hydrocarbon
compounds known to have difficulty in achieving full combustion
and responsible for soot, PM (particulate matter), HAPS
(hazardous air pollutants), and other things we care about.
On the FAA side, they've been using several impactful
programs to advance the modeling and understanding of ways to
expedite SAF development and use, including the programs of
ASCENT, CLEEN (Continuous Lower Energy, Emissions and Noise),
and CAAFI. R&D associated with SAF in these areas includes,
one, continuing to make progress on the modeling, referee test
models, small-quantity fuel screening, clearinghouse assistance
to continue to reduce the cost and time associated with
industry qualification of additional SAF pathways. Using such
models and knowledge development will help us move more quickly
in the direction of higher allowable SAF blends or 100 percent
SAF formulations that have been brought up a couple of times.
Second, removing supply chain barriers through analysis,
tool development, and facilitating broader industry engagement
and collaboration. All of these efforts by NASA and FAA should
foster more interest on the part of commercialization entities
to consider SAF production by creating a better realizable
value proposition than exists today.
In summary, the opportunity for SAF is great. While the
challenges for scaling remain abundant, the research
capabilities of NASA and FAA and other agency partners are
critical to enabling SAF maturation and improving aviation
sustainability. Thank you for your attention, and I look
forward to addressing your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Csonka follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Csonka, very much.
At this point I'd like to ask unanimous consent to include
Congresswoman Julia Brownley of California on our Space
Subcommittee for the purposes of this hearing. If there's no
objection, Ms.--Julia, yesterday, by the way, gave a very
passionate argument for SAF at a Ways and Means Committee
Member hearing, so great to have you with us, Julia.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Chairman Beyer. Let me begin by asking Dr. Thole. You--in
fact, all three of you have talked about hydrogen and the
difficulty with it, the safety, problems to be overcome. Why
has Europe chosen hydrogen and charged forward with that when
we've been so reluctant?
Dr. Thole. That's a great question, Chairman Beyer. You
know, I mean, I think that they are being pushed by Airbus,
which is one of their manufacturers, and they have made a
decision to go that direction. There are a lot of advantages of
hydrogen. You know, the fuel--or the energy density content of
hydrogen is superior, and it can be made using green
electricity, although currently it's not, so there are a lot of
advantages there. And I think Europe sees the advantages, and
they are putting a lot of money into it.
And so I can't really explain their rationale for doing
this, but, you know, as I see it, I think there are a lot of
challenges. There are a lot of challenges just from considering
that the amount of space that hydrogen would require on an
aircraft is three times larger than what we would--what we
currently have. We have to store liquid hydrogen at minus 450
degrees Fahrenheit, which is a challenge in itself. And----
Chairman Beyer. And I guess all the opponents would have
to do is say ``Hindenburg.''
Dr. Thole. And Hindenburg, correct.
Chairman Beyer. Dr. Thole, you--let me pivot because you
talked a lot about design disruption. You know, the larger
picture, moving away from SAF, and you totally confused me by
talking about fan pressure ratio and nacelles and revolutionary
improvements in traditional tube-and-wing platform and boundary
layer ingestion configurations. Can you simplify that for us
humble Members of Congress----
Dr. Thole. Yes, so----
Chairman Beyer. And the potential there?
Dr. Thole. So if we want to improve the efficiency of our
power generation on our aircraft, there's a big advantage to
reducing fan pressure ratio and to have high bypass ratio
engines. And so, you know, when you fly on an aircraft, right,
and you look at the really big engines, you--they're huge. And
right now, we're limited with the traditional tube-and-wing and
landing gear constraints such that the nacelle can't grow any
larger. And as the nacelle grows, in addition, you have
additional weight and you have additional drag. So really our
bypass ratios of our engines are somewhat limited at this
point.
The other alternative is to shrink the core engine, right,
so we can shrink the core of the turbine, which allows more
flow area, or perhaps we can develop a new overall aircraft
propulsion integration system such that we could have
distributed propulsion. And that's another way to do it. And
that's what--and a disruption would be required for that.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you. You know, I've long had an
interest in this, and Senator Cardin and I have introduced
legislation in the last Congress and will again, the Cleaner,
Quieter Airplanes Act, to bolster the R&D we need for
competitive future aviation sector. And this testimony is
exactly what we need. And this is not accidental because I live
about two miles from a national airport, so it's our number-one
constituent complaint.
Dr. Hansman, Norway is on track for full electrification
for short-haul stuff by 2040. Do you see that electrification
being--can we do that for short-haul? Should we be--where are
we on electrification perspective?
Dr. Hansman. So if you say--if by electrification you mean
full battery, it's really going to be short-haul, but the
problem that we have with airplanes is that airplanes have to
carry the battery, so the figure of merit that we think about
is something we call specific energy, the amount of energy you
can get per unit pound. And basically the battery technology
has been improving, driven by the automobile interest, but, you
know, we're sort of getting to the point where it's much
harder, and once we get to the point that it's really not an
issue for cars, it's going to be hard to get that specific
energy up high enough that it really makes big airplanes
practical, particularly on even medium hauls. So I think it's a
desirable goal, but I think it's going to be tough to do
anything practical, right, other than relatively very short-
range airplanes at a sort of limited scale.
Chairman Beyer. OK, great. Thank you. My time is almost
up, so let me yield now to our Ranking Member Dr. Babin if
Brian is here.
Mr. Babin. I am here. Can you hear me?
Chairman Beyer. Yes, good, good. I can hear you, and
charge. The floor is yours.
Mr. Babin. OK. All right. Thank you very, very much.
First off, I really appreciate the witnesses being here
today. Dr. Hansman, the WTO recently ruled that Europe was
allowed to implement $4 billion in tariffs against the United
States, including aircraft tractors, ag products, and according
to the World Trade Organization and the European complaint,
this is based on NASA and FAA research and development
subsidies, as well as tax breaks provided by the State of
Washington. The U.S. has stated that it is now in compliance
with the WTO order.
Similarly, Europe claims that they are now fully compliant
with the WTO ruling that allowed the U.S. to impose $7.5
billion on European products despite the U.S. Trade
Representative (USTR) arguing that they are not. NASA and FAA
subsidies are small compared to the significant loan guarantees
provided by European nations to Airbus.
Given the fact that U.S. industry funds most of the $15
billion annually spent on aviation research and development and
that aviation is one of the largest sources of U.S. exports
accounting for $148 billion in 2019 alone, is the small funding
from NASA and the FAA worth the headache that it creates in
terms of international trade and overall economic health of the
U.S., Dr. Hansman?
Chairman Beyer. Dr. Hansman, you're muted for the moment.
Dr. Hansman. Sorry about that. Yes, I think there are some
things that need to be funded by the either FAA or NASA. On the
FAA side--and Steve talked about this a little bit--there's a
need to fund those things that allow us to determine whether we
can, for example, use synthetic or sustainable aviation fuels
safely, so we have to think about the certification processes,
so there's clearly a role there.
There's a general role for NASA to be doing fundamental
research that enables the knowledge and understanding of the
mechanism, so there's clearly benefit to us. If we want to move
the system to a more sustainable system, it won't be done by
the industry alone.
One of the things we did a few years ago, one of my
students did a game theory analysis of, you know, what would
incentivize improving the efficiency of airplanes? And it turns
out it's very hard to take the risk and development time to do
an airplane which would be fundamentally better. We know we can
get 50 percent, 70 percent improvement in efficiency, OK, but
this is too big a risk for an individual company to take on its
own, so you need to do the underlying research to de-risk
[inaudible] validation.
Mr. Babin. OK. Well, thank you. Thank you very much.
And, Dr. Thole, the market has already responded to
sustainable aviation challenges, and companies continue to
pivot operations. Flights today produce 50 percent less
CO
2
as the same flight did in 1990, and each new
generation of aircraft leads to a 15 to 25 percent improvement
in efficiency per passenger mile. The vast preponderance of the
$15 billion a year spent on aviation efficiency research and
development is funded by the private sector.
In January of 2021 the Boeing Company, a leading
manufacturer of commercial jets, announced that they will begin
delivering commercial airplanes capable of flying on 100
percent biofuel by the end of the decade. Airlines for America,
the U.S. airline trade group, pledged to improve fuel economy
by 1.5 percent a year, have carbon-neutral growth by 2020, and
reduce CO
2
emissions by 2050 relative to 2005
levels.
In August of 2020, the energy company Phillips 66
announced plans to convert a facility in Rodeo, California,
into the world's largest renewable fuels plant to support
growing demands for these types of fuels. These impressive
steps were taken by the U.S. private sector on their very own.
How can we maintain this positive momentum and focus
academia and industry efforts to solve this challenge? What
high-risk, high-reward research should NASA support that
industry is unable or uninterested in conducting? And what are
the highest-priority safety research areas tied to sustainable
aviation that the FAA should focus on?
Dr. Thole. I think during my talk I actually outlined some
of those, so, for example, if we focus particularly on thermal
efficiencies and improving thermal efficiencies, I think there
are a lot of areas that we can work on in particular looking at
high-temperature materials. The other thing I'd want to point
out is--Mr. Babin is that----
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am.
Dr. Thole [continuing]. The amount of time to develop
these new solutions is too long right now. It is--it takes a
long time to develop new solutions. Part of that is because of
our manufacturing requirements. The United States is one of the
few countries in the world that can actually cast turbine
blades, but those turbine blades come at a cost in terms of
time and in terms of money. And I think that we need to develop
better ways to do faster manufacturing and evaluate innovative
solutions faster.
I think academia has a large role to play. We usually
generally focus on lower technology readiness levels. We--for
successful universities to work in this field, we work closely
with industry. This is not a field that you fund through the
FAA or NASA without a partnership between the Federal agency,
the university, and industry. If you want to be successful in
this field, you have to work with industry. And many of our
universities do. So the dollars you spend in research are not
going into esoteric studies. They're going into real studies.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Dr. Thole. And thank you, Dr.
Babin.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. My time is up, and I yield back.
Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. My connectivity and my video have gone
down the tubes here, and I don't know how much time I've spent
or have any left at all, so I apologize.
Chairman Beyer. That's all right. Thank you. Thank you,
Dr. Babin.
Let me now recognize Dr. Bera from California.
Mr. Bera. Great. Great, thanks, Mr. Chairman. I may have--
I've got poor internet connection right now as well, so let me
know if my audio is not great.
A question for Dr. Thole. You talked a little bit about
turbo-electric. If you can kind of expand on that compared to,
you know, the battery-charged electric and then also the role
of maybe hybrid technologies as, you know, I think about the
car I bought 15 years ago, it was a hybrid vehicle, and the
next car I'll buy will be all electric and, you know, what role
hybrid technology may play. So, Dr. Thole.
Dr. Thole. Yes, that's a great question. So there's a
spectrum, right? There's the conventional gas turbines that
operate today that--the next phase off of that is what I would
call turbo-electrics. Turbo electrics do not require batteries
or fuel cells, but they do require motor generators and all of
the auxiliary equipment along with that, and what they enable
is a concept that I talked about earlier which is distributed
propulsion, and that can have significant benefits or at least
we believe that it will have significant benefits in overall
reducing the amount of fuel needs. So that's the turbo-electric
class.
Then if you go to the next class, you have the hybrid
electric class of engines or potential solutions. There are
also a range of those. Generally, those still require a gas
turbine as the power plant most likely, but perhaps a battery
would be also put into the overall propulsion system to provide
some power maybe during takeoff when more power is needed and
so forth. So there are a lot of different hybrid electric
architectures that are feasible, and companies are looking at a
range of different architectures right now to see the
tradeoffs.
And then finally, you go to the last step, and the last
step is maybe addressing your next car needs, and that's fully
electric. And as already was mentioned I think by some of the
other Committee Members, fully electric is a big challenge for
large aircraft. And if you remember, 90 percent of the CO
2

emissions is coming from the large aircraft. To scale batteries
and fuel cells to large aircraft, we do not see a path for that
right now because if you look at the current energy density of
batteries and what it would take to get there to implement
solutions by 2050, there--it would require a major--you know, a
major discovery, and we don't project that right now.
Mr. Bera. Maybe for----
Dr. Thole. I hope that answers your question.
Mr. Bera. It does. And maybe for all the witnesses, then
how should we be thinking about this as Congress? What are the
investments we should be making if we're looking at turbo-
electric as, you know, kind of the next step in reducing
emissions and then, you know, the investments we might be
thinking about making in hybrid electric if those are the more
feasible paths and which of you----
Dr. Thole. So the good news here is that both for turbo-
electrics and hybrid electrics, considering that the gas
turbine is still going to be the power plant, any investments
that can be made in that area to increase the thermal
efficiency is going to be--is going to impact both, the success
of both.
In addition, the research that is needed to do the
propulsion aircraft integration will also impact both areas, so
I think that is a key area to invest in.
Dr. Hansman. Yes, I think the--one way to think of it is
that these new hybrid electric or turbo-electric have to buy
their way onto the airplane, so they either have to bring in
[inaudible] efficiencies. So when we think about efficiency,
there's something called the Breguet range equation, so you
either have to improve the aerodynamics or you improve the
energy consumption of the engines. So one of the nice things
about particularly hybrid is you don't have to have a big
engine for takeoff. Today, we [inaudible] because they have to
be [inaudible] get away with a smaller engine so it might be
more efficient. So we need to think about all of those pathways
from the entire airplane system and how does the propulsion
system improve the entire [inaudible].
Mr. Bera. Right. And, Mr. Csonka, if you want to add
something?
Chairman Beyer. Mr. Csonka, you're muted for the moment.
Mr. Csonka. My apologies. I would say the hybrid
propulsion actually is the--a good first step that puts us on a
pathway to expanding opportunities for other technologies down
the road. So when you start the development of the hardware
required to handle more electric power on the aircraft, you
open the door up to the potential hybrid, and you potentially
open the door up to further--more fully electric aircraft that
don't appear to be on the horizon right now. So that's clearly
where it has been a focus of NASA work over the last couple
years, and that clearly would suggest continued effort because
it's a good first step for the--for pathways that lie in our
future but still remain somewhat uncertain.
Mr. Bera. Great. And I see I'm out of time. Mr. Chairman,
I'll yield back.
Chairman Beyer. OK. Thank you, Dr. Bera.
I now recognize the--Mr. Posey from Florida, who will be
followed by Mr. Perlmutter. Mr. Posey, the floor is yours. And
you are muted.
Mr. Posey. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
for holding this hearing.
I fully support the use of technologies to reduce
emissions but have concerns for using feedstocks from crops and
for the use of sustainable aviation fuels. My concern is that
here we have, as in other parts of the world, we're devoting an
increasing amount of land and resources to nonfood crops such
as ethanol and now sustainable aviation fuels. You know, simply
put, I think we should be growing crops for food and not for
fuel.
I recently was shown a white paper on sustainable aviation
fuels from the International Council on Clean Transportation
(ICCT) March of 2021, and the paper contained the following
statement that I'd like to share with you. ``Increased demand
for biofuels made from crops grown on dedicated cropland such
as wheat or palm may displace commodity used for food and feed
and increase the total agricultural area needed to meet the
demand. The conversion of high-carbon stock forest, natural
lands, and pastures to agriculture to meet the increased demand
would release carbon from distributed biomass in soil and
thereby would generate indirect emissions attributable to those
biofuels.'' Those type of things often get forgotten and
overlooked in the process.
Mr. Csonka, in your testimony you state, ``Sustainable
aviation fuels is not yet broadly monetizable and as a result
of the inability of the free-market economics to change this
paradigm, policy is likely needed to affect the change.'' Would
one policy include a new renewable fuel standard (RFS) that
would mandate volume production levels for sustainable aviation
fuels, as happened with the ethanol fuels?
Mr. Csonka. So let me address the first part of your
question first. Yes, I understand ICC's position. I would
suggest that that's somewhat of an alarmist position for an
entity that's interested in other solutions for aviation. And
what I would also say to you is that there are no crops being
grown today for the production of SAF. It's fairly limited in
supply.
But I think the more interesting perspective, Mr. Posey,
is that we--the aviation industry is very attuned to the
criticisms associated with things that have happen in the past
with respect to sustainability of feedstocks, and so it may
surprise you that, as we look at the use of waste streams
alone, municipal solid waste, forestry waste residues, wood
processing waste, ag waste, waste food production oils,
industrial off gases, and some amount of oil coming from crops
that actually don't contribute to indirect land-use change can
supply the full amount of fuel that we need for aviation.
That's without dedicated energy crops. And the aviation
industry is clearly focused where we need to be with respect to
dedicated energy crops on ones that address sustainability.
Secondly, with respect to the issue of policy, there are a
lot of policy elements. Jet fuel actually does--is able to take
advantage of RFS policy at it exists today, as well as tax
treatment from a blenders tax credit perspective and things
like the California low-carbon fuel standard (LCFS) and other
mechanisms in other parts of the world. So the policy does
exist.
Would the production of SAF benefit from refinements to
those policies? Absolutely, and there is a clear effort right
now in Congress to address perhaps the first challenge that the
industry sees as trying to level the playing field between the
production of sustainable aviation fuel and the production of
renewable diesel. I just added up the statistics this morning.
There are 6.9 billion gallons of renewable diesel capacity
being planned today. That technology is completely applicable
to the production of SAF. The issue for--the reason why that
production is targeted to diesel is that diesel enjoys benefits
from that policy that SAF doesn't, and so a blenders tax credit
specific to aviation fuel is being proposed for renewable
diesel to level that playing field and see some of that 7
billion gallons of fuel production come in the direction of
sustainable aviation fuel.
Mr. Posey. I see my time is expired, so I yield back.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Posey. And, Mr. Csonka,
thank you for that very clear description of where those
biofuels are coming from. It was a fairly effective response to
Dr. Babin's opening statement, so thank you.
I'd now like to recognize Mr. Perlmutter, who will be
followed by Congresswoman Young Kim from California. So, Mr.
Perlmutter, the floor is yours.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
And this is to Dr. Hansman and Mr. Csonka. And it's--I'm
coming at it a little different angle here. I'll give you some
background. I've been working on helicopter fuel systems for
the last few years. We've seen in--there's--the fuel systems
have been very fragile. If there have been accidents, the
helicopter blows up, burns everybody. And we recognized this
back during the Vietnam War, and the military changed their
fuel systems. But commercially, we haven't really done much
until just now. There have been some very well-known high-
publicity kinds of accidents where people were killed, and I
guess what I'm saying is I just--it's hard--and, Dr. Thole, you
were talking about this. How long, given the fleets that are
out there, will it take to retool and revamp our engine systems
for sustainability? I'm just trying to get new fuel systems in
helicopters for safety purposes.
So, Dr. Hansman, you started off talking about how long it
will take to retool the entire fleet, so can you and Mr. Csonka
and Dr. Thole expand on that for me, please?
Dr. Hansman. Sure. So if--one way to think of it is if a
brand-new technology came in, so if you go back and look
historically at the jet engine, when the jet engine came in, it
took 20 to 25 years for most of the airplanes flying to be jet
aircraft. So in--another way to think of it is a commercial
transport airplane is like a factory, so you're not going to
throw away that factory. In fact, we don't have the capability
to reproduce it. So even if you had the airplane ready to go
and certified, it would take 20 years to propagate into the
system.
Now, let's step back and look at what it would take to get
that airplane available. You need to design the airplane
[inaudible] certification. One of the reasons--pardon me--why
we are hesitant to go to new technologies is there's a huge
risk in certification. If you go to a totally new technology,
you don't necessarily know what will be--we need to do to make
it fully safe, so it's easier to go to an existing--what Karen
mentioned as a tube-and-wind configuration. We know how to do
that. We know how to do the structures. We certainly know how
to do the engines. So in order to stimulate a kind of
revolution in--there are things we know we can do to make the
airplanes much better, but nobody's going to take the risk. So
this is really where we have to, as a collective, sort of go
into that.
So, now, the sustainable aviation fuels or the alternative
fuels are a little bit easier because they can be used, as
Steve said, as a drop-in, but you need to make sure that
they're safe, so one of the challenges to go to 100 percent
today is to make sure you haven't introduced a problem like
leaking C-fuels or whatever that come due to the chemistry of
the fuels. So we need, you know, to look at it as sort of a
long-term process, all of the steps. We need to do what we can
in the short term, but we need to invest to get the risk down
so we can make the changes in the long term.
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. So let me turn to Mr. Csonka
for a second. So in my helicopter example, the military made
changes 50 years ago. Commercially, we haven't made any
changes, but now we're changing the fuel systems in new
helicopters, but we still need to go retool the current fleets.
So how would your drop-in fuels--I mean, what kinds of things
do we have to worry about with your approach? And you're muted.
Mr. Csonka. Yes. Yes, thanks. Thanks for the question. So
the short answer is you have to take no changes with respect to
the current or legacy or future fleet. The thing we have to
keep in mind is that jet fuel is an extremely efficient,
extremely safe fuel system. It's an energy system. And it's
actually quite unparalleled. We've talked about hydrogen and
other things, and there are tradeoffs associated with those. So
jet fuel works.
I think a lot of the changes that you're talking about are
actually changes to the infrastructure of the vehicle itself,
to delivery systems, fuel protection systems, et cetera. The
beauty of a SAF approach is that all of that stuff can happen
in parallel with the continued introduction of sustainable
aviation fuel. And the reason that that can happen in parallel
is because these molecules that we're producing synthetically,
they are identical to the molecules that you find in jet fuel.
There are no differences. We're not introducing something new.
We're not introducing an ethanol molecule to a gasoline pool or
a fatty acid methyl ester to a diesel pool. These are jet fuel
molecules. So drop in, no change is required, it continues to
enable the safety and efficiency in the system that we've come
to know and love.
Dr. Thole. If I could also say something unless the time
is up.
Chairman Beyer. Dr. Thole, go ahead, please.
Dr. Thole. I--you know, I appreciate what Dr. Hansman said
and, you know, he gave your timescale, but I also want to point
to a counterexample. In 2016, Pratt & Whitney offered the gear
turbofan. The gear turbofan reduces the amount of fuel needed
by aircraft by about 100 gallons of fuel per hour, which is
significant. Since 2016, there are already 10,000 engine orders
for that engine. I can point to an equally successful program,
the LEAP (Leading Edge Aviation Propulsion) program on the GE
side, so the market is very hungry for this.
While it will take some time to infiltrate the entire
market, there are some success stories out there that are
recent success stories that aircraft, as Chairman Beyer pointed
out, you know, airlines are spending a lot of money on fuel,
and so with fuel savings, they're going to buy these new
engines, for example. Thank you.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you very much. Thanks to our
witnesses. I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Perlmutter.
I now recognize and welcome to the Science Committee and
the Space Subcommittee Congresswoman Kim. The floor is yours.
Ms. Kim. Thank you, Chairman Beyer. I'd like to go
directly to the questions and to all our witnesses. I want to
thank you for joining us. This is a very enlightening session
for me.
You know, NASA Aeronautics in southern California has
played a leading role in the new X-Plane flight demonstrators,
including electric propulsion and low boom supersonic flight
demonstrators. As NASA prepares to launch a new transonic
truss-braced wing flight demonstrator, how can a national
subsonic demonstrator support and accelerate adoption of
innovative new structures, composites, and propulsion systems
for commercial aviation that can help increase efficiency and
reduce emissions?
Dr. Hansman. So let me start on that. I think that the
role of the X-Planes is to demonstrate the technology and
provide a basis to de-risk it, to allow the industry to
actually move forward on that. So the--the X-Planes, for
example, the transonic truss-braced wing, it's not just that
transonic wing, it's the set of tests that would be done on the
airplane that would provide the basis. It would allow you to
both design and certify airplanes in the future. So, again,
it's--NASA is not a manufacturer. They're not trying to push an
idea. They should be trying to do the knowledge discovery, the
engineering that would support us in actually investing and
making a new airplane configuration going forward.
So I think it's an important role because there is--you
know, these things take a long time and they're expensive to do
these big test airplanes and to do the engineering right and
get the information.
Dr. Thole. Yes, I think the only thing I would add is I
think the role of NASA is really critical in making sure that
this industry take risks and can demonstrate risky
technologies. And I think that's where NASA, again, working
with the industries and universities, can play a major role.
Ms. Kim. All right. I'll go to next question, actually,
Dr. Thole, since you talked in your testimony, you remind us
that China and the E.U. are also racing to develop sustainable
aviation solutions. So what actions are currently taking place
to ensure that the U.S. is a leader in sustainable aviation
technologies, and where are further investments needed to
remain competitive?
Dr. Thole. Yes, so I will start off by telling you a
little story, and I put this in my testimonial. You know, I
have been approached on numerous occasions by colleagues in
China working at very highly respected universities asking for
me to work with them directly. And I was opened and--you know,
given an opportunity to have an open spigot of money on any
research I wanted to do. And so, you know, I didn't take that
money and--because I am fortunate to be--you know, be well-
funded by the--by industry as well as by FAA, NASA, and the
Department of Energy. And so what's very key and what's
important for us to develop a competitive workforce in this
area and for us to keep that--to keep universities working in
the space is to make sure that NASA Aeronautics is funded at a
heavy rate, the FAA, the ASCENT program, which I also am a part
of, you know, is funded at a high rate and particularly also
the U.S. Department of Energy. So those--you know, those
Federal funding agencies play a key role in making sure that,
you know, we do maintain some--you know, some--we maintain
leadership in the aviation industry.
Ms. Kim. Thank you.
Dr. Hansman. Yes, I think--sorry.
Ms. Kim. Go ahead.
Dr. Hansman. No, I was going to say I think we need to
think about this strategically, so as Karen indicates, we need
to make this as a strategic investment. [inaudible].
Ms. Kim. Well, thank you. I wanted to put in the last
thoughts and maybe if there was time I would like to hear your
thoughts as well. You know, regarding the former U.S. Trade
Representative Robert Lighthizer, he recently stated in an
interview with Reuters that the U.S. and Europe should agree to
cooperate in opposing any future hurtful subsidies used by
China to buildup its commercial aircraft industry. And Mr.
Lighthizer expressed frustration that current WTO rules would
not prevent future subsidies by the European Union or China. So
can you explain what can the U.S. do domestically to prevent
predatory trade practices by other nations? Anyone can answer.
Dr. Hansman. I think we're not experts on WTO policies.
Dr. Thole. I would agree. We're not--I'm not an expert in
this, so I----
Ms. Kim. OK.
Chairman Beyer. Congresswoman Kim, that may be a better
question for the record, but----
Ms. Kim. Yes.
Chairman Beyer [continuing]. We'll get you to ask it as a
Ways and Means Committee.
Ms. Kim. I know my time is up, so if I can get an answer
at a later time, that would be greatly appreciated. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Congresswoman Lofgren, Chairman of the
House Administration Committee and many other things.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thanks very much, Mr. Chairman. This
has been an interesting hearing.
And as everyone probably knows, I represent San Jose,
California, and the San Francisco Bay area is very much on
board with sustainable aviation fuel. In fact, I believe or
have been told that two California airports, San Francisco and
LAX, actually dispense most of the sustainable aviation fuel in
use today.
Now, I think part of the reason for that is the California
Air Resources Board addition of sustainable aviation fuels as
an eligible credit generator to the carbon--low-carbon fuel
standard program, but there are still, I think, a few other
barriers. And I'm interested--I probably--Mr. Csonka, you might
be best to answer this but maybe others have comments, too.
What can be done to reduce the price of SAF's as it compares to
conventional jet fuel? And would Federal policy creating
something like the California credit be part of that price
reduction?
Mr. Csonka. Thank you very much. And yes, absolutely.
First, I concur with your belief and statement that the
introduction of fuel to California airports of SAF is directly
attributable to the policy associated with low-carbon fuel
standard. And so in the comments that I made earlier about the
need for policy to change the paradigm that exists in the
marketplace today with carbon reduction not being recognized or
monetizable, the California low-carbon fuel standard clearly
does that, and it's--it has absolutely been responsible for the
introduction of that fuel.
There are other likely policy mechanisms that can come
into play. Those--and there have been several think tanks and
other folks who have looked at additional mechanisms for
different kinds of policy support that could be brought into
play. I'll refer you to the Atlantic Council's look at policy
applicable to sustainable aviation fuel. But yes, a national
LCFS system could address issues associated with potential
shortfalls to the existing RFS policy. It can do some other
things like level the playing field between all airlines with
respect to whether one airline wants to be more progressive
with SAF usage and another doesn't and helps create a level
playing field there. So yes, there clearly are opportunities
for mechanisms.
The reason that the industry is clearly behind the
blenders tax credit at present is to address this disparity
with respect to existing policy between diesel and jet fuel but
also because it's near term. We understand economics associated
with producing fuel in California under the LCFS and with the
existing non-level playing field, and the blenders tax credit
proposal addresses that issue specifically.
What becomes harder is something like what Congresswoman
Brownley has proposed is a longer-term strategy for what
actually moves us further in the direction of long term
addressing these issues, and that's where it becomes very gray
because we don't know, as an industry, what happens if RFS gets
redone in some fashion. You know, what might happen at the
Federal level to bring in new policy elements? And will
significant regulation that requires multiple years be required
to introduce that kind of legislation? So it's one of those
things of, you know, a bird in the hand is worth two in the
bush. That's why we have the focus on BTC today, and tomorrow,
it becomes much less clear to us what appropriate policy
mechanisms might be.
Ms. Lofgren. I wonder if--you know, this has been a useful
hearing for me to hear that, you know, a molecule is a molecule
is the same as the other jet fuel, so what's the reason behind
the current 50 percent blend limit?
Mr. Csonka. So I said that all of the molecules in SAF are
molecules that are currently found in jet fuel but not
necessarily all of the molecules that are found in jet fuel.
That's the difference. So we established initially a blending
limitation to ensure that the full suite of molecules that
we've been operating off of for the last six, seven decades
still remains in jet fuel while we continue to learn more in
this sector.
The good news is or the bad news is the first couple
pathways were limited in how much--how identical they were to
the jet fuel they were replacing. We've got a couple pathways
now. One's already approved and a couple or more on the way
that now are producing a nearly identical replication of the
full suite of molecules that we find in petroleum jet fuel, so
those create the basis for us over the next couple of years to
increase the SAF blending limit from its 50 percent maximum
level today to perhaps fully drop-in 100 percent synthetic
fuels tomorrow. And we're working diligently on the foundation
of that strategy.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, my time is expired, but let me just say
I think that is exciting news given the role that aviation
plays in climate change.
So, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you very much.
Chairman Beyer. And thank you, Chairman Lofgren.
And now one of our greatest enthusiasts of SAFs,
Congresswoman Brownley from California.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
Ranking Member also for allowing me to participate in today's
hearing.
You know, I have been working on this issue and have
reintroduced a bill that has a number of different policy
mechanisms, including grants, tax credits, standards, as well
as R&D funding.
And I'm grateful for Mr. Csonka here today. Full
disclosure, he has been extraordinarily helpful to my office in
crafting legislation, so I'm greatly, greatly appreciative.
And so, Mr. Csonka, my first question is to you. You know,
as you know, my bill would fund a number of research priorities
that industry experts have told me are important issues in need
of more study. So one of these priorities is developing SAF
that can be used without blending with fossil jet fuel. Another
is studying the climate impacts of non-CO
2

greenhouse gas emissions from jet fuels like water vapor or
contrails. What are these--why are these important research
priorities for the industry?
Mr. Csonka. So the first one is I personally answered that
in the last question which is if we know that we need to count
on sustainable aviation fuels to deliver carbon reductions that
the industry has signed up for, that policymakers might be
interested in, we need to remove artificial barriers long term,
right? So external fans or foes of what we're doing [inaudible]
look at the 50 percent blending limit as a hurdle, a limitation
on how much benefit we can actually get from SAF. And so we're
interested in removing those kinds of carriers and hurdles,
letting the world know that, yes, we can go beyond the 50
percent blend level.
And so if we produce a fuel that delivers an 80 percent
net lifecycle carbon reduction and we're able to use it at a 50
percent level to get a 40 percent reduction, if we're able to
use it at a 100 percent as a full drop-in, we get that full 80
percent reduction. So that's why we're focused on that. And
there is some more research and development activity that needs
to occur that builds on work of the last five years through the
National Jet Fuel Combustion Program and other work of NASA and
FAA to continue to ensure that we move from the paradigm that
we're in today, 50 percent maximum levels to 100 percent max
levels.
Ms. Brownley. I've got a couple more questions
[inaudible].
Chairman Beyer. Go ahead.
Ms. Brownley. So, you know, to all the panelists, I just
wanted to ask a very quick question and that in your opinion do
we need more research before SAF is ready to be deployed at
scale? Just yes or no.
Dr. Hansman. Yes.
Mr. Csonka. Yes.
Dr. Thole. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Csonka. Yes.
Ms. Brownley. OK. And, you know, I guess I would like to
delve into that deeper by your answers, but I don't think I
have enough time, so I'll talk to you later about it.
And the last question before I run out of time here is,
Dr. Thole, you talked about China and the European Union. I was
just wondering if you could tell me, you know, where is--we
sort of--I think in this hearing sort of disclosed and
uncovered where the United States is with SAF at this
particular point and where it might be going in the nearest
future, so where is exactly China and the European Union on SAF
production?
Dr. Thole. Yes, I think I will have to defer to Steve on
this one. He probably is more aware of that than I am in terms
of----
Ms. Brownley. So you have talked more about hydrogen and
other technologies, where they are ahead?
Dr. Thole. They--oh, yes, that's right. They have made a
committed effort to hydrogen right now, a significant financial
commitment, and they are plowing ahead.
Ms. Brownley. OK. So----
Dr. Thole. And China on the--you know, what China is doing
is they are developing an aviation ecosystem, right? Everything
from airframers to engine companies and everything in between,
so----
Ms. Brownley. Very good. So, Mr. Csonka, is China doing
SAF production as part of their portfolio here? No, none?
Mr. Csonka. They are not.
Ms. Brownley. OK.
Mr. Csonka. They've done some demonstration work only.
Europe produces about half, America produces about half of
what's being produced today.
Ms. Brownley. Very good. Well, it looks like my time is
up. Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me--this has
been a great hearing, and I yield back.
Chairman Beyer. Thank you, Congresswoman Brownley, very
much. And I'd really like to thank all of you.
Dr. Thole, we heard your name pronounced six different
ways today, which is fun, but----
Dr. Thole. That's OK. I think I've answered to all of
them, so I hope it's OK. It's Thole. It's Thole, but that's
fine.
Chairman Beyer. And I for one have been really impressed
by the incredible range of knowledge that all three of you have
brought to this, so I'm very, very grateful.
I would like to ask for unanimous consent to introduce a
letter from BIO that was sent and has been reviewed by
Republican staff, so if no concerns, it will be part of the
record.
There--I think Members have two weeks to submit other
additional statements, and we will try to get Congresswoman Kim
an answer on USTR Lighthizer's concerns about China and its
progress.
So with that, I want to thank you very much again for
being part of this, and I bring this meeting to a close. Thank
you all for your testimony. Have a good, good spring and
goodbye.
[Whereupon, at 12:24 p.m., the Subcommittee was
adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
