- BUILDING REGIONAL INNOVATION ECONOMIES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING REGIONAL INNOVATION ECONOMIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 9, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-20

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

44-720PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman

ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
JERRY McNERNEY, California           PETE SESSIONS, Texas
PAUL TONKO, New York                 DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                MIKE GARCIA, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
DON BEYER, Virginia                  YOUNG KIM, California
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAY OBERNOLTE, California
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DAN KILDEE, Michigan                 VACANCY
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. HALEY STEVENS, Michigan, Chairwoman

PAUL TONKO, New York                 MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida,
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                    Ranking Member
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania             ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
DON BEYER, Virginia                  PETE SESSIONS, Texas
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         PETER MEIJER, Michigan

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

June 9, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Haley Stevens, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Michael Waltz, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    15

Written statement by Representative Deborah Ross, Subcommittee on
Research and Technology, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    16

Witnesses:

Mr. Dan Berglund, President and CEO, SSTI
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    20

Professor Erica R.H. Fuchs, Department of Engineering and Public
Policy, Carnegie Mellon University
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    37

Ms. Paula Nas, Director, Office of Economic Development,
University of Michigan--Flint
Oral Statement...............................................    56
Written Statement............................................    58

Hon. Elizabeth Hutt Pollard, Secretary of Science and Innovation,
State of Oklahoma
Oral Statement...............................................    66
Written Statement............................................    68

Discussion.......................................................    74

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Dan Berglund, President and CEO, SSTI........................    90

Professor Erica R.H. Fuchs, Department of Engineering and Public
Policy, Carnegie Mellon University.............................    96

Ms. Paula Nas, Director, Office of Economic Development,
University of Michigan--Flint..................................   101

Hon. Elizabeth Hutt Pollard, Secretary of Science and Innovation,
State of Oklahoma..............................................   103
Addendum: ``2021-2026 Science & Innovation Strategic Plan--
Developing an Innovation Economy in Oklahoma''.............   105

BUILDING REGIONAL INNOVATION ECONOMIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 9, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m.,
via Zoom, Hon. Haley Stevens [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Well, this hearing will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recess at
any time. Pursuant to House Resolution 8, today the Committee
is meeting virtually. Just a couple of reminders that we've
gone over before about the conduct of this remote hearing.
Members should absolutely keep their video feed on for as long
as they are present in the hearing. Members are responsible for
their own microphones. Please also keep your microphones muted,
unless you are speaking. Finally, if Members have documents to
submit for the record, please e-mail them to the Committee
Clerk, whose e-mail address was circulated prior to the
hearing. And, with that, allow me to say good morning, and
welcome to today's hearing on Building Regional Innovation
Economies. Thank you to our distinguished witnesses for joining
us.
In recent decades economic growth has become increasingly
concentrated in a relatively small number of cities and
regions. This is then tracked across analysis from leading
experts. Between 1980 and 2016, for instance, the top 10 metro
areas saw their earnings grow 57 percent more than elsewhere in
the country. The top 10 metro areas saw their earnings grow 57
percent, almost 60 percent, more than anywhere else in the
country. According to a recent report from the Brookings
Institution, more than a third of American jobs in high growth
innovation industries within the technology sectors, computer
manufacturing, biotech, telecommunications, are located in just
16 counties. We certainly want to recognize and celebrate the
success of American innovation hubs spanning this country, and
continue to support their role in advancing U.S.
competitiveness while we drill down and identify opportunities
to create economies of scale across the country, particularly
in areas that have experienced decline or transformations of
the resources based on trade challenges, and different dynamics
that have led to decline.
The United States needs to remain globally competitive,
and, as such, we must continue to address issues that are
hindering geographic diversity and economic growth, and we must
have intentionality in addressing some of the root causes of
the increasing social and economic disparities in our country.
The Federal Government has long been a partner in building
regional innovation economies through many agencies across the
Federal Government with different missions. Today we will be
focusing particularly on the role of the Economic Development
Administration (EDA) at the Department of Commerce. And, in
full disclosure, I have worked at the Economic Development
Administration from 2011 to 2012. Your Chair has worked there.
I was pleased to see that President Biden shares a vision
to support EDA's core mission. In the American Jobs Plan, the
President calls for supercharging Federal support for regional
innovation by investing $20 billion in EDA grants to develop 10
regional innovation hubs. Such a plan, if developed and
implemented carefully, could spark economic activity, economic
growth, build community wealth, and help close the gap in
access to the innovation economy for communities of color and
rural communities in particular. We also ask the question, if
the President is making these investments, if we should stop at
10, and continue to expand and grow from there.
We have an opportunity to be intentional about how we
continue to grow and achieve shared purpose in the country in
an age of rapid transformation. EDA has demonstrated historic
success by allowing regions to self-select what their
innovation ecosystem looks like. Now we have the opportunity to
build on this work, allowing the--for the growth and the
development of clusters in industry-specific innovation, to
build economic development in regions that may have--otherwise
been left behind. That is certainly an example that we have
seen across the board in a place that I call home here in
Michigan. Not only did we put the world on wheels at the
beginning of the 20th century with automobiles, but we built an
entire innovation ecosystem that sprung up around new machines.
In 1912 the Nation's first Highway Materials Testing Lab
opened in Ann Arbor, Michigan. In 1918 a police officer from
Detroit invented and installed our Nation's first four-way red,
yellow, green electric traffic light at the corner of Woodward
and Michigan Avenues in Detroit. In 1960 Michigan became the
first State to complete a border-to-border interstate. Now our
auto companies, at the turn of another century, are leading the
world in electric vehicle technology, autonomous and connected
vehicle technology, connected infrastructure, and other
innovations that are the very back bone of our Midwestern
regional economy.
Building regional innovation economies is certainly no
simple task. It requires many committed partners, it requires
intentionality, and it requires a lot of complicated things to
fall into place. Federal investments are needed now more than
ever to help build new and vibrant innovation economies,
transforming us and propelling us into the 21st century--the
mid-21st century, where we are heading. We will learn from past
successes, failures, and unintended consequences if we are to
get this right. The Science, Space, and Technology Committee
led the authorization for the Regional Innovation Program at
EDA, in 2010, and we will continue to evaluate these new
proposals for the agency. We want to thank our witnesses for
being here today, and we certainly look forward to the
discussion.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Stevens follows:]

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing on building
regional innovation economies. Thank you to our distinguished
witnesses for joining us.
In recent decades, economic growth has become increasingly
concentrated in a relatively small number of cities and
regions. Between 1980 and 2016, the top 10 metro areas saw
their earnings grow 57 percent more than elsewhere in the
country. According to a recent report from the Brookings
Institution, more than a third of American jobs in high-growth
innovation industries such as technology, computer
manufacturing, biotech, telecommunications, are located in just
16 counties.
We should celebrate the successes of innovation hubs such
as Silicon Valley and Boston and continue to support their role
in advancing U.S. competitiveness. However, for the United
States to remain globally competitive we must address issues
that are hindering geographic diversity in economic growth and
we must have intentionality in addressing some of the root
causes of the increasing social and economic disparities in our
country.
The Federal government has long been a partner in building
regional innovation economies through many agencies with
different missions. Today we will be focusing particularly on
the role of the Economic Development Administration at the
Department of Commerce.
I was pleased to see President Biden shares my support for
the EDA's core mission. In the American Jobs Plan, the
President calls for supercharging Federal support for regional
innovation by investing $20 billion in EDA grants to develop 10
regional innovation hubs. Such a plan, if developed and
implemented carefully, could spark economic activity, build
community wealth, and help close the gap in access to the
innovation economy for communities of color and rural
communities.
We have an opportunity to be intentional about how we
continue to grow and achieve shared purpose in the country in
an age of rapid transformation.
EDA has demonstrated historic success by allowing regions
to self-select what their innovation ecosystem looks like. Now
we have the opportunity to build on this work, allowing the
growth and clusters of industry-specific innovation to build
economic development in regions that may have otherwise been
left behind.
That's what we've done in Michigan. Not only did we put the
world on wheels at the beginning of the 20th century with
automobiles, but an entire innovation ecosystem sprung up
around these new machines. In 1912, the nation's first highway
materials testing lab was opened in Ann Arbor, Michigan. In
1918, a police officer from Detroit invented and installed our
nation's first four-way red, yellow, green electric traffic
light at the corner of Woodward and Michigan avenues in
Detroit. In 1960, Michigan became the first state to complete a
border-to-border interstate.
Now, our auto companies are leading the world in electric
vehicle technology, autonomous and connected vehicle
technology, connected infrastructure, and other innovations
that are the very backbone of our Midwestern regional economy.
Building regional innovation economies is no simple task,
requiring many committed partners, and many different pieces to
fall into place. Federal investments are needed now more than
ever to help build new and vibrant innovation economies in
regions across the country.
We must learn from past successes, failures, and unintended
consequences if we are to get this right. The Science, Space,
and Technology Committee led the authorization for the regional
innovation programs at EDA in 2010, and we will continue to
evaluate these new proposals for the agency.
I want to again thank the witnesses for being here today
and I look forward to the discussion.

Chairwoman Stevens. And with that, slightly over time,
asking for your obliging, I now am going to recognize Mr. Waltz
for an opening statement.
Mr. Waltz. OK. Thank you. Good morning. Thanks, Chairwoman
Stevens. Thanks for holding today's Subcommittee hearing on
regional innovation, and also thank you to our expert witnesses
for being with us. I think the question before us is how do we
spur regional innovation to ensure all Americans have the
opportunity to participate in the innovation economy? And
that's, you know, whether they live in Daytona Beach, in my
district, or all the way up in Boston, Massachusetts, or over
in Michigan. You know, this is a challenge that policymakers
have long struggled with, as the Chairwoman noted, and one that
has received renewed interest over the last few months, as we
seek to advance our economy through technological innovation,
and compete with our adversaries, and our competitors, like
China.
There are multiple proposals from the administration, by
our colleagues in Congress, calling for significant investments
in the development of regional innovation economies, and I'm
glad that the Science Committee has taken the time to carefully
review and investigate these proposals. You know, and--we have
to be candid, and, unfortunately, the history of regional
innovation is littered with successes and failures. In the
1980's the United States invested heavily in science and
technology industrial parks. Many of these parks,
unfortunately, were unable to attract the high-tech companies
needed to drive economic growth, and ultimately ended up
failing. The buildings were impressive, but they were empty.
And we need to make sure we don't repeat those mistakes. We
need to make sure we don't just throw money at what we all, I
think, agree is an issue, and a cause worth supporting. I hope
we can use this hearing, amongst others, as an opportunity to
hear different perspectives and new ideas on how Congress can
successfully support regional innovation, and avoid the past
failures.
Me--my home State of Florida is a great case study, I
think, in the successes and challenges of regional innovation.
Our Florida space coast is a key part of Central Florida's
economy. It's created jobs for Floridians in the private space
industry, high-tech manufacturing, academia. From NASA's
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration's) first launch,
putting man on the Moon, the Florida Space Coast has pioneered
technological innovations, has given the U.S. the resources and
edge necessary to enhance national security, defend against her
adversaries in the 21st century space race.
But at the same time, Florida has struggled in other areas
of innovation. For example, Florida ranks comparatively low in
access to early [inaudible] despite its size partly because
many of Florida's accredited investors typically focus on real
estate, or other low-tech investments because they're
unfamiliar with the opportunities in innovative technology
companies and equity-based investment mechanisms. Florida's
technology sector also faces a skill shortage, struggling to
find qualified workers to fill STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) jobs, which is a significant
barrier to growth.
So one of my goals is to ensure that these critical
innovation jobs continue to grow, remain an integral part of
our economy, and we take a long-term, decades-long approach. To
that end, I think we need to understand how to successfully
bring together local, State, and Federal Government with
industry, with investors, with educational institutions at all
levels within our community, and I look forward to hearing
ideas from our witnesses of how we can do that.
I believe that strategic investments in science, in
technology, in research, in STEM education are key to enhancing
our national security and economic competitiveness, so I think
we have a lot of agreement there. Our Committee has already
worked together, which I'm proud to say on a bipartisan basis,
to develop two bills that would double down our investments in
science and tech, the NSF (National Science Foundation) for the
Future Act and the DOE (Department of Energy) Science for the
Future Act--the Department of Energy Science for the Future
Act. I will also soon be introducing bipartisan legislation to
create a national science and technology strategy and
quadrennial review process. This will allow us to direct more
strategic, whole of government planning process, and put that
process in place to establish some priorities, and better
coordinate between agencies with a large focus on also then
securing that research from theft, particularly from China.
This strategy will help the U.S. remain competitive on a
global scale, and stay a leader in cross-cutting innovation.
The U.S. must not fall behind in developing the technology of
the futures. I believe that together our Committees and the
bills will help the U.S. remain a global leader. Thank you
again, Madam Chairwoman, thank you again to our witnesses, and
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waltz follows:]

Good morning and thank you Chairwoman Stevens for holding
today's subcommittee hearing on regional innovation. And thank
you to our expert witnesses for being with us.
How do we spur regional innovation ensure that all
Americans have the opportunity participate in the innovation
economy, whether they live in Daytona Beach, Florida or Boston,
Massachusetts? This is a challenge that policymakers have long
struggled with, and one that has received renewed interest over
the last few months as we seek to advance our economy through
technological innovation and compete globally with countries
like China.
There are multiple proposals from the Administration and by
Members of Congress calling for sizable investments for the
development of regional innovation economies, and I am glad
that the Science Committee is taking the time to carefully
review and investigate these proposals. Unfortunately, the
history of regional innovation is littered with policy
failures. In the 1980's, the United States invested heavily in
science and technology industrial parks. Many of these parks
were unable to attract the high-tech companies needed to drive
economic growth and ultimately ended up failing. The buildings
were impressive, but empty. We need to make sure we don't
repeat those mistakes. I hope we can use this hearing as an
opportunity to hear different perspectives and new ideas on how
Congress can successfully support regional innovation and avoid
the failures of the past.
My home state of Florida is a great case study of the
successes and challenges of regional innovation. Florida's
Space Coast is a key part of Central Florida's economy, and has
created jobs for Floridians in private space industry, high-
tech manufacturing, and academia. From NASA's first launch to
putting a man on the moon, Florida's Space Coast has pioneered
technological innovations and has given the United States the
resources and technological edge necessary to enhance national
security and defend against our adversaries in the 21st century
space race.
At the same time, Florida has struggled in other areas of
innovation. For example, Florida ranks comparatively low in
access to early-stage capital despite its size, partly because
many of Florida's accredited investors often focus on real
estate or other low- tech investments because they are
unfamiliar with opportunities in innovative technology
companies and equity-based investment mechanisms. Florida's
technology sector also faces a skills shortage, struggling to
find qualified workers to fill STEM jobs, which is a barrier to
growth.
My goal is to ensure that these critical innovation jobs
continue to grow and remain an integral part of Florida's
economy for decades to come. To do that, we need to understand
how to successfully bring together the local, state, and
federal government with industry, investors, and educational
institutions at all levels within a community. I look forward
to hearing ideas from our witnesses how we can do that in
Central Florida, and all regions of the country.
I believe strategic investments in science and technology
research and STEM education are key to enhancing our national
security and economic competitiveness.
Our Committee has already worked together on a bipartisan
basis to develop two bills that would double down on our
investment in science and technology: The NSF for the Future
Act, and the DOE Science for the Future Act. I will also soon
be introducing bipartisan legislation to create a national
science and technology strategy and quadrennial review process.
This will allow us to direct a more strategic whole-of-
government planning process to establish national priorities
with better coordination between agencies with a large focus on
securing research from China. This strategy will help the
United States remain competitive on a global scale, and stay a
leader in cross- cutting innovation.
I hope today's hearing will start an important dialogue on
what strategic investments are needed to encourage and support
innovation economies in the United States and will yield
potential legislative ideas for the Committee to consider. The
U.S. must not fall behind China in developing the technologies
of the future, and I believe that together our Committees bills
will help the U.S. remain the global leader.
Thank you again to our witnesses for your participation
today. I yield back.

Chairwoman Stevens. Perfectly on time. The Chair now
recognizes the Ranking Member of the Committee, Mr. Lucas, for
an opening statement.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for holding
today's Subcommittee hearing, and thank you to our witnesses
for your participation today. I look forward to hearing your
expert testimonies on how we can support the development of
regional innovation economies, as innovation is a propelling
force for economic growth and prosperity. I would especially
like to thank Secretary Pollard for taking time to speak with
us today about Oklahoma's science and innovation strategy plan.
This commitment to investing in innovation will grow our
State's economy, provide Oklahomans with high-paying jobs, and
advance our competitiveness. Oklahoma has significant existing
infrastructure in three key technology areas, aerospace and
autonomous systems, biotechnology and life sciences, and energy
diversification. Further investments in these key areas would
advance Oklahoma's innovation and potential to become a top 10
State for science and technology. The Oklahoma City Innovation
District, the Tulsa Innovation Labs, the OSU (Oklahoma State
University) Discovery Building, and the Oklahoma Pandemic
Center for Innovation and Excellence are also examples of
Oklahoma's commitment to lead in innovation.
Despite these investments, there are a few challenges
affecting Oklahoma's ability to develop an innovation economy.
Oklahoma ranks last for State investment in human capital, and
36th place in total R&D (research and development)
expenditures. It's important to recognize these challenges to
better understand how Oklahoma can leverage State, local, and
Federal Government resources, along with academic and industry,
to overcome these challenges. While these challenges are
specific to Oklahoma, the fact is every community has their own
unique set of goals and challenges for developing their
research industry infrastructure.
As my colleague noted earlier, there are multiple
proposals from the administration and Members of Congress on
developing regional innovation economies, and I'm happy to see
that this Committee is using this hearing as an opportunity to
explore these proposals, along with new ideas to foster
regional innovation. As we consider these proposals, I want to
make sure we keep in mind the flexibility required to ensure
they work across urban and rural areas, coastal and Midwestern
States, big and small communities, and everything in between.
For instance, while current proposals consider regional
diversity when issuing awards, more often than not many rural
communities, like those in my district, struggle to compete for
funding, since the matching requirements are beyond the
resources available within these communities. I hope today we
can learn how all communities can have the opportunity to
become leaders in regional innovation, and help solve some of
the 21st century's most challenging problems.
With that, I thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens for holding today's
subcommittee hearing. And thank you to our witnesses for your
participation today. I look forward to hearing your expert
testimonies on how we can support the development of regional
innovation economies, as innovation is a propelling force for
economic growth and prosperity.
I would especially like to thank Secretary Pollard for
taking the time to speak with us today about Oklahoma's Science
and Innovation Strategic Plan. This commitment to investing in
innovation will grow our state's economy, provide Oklahomans
with high- paying jobs, and advance our competitiveness.
Oklahoma has significant existing infrastructure in three
key technology areas: aerospace and autonomous systems;
biotechnology and life sciences; and energy diversification.
Further investments in these key areas would advance Oklahoma's
innovation and potential to become a Top 10 State for science
and technology. The Oklahoma City Innovation District, Tulsa
Innovation Labs, OSU Discovery Building, and the Oklahoma
Pandemic Center for Innovation and Excellence are also examples
of Oklahoma's commitment to lead in innovation.
Despite these investments, there are a few challenges
affecting Oklahoma's ability to develop an innovation economy.
Oklahoma ranks last for state investment in human capital, and
36th place in total R&D expenditures. It is important to
recognize these challenges to better understand how Oklahoma
can leverage state, local, and federal government resources
along with academia and industry to overcome these challenges.
While these challenges are specific to Oklahoma, the fact
is that every community has their own unique set of goals and
challenges for developing their research industry
infrastructure. As my colleague noted earlier, there are
multiple proposals from the Administration and Members of
Congress on developing regional innovation economies, and I'm
happy to see that this Committee is using this hearing as an
opportunity to explore these proposals, along with new ideas to
foster regional innovation.
As we consider these proposals, I want to make sure we keep
in mind the flexibility required to ensure they work across
urban and rural areas, costal and midwestern states, big and
small communities, and everything in between. For instance,
while current proposals consider regional diversity when
issuing awards, more often than not many rural communities,
like those in my district, struggle to compete for funding
since the matching requirements are beyond the resources
available within these communities. I hope today we can learn
how all communities can have the opportunity to become leaders
in regional innovation, and help solve some of the 21st
century's most challenging problems.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairwoman Stevens. Well, thank you, Ranking Member Lucas.
And if there are any other Members who wish to submit
additional opening statements, your statements will be added to
the record at this point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

I want to thank Chairwoman Stevens and Ranking Member Waltz
for holding this hearing. And thank you to our esteemed panel
of witnesses for joining us to share your expertise.
The U.S. innovation ecosystem is the envy of the world for
its capacity to create new technologies, jobs, and wealth. A
number of U.S. cities and regions have led the way in building
vibrant technology hubs. In an increasingly technology-driven
world, these hubs are where new high-skilled, high-paying jobs
are being created. While they benefit the country as a whole,
the prosperity created by technology hubs is not shared equally
across the country. It is not even shared within the regions in
which the hubs are situated. If unaddressed, the concentration
of economic growth will hamper our science and technology
leadership and continue to exacerbate other societal
challenges.
There have been a number of proposals for building upon
longstanding Federal investments in building geographically
diverse innovation economies. President Biden has called on
Congress to invest $20 billion to fund at least 10 regional
innovation hubs and to help increase access to the innovation
economy for communities of color and rural communities. He has
also called for significant investments in research, technology
development, and manufacturing innovation through our nation's
premier science agencies. These are bold and timely proposals.
The Science, Space, and Technology Committee is leading the way
in thoughtful and transparent discussion and vetting of these
proposals, including through this hearing.
In making any new investments of the scale called for in
the American Jobs Plan and elsewhere, we must focus on ensuring
a more equitable distribution of the benefits of new innovation
economies. In addition to prioritizing geographic diversity, we
must take steps to avoid replicating the income inequality and
housing issues troubling our existing technology hubs. This
starts by bringing a more diverse set of experts and voices to
the planning table. Every city and every region is unique. The
Federal government should not dictate local plans for building
regional innovation economies. However, the Federal government,
as a partner and co-investor, can require that every plan have
certain elements and include certain kinds of partners.
Addressing these challenges at the Federal level will also
require a renewed commitment to collaboration between Federal
agencies. While today's hearing is focused on the Economic
Development Agency, or EDA, it isn't the only agency with an
important role to play. Moreover, the EDA cannot accomplish
these goals on its own. Congress must be clear about the role
of each agency in contributing to regional innovation. And we
must leverage the strengths of each agency for maximum benefit.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses' insights on how we
can address these challenges. And I look forward to continuing
the bipartisan work of this committee to advance bold and smart
science and technology policies for our future.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Ross follows:]

Thank you for holding this hearing, Chairwoman Stevens, and
thank you to all the panelists for joining ustoday. I represent
a district that includes much of the Research Triangle Park,
the largest research parkin the United States and a premier
global innovation center. The Triangle is an ecosystem of
hundreds ofcompanies, government agencies, academic
institutions, startups, and nonprofits that in effect work
inconcert to attract talent; bolster the local economy; and
provide critical research, technology, and cleanenergy
leadership to the region and nation. Last week I led a
roundtable in my district on regionalinnovation. We determined
that three key ingredients that have contributed to the
Triangle's successare local business community buy-in,
connections to universities, and an environment conducive
tostart-ups. We also discussed challenges facing the region,
including the need for more early educationSTEM opportunities
to strengthen the talent pipeline and the growing affordable
housing crisis.

Chairwoman Stevens. Also at this time I want to take a
moment to introduce our just phenomenal witnesses, who have
graced us with their presence today. Our first witness is a
sincere privilege for me to introduce, Mr. Dan Berglund. Mr.
Berglund is the President and CEO (chief executive officer) of
SSTI (State Science & Technology Institute), a non-profit
organization that leads, supports, and strengthens efforts to
improve State and regional economies through science,
technology, and innovation. Mr. Berglund has held this position
since SSTI was founded in 1996, and under his leadership, SSTI
has developed a range of services focused on communication,
education, information, data analysis, and research. Prior to
his position at SSTI, Mr. Berglund served as the Director of
Ohio's Thomas Edison Program, and the Ohio Technology Transfer
Organization, and as the Assistant Deputy Director of the Ohio
Department of Development's Division of Technological
Innovation. But all of that's to say, if you are in the
technology-based economic development world, you are connected
to SSTI, and leveraging their resources, or you are very likely
doing it wrong.
Our next witness is Dr. Erica Fuchs. Dr. Fuchs is a
professor in the Department of Engineering and Public Policy at
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), and a Research Associate with
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Her research focuses
on the development, commercialization, and global manufacturing
of emerging technologies and national policy in that context.
Professor Fuchs is leading Carnegie Mellon's College of
Engineering moon shot on national technology strategy in
critical technologies supply chain and infrastructure. She also
was the founding faculty director of CMU's Manufacturing
Futures Initiative, an initiative across six schools aimed to
revolutionize the commercialization and local production of
advanced manufacturing projects.
And now, for our next witness, Ms. Paula Nas, I would like
to yield to my friend, and the dean of the Michigan delegation,
Mr. Kildee, to introduce Ms. Paula Nas of the Economic
Development Office at the University of Michigan at Flint.
Mr. Kildee. Well, first of all, thank you, Chairwoman
Stevens, and Ranking Member Waltz for holding this hearing, and
I'm sure I'm joined by our Chair, Chair Stevens, and my friend,
Representative Peter Meijer, in welcoming a fellow Michigander
to testify before us. It's my pleasure to welcome Paula Nas to
testify as a witness today. Paula is the Director of the Office
of Economic Development at the University of Michigan--Flint,
where I once, many decades ago, was a student. She's been a
lecturer in Economics at U of M-Flint for the past 25 years.
She oversees several impressive programs that I've been
observing for some time, including the Economic Development
Administration's University Center for Community and Economic
Development, the GIS (Geographic Information Systems) Center,
the Innovation Incubator, and the Cybersecurity Training Center
at U of M-Flint. Her primary academic interests are law and
economics and microeconomic theory. She's a graduate of the
Honors Program at U of M-Flint, and holds a Master's in
Economics from Michigan State University, a fact which I will
not hold against her, and a J.D. from Wayne State University
Law School. She's also an active member of our community,
serving on a number of community boards and councils, including
as a member of the Grand Blanc City Council, a large suburb of
my hometown of Flint. She serves on the Board of Educational
Association of University Centers as well. So, Paula, thank you
for your commitment to the community, to economic development
in our region, and for joining us to share your expertise
today. With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. And, with that, let it be known that
three of the 14 Members of Congress from Michigan are on the
Science, Space, and Technology Committee.
Our final witness is the Honorable Elizabeth Hutt Pollard,
Secretary of Science and Innovation for the State of Oklahoma.
Secretary Pollard was appointed to her position in June of
2020. In this role she places a strategic emphasis on enabling
science and innovation to impact health, commerce, and STEM
education for Oklahoma. Prior to her appointment as secretary,
she served as Deputy Secretary of Science and Innovation. In
addition to her cabinet role, Secretary Pollard is Executive
Chair of Applied Silver, a materials science health tech
company located in Silicon Valley, addressing infection control
and antibiotic stewardship.
As our witnesses should know, you will each have 5 minutes
for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will be
included for the record for the hearing. When you have
completed your spoken testimony, we will begin questions. Each
Member will have 5 minutes to address the panel, and we will
start with Mr. Berglund.

TESTIMONY OF MR. DAN BERGLUND,

PRESIDENT AND CEO, SSTI

Mr. Berglund. Good morning, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking
Member Waltz, and Ranking Member Lucas, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee. My name's Dan Berglund, President
and CEO of the State Science & Technology Institute. I'm
honored to appear before you today to discuss a topic that I've
dedicated 36 years of my professional life to. My testimony is
grounded in my personal experience of 7 years in creating,
administering, and evaluating innovation programs in Ohio, and
over the last 29 years working with all 50 States to build
innovation economies.
For several decades, many States, as well as
municipalities, philanthropic, and industry partners have been
investing in their regional innovation economies to create
tectonic opportunities. As I outlined in my written testimony,
Georgia, St. Louis, and Pennsylvania, among others, are those
that have been remarkably successful. We need to build on their
examples and other successful efforts. Those efforts that are
working share characteristics that can guide a responsible
Federal program. They, first, bring all actors together. The
private sector, institutions of higher education, economic
development organizations, nonprofits, foundations, to work
collaboratively. Second, they develop an approach that's
customized to the local strengths, needs, and cultures of the
region. And third, they make long term, sustained commitments
that are of a scale to make a difference, and flexible enough
to adapt to emerging opportunities.
Data show we face significant economic problems. In 1970
the middle class made up 62 percent of U.S. aggregate income,
according to the Pew Research Center. By 2018 that had declined
to just 43 percent. The percentage of population in the middle
class shrunk in every State but Nebraska from 2000 to 2017. In
2018 the Pew Research Center calculates that Black median
household income stood at 61 percent that of White households.
An Iowa State University economist, David Swenson, has
estimated that between 2008 and 2017 98-1/2 percent of non-farm
job growth occurred in metropolitan counties. Meanwhile, the
Chinese are making major investments in science and technology.
While we lead in basic research, that is not enough. As
valuable as basic research is, many people have a mistaken
belief that if we just fill the pipeline with basic research,
it'll somehow magically make it into the marketplace throughout
the U.S. It takes more than magic. It takes hard work and
resources that, right now, are coming primarily from States and
universities to identify the research with commercial
potential, fund proof of concept, and actually get the
technology to the private sector.
We know this work can be done successfully because we're
seeing it done at the local level. So what do we need to do?
There's 40 years of experience at the State and local level on
approaches to build innovation economies. We need a national
strategy, and the funding to take those lessons and implement
them in a sustained effort to bring this work to scale, and in
all areas of the country. We need bold, robust support from the
Federal Government that offers flexible funding to States and
organizations to build regional innovation economies, and
transform our national economy. Funding from the Federal
Government that addresses the whole innovation system, rather
than individual elements of a system, would be critical to
building a regional innovation economy, and different than any
other Federal program.
The regional technology hubs proposal of the Endless
Frontier Act deserves serious consideration by this Committee.
The legislation accomplishes much of what I've described above,
with specific focus on entrepreneurship through business
development, technology maturation, and workforce. The
legislation as it passed through the Senate Commerce Committee
could support dozens of hubs that are focused and large enough
to have a meaningful impact on their regions. The results would
be more areas and people benefiting from a technology economy,
and a stronger country. As I outlined in my written testimony,
there are specific items in Endless Frontier that should be
addressed, including the makeup of eligible recipients metrics,
evaluation of the program, and where the program is located.
In summary, we can no longer afford to follow an approach
where regions are cobbling together support from States,
private entities, and single-purpose Federal programs.
Congress, which clearly recognizes the critical threats facing
the American economy, should guide a strategic substantial
investment in regional innovation economies. Thank you for the
opportunity to provide this testimony. My apologies for going
over.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berglund follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. With that, Dr. Fuchs.

TESTIMONY OF PROFESSOR ERICA R.H. FUCHS,

DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING AND PUBLIC POLICY,

CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY

Dr. Fuchs. Fuchs. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking
Member Lucas, Ranking Member Waltz, and Members of the
Subcommittee. Trained as an engineer, I bring perspectives from
my research laboratory, which is the factory floor of
manufacturing firms across the United States and around the
world. Over the last half a century, the global geopolitical
balance of scientific, economic, and production capabilities
has shifted away from U.S. dominance. Today China is the
largest producer, and second largest consumer market. The U.S.
is no longer in a singular position of scientific and
technological leadership across domains. Meanwhile, we face
equal or greater challenges on our home front. Economic
inequality has increased, and social mobility declined. Central
to these trends are trade and technology change. While
increased and more evenly distributed science and technology
funding is essential for national security, economic
prosperity, and social welfare, realizing policymakers'
multiple objectives for these Federal investments will require
institutional innovations to ensure our technology investments
realize the economic and social benefits we seek.
First, strategic investments in science and technology can
change the playing field and rules of the game. To regain and
maintain global economic competitiveness, our priority should
be making products that can only be made here, and that
everyone in the world wants. In advanced semiconductors for
communications, our research finds that while firms can save
costs in the short term by producing older generation products
offshore, the innovative next-generation products hold
potential to address national security firm--concerns, and
enable firms to access new, larger markets. Those innovative
next-generation products can only be produced in the U.S. and
Europe, and involve more skilled and innovative jobs for high
school educated operators. Similarly, as the world scales up
electric vehicle production, the country that leads in
innovations in battery recycling and cobalt-free batteries has
the potential to change global market prices, change the global
location of production, and free itself from single country
supply risks. Our research again suggests that battery
production may involve more skilled and empowered jobs for high
school educated shop floor workers. We need to invest to ensure
we make these and other critical technologies here.
Second, to help regions reap locally the longer-term
economic benefits of research and technology investments, we
need to strategically invest in infrastructure now. Nationwide
investments in the infrastructure of the future hold promise
not only to improve security, productivity, and equity, but
also to revitalize the U.S. worker skills and manufacturing
ecosystems necessary to manufacture the products of the future.
The mason, floorman, engineer, and computer science skills
relevant to intelligent transportation and urban infrastructure
systems have corollaries in resilient grid infrastructure,
privacy preserving health infrastructure, and intelligent
manufacturing. Our investments and trainings should be
strategic to leverage these overlaps, and the career
transitions between them.
Third, the U.S. must invest in the intellectual
foundations, data infrastructure, and analytic capabilities
necessary to inform technology investments. Research by
ourselves and many other shows that inadequate data and
analytic capability is weakening government decisionmaking
regarding critical technologies, supply chains, and
infrastructure. Our research demonstrated the possibility of
using text processing of public information to substantially
improve the government's real-time situational awareness of
critical medical supply chains during COVID. In other work we
are leveraging new tools to quantify the skills required for
emerging technologies before large-scale investments are made,
and to better understand skill crosswalks that enable firm
pivots and skill transitions. The executive branch, legislative
branch, and all agencies need access to, and to be informed by
the data and analytics today's technology and public/private
collaborations could make possible.
Finally, the U.S. should create a nimble entity with
national technology strategy as its mission. U.S. agencies are
single-mission driven, and yet technology investments, by their
very nature, simultaneously affect security, economic
competitiveness, and social welfare, including health,
environment, and equity. Regional investments in research and
development, in infrastructure of the future, and local
economic development have the potential to have their
investments multiplied, if thoughtfully linked. A new
directorate focused on national technology strategy will need
to be empowered, to influence, and have incentives to
collaborate with the excellent mission-oriented agencies in our
government. Getting these investments right is non-trivial, but
as we've shown in our research, win-win solutions exist. This
directorate must be backed by the star-studded
interdisciplinary data and analytic team necessary to make
tradeoffs transparent and help policymakers ensure the security
and welfare of all citizens in our Nation.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fuchs follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you, Dr. Fuchs, and we're glad
to hear from you in Congress today, and we're hoping the White
House has you on speed dial too. And, with that, we'll hear
from Ms. Nas.

TESTIMONY OF MS. PAULA NAS,

DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,

UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN--FLINT

Ms. Nas. Hello to Chairwoman Stevens, Ranking Member
Lucas, and Ranking Member Waltz, and distinguished Members of
the Subcommittee, including Congressman Kildee, who represents
my home State. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
the Subcommittee today. My name is Paula Nas, and I serve as
the Director of the Office of Economic Development at the
University of Michigan in Flint, where the U of M-Flint EDA
University Center for Community and Economic Development is
housed. It is an honor to share my views----
Ms. Moore. Madam Chair, I can barely hear her. Is----
Chairwoman Stevens. Yeah. Thank you. Congresswoman Moore
is recognized. I have 20/20 vision. I don't know what the
hearing is. I was having a little problems hearing too with
you, Ms. Nas, so maybe you could just speak a little bit closer
to the microphone?
Ms. Nas. OK, sure. Thank you. It is an honor to share my
views--are you able to hear me better? It is an honor to share
my views about the importance of the Economic Development
Administration's support for the development of regional
innovation economies. The U of M-Flint EDA University Center
for Community and Economic Development coordinates, forms, and
contributes to economic development efforts that cultivate
innovation, support proof of concept development and
commercialization, and provide employer-identified workforce
development programs needed to build and sustain a resilient,
inclusive economy.
Research on building effective innovation ecosystems
points to the importance of interactions among key actors in
the region. Typically these include institutions of higher
education, industry, government funders in economic
development--among others. There's also consensus on a need for
other elements, a research and development ecosystem, access to
capital, mentors, innovation labs, and training programs. These
are all necessary conditions for creating an environment that
spurs innovation and contributes to regional economic growth.
What is often left out of this equation is the fundamental
issue of how one enters this complex system, and what the
barriers of entry are. At the University of Michigan in Flint,
we think about how we, as key players in the innovation
ecosystem, make a concerted effort to minimize, or completely
eliminate barriers to entry, and once an innovator has entered
the ecosystem, we are mindful of how to best provide them with
the tools and knowledge needed to navigate the system.
The development of regional innovation economies can be an
engine of economic growth, but if that growth is going to be
sustainable, we must provide avenues of access to those who are
at risk of being locked out, particularly innovators from
underserved communities in both urban and rural areas. Much of
the work of U of M-Flint's EDA University Center is dedicated
to solving these issues. Through the U of M-Flint's EDA
University Center, we've had the opportunity to serve as an
entry point for a diverse group of regional entrepreneurs,
delivering services to over 2,000 individuals over the past 5
years. One such individual is a community member named Linda,
who was inspired by her deaf mother to create a technology to
help deaf and hard of hearing communities. Linda launched an
emergent technology company, Bell Tech Communications, which
has developed English to ASL (American Sign Language) real time
translation software and hardware that removes learning
barriers by teaching ASL speakers English grammar and sentence
structure, in addition to the ASL equivalent translation. Bell
Tech has been supported by our staff through ongoing one-on-one
counseling, workshops, and resource connections, including
personnel and funding opportunities. Linda is an excellent
example of a local innovator who may not have entered the
ecosystem without the support of our EDA University Center.
In addition to minimizing barriers to entry in the
ecosystem, our EDA University Center is working to build a
strong foundation for a sustainable innovation economy by
creating programs that foster the entrepreneurial and
innovation mindset. We have developed a suite of offerings that
introduce campus and community partners of all ages to
entrepreneurship and innovation. Through programs on U of M-
Flint's campus, such as faculty innovation fellows, an
interdisciplinary innovation capstone course, and student
innovation competitions, we aim to create a culture of
innovation. We also offer a menu of innovation programs for our
community partners. We have introduced entrepreneurship at an
early age--we've created the Young Sharks and Junior Sharks
Curriculum, and pitch competitions for elementary and middle
school students, and we are confident that today's efforts to
create awareness of the importance of innovation will have
long-term benefits for the economy.
As we collectively think about best practices for building
strong and inclusive innovation economies, we need to keep in
mind the perspective of our population, and what people need in
terms of support systems, what they need in terms of making
sure that everybody has access to everything they need to move
their innovations forward. Through programs like this, we know
that we will be able to keep in mind that solutions are not
one-size-fits-all. We need to provide entry points into the
ecosystem, and supports to ensure that opportunities are shared
broadly, so widespread participation involves planning and
implementing innovation initiatives. Thank you again for the
opportunity to testify today. I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Nas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Just fabulous. And, with that,
Secretary Pollard.

TESTIMONY OF HON. ELIZABETH HUTT POLLARD,

SECRETARY OF SCIENCE AND INNOVATION,

STATE OF OKLAHOMA

Ms. Pollard. Madam Chair Stevens, and Ranking Member
Waltz, House Science Committee Ranking Member Lucas, thank you
for the opportunity to speak today. My name is Elizabeth
Pollard, and I have the honor of serving as Secretary of
Science and Innovation for the State of Oklahoma. In addition,
I serve as a C Suite Executive, with decades of experience
working in Silicon Valley, and understand how to bring capital
and investment together to meet market needs. I'm here today to
discuss Oklahoma and its expanding innovation ecosystem. There
is a confluence of forces within State leadership, industry
partners, higher ed, and the philanthropic community to grow
Oklahoma's innovation economy. To ensure this vision for our
safety becomes a reality, the State of Oklahoma released its
new Science and Innovation Strategic Plan. Under the Governor's
leadership, this plan outlines the vision for establishing
Oklahoma as a global leader in scientific research and
innovation through state-of-the-art research facilities,
cutting edge technology, and progressive partnerships.
Today our State ranks first among other States in terms of
cost of living, second in terms of cost of doing business.
Oklahoma also ranks third in economic outlook, with low-income
tax rates ranking sixth in the Nation for tax burden per
capita, and the State has developed a strategic plan to
leverage these assets. The plan is focused on three key sectors
where we have expertise. One, energy diversification. Oklahoma
has a long and rich history as a leader in oil and gas research
and exploration, and continues to lead the way in these areas.
Oklahoma is also increasing its focus in environmentally
friendly alternative energy solutions to put--support the needs
of the changing globe. We're ranked best State to own an
electric vehicle, and ranked third in the Nation for
electricity generated by wind.
Second, aerospace and autonomous systems. Today Oklahoma
is home to FAA's (Federal Aviation Administration's) Mike
Monroney Aeronautical Center, Tinker Air Force Base, and the
sustainment headquarters of the United States Air Force, and
many aviation, aerospace, and cyber-related companies. We have
strong university programs across aerospace, including Oklahoma
State University's Rocket Test Site, and International Space
Station projects through NASA's EPSCoR (Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research) Program. And third,
biotechnology and life sciences. We have had significant
biotech research and development activity underway for decades.
Some examples include the University of Oklahoma's
comprehensive health system and NCI (National Cancer Institute)
Cancer Center, Oklahoma State University's Human and Animal
Schools of Medicine, with a focus on one health, and many other
groups, such as Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma
Blood Institute, Noble Research, and so on.
The Science and Innovation Strategic Plan for the State
lays out Oklahoma's innovation opportunities, and recommends
seven strategic goals to ensure solid foundation and serve as a
catalyst for growth. First, to establish the Office of Science
and Innovation to facilitate meaningful collaborations, and the
collection and analysis of data. Second, to focus on these
strategic industries and large-scale focus investments and
partnerships. Third, establish centers of excellence in
research to ensure Oklahoma's economic competitiveness and
leadership. Fourth, create superclusters in innovation and
support systems, with focus areas in both urban and rural
communities to develop as superclusters for innovation. Fifth,
establish a federally funded research laboratory. Sixth, invest
in education, workforce development, and internship programs to
ensure diversity in workforce, and seven, secure public and
private financing to fund all of these recommendations.
Today the State funds entrepreneurs, researchers, and
companies to help commercialize their technologies and grow
their businesses through the Oklahoma Center for the
Advancement of Science and Technology, and i2E, a nationally
recognized private not-for-profit corporation, and the Oklahoma
Manufacturing Alliance. These bold long-term strategies work
together to build a dynamic research infrastructure and
attract, retain, and empower a diverse and talented workforce
in our State. One specific case example is the recently
established Oklahoma Pandemic Center, which was created in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a first of its kind
collaborative and immersive campus located in the heart of the
U.S., bringing cutting edge science to the fields of human/
animal environmental health. As a largely rural and
agricultural State, Oklahoma is uniquely positioned to capture
the benefits of animal science insights as a tool to improve
human health and prevent the spread of disease to humans.
Madam Chair Stevens, Ranking Member Waltz, House Science
Committee Ranking Member Lucas, thank you again for the
opportunity to speak today. Thank you for your efforts to
explore ways Federal agencies can support the development of
innovation economies in States like Oklahoma. We urge you to
consider funding timelines to better align with smaller States'
needs, their legislative cycle, and to invest in diverse States
with rural, urban, and tribal representation, like Oklahoma.
This is a new era in Oklahoma, one that embraces and leverages
our State's unique assets to make Oklahoma a top 10 State for
innovation. I appreciate your consideration, and welcome any
questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pollard follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Stevens. Thank you. Thank you so much, and we
know SSTI is very familiar with your i2E Program, and a lot of
your best practices. So, with that, after these phenomenal
testimonies, we're going to begin our first round of questions.
Chair's going to recognize herself for 5 minutes.
And, Mr. Berglund, I wanted to start with you. In your
written testimony, which I encourage my Committee Members to
review--all 12 pages. I wanted to reference something that you
touch on at the beginning of your written testimony, with Dr.
AnnaLee Saxenian's book, Regional Advantage, where, quote--she
said--you know, she describes the origins, growth, and
differentiators of Silicon Valley and Route 128. Silicon Valley
and Route 128 were--or--were not planned as technology hubs,
but they did not happen by accident either.
And so I wanted to draw down on that, and something else
that you said in your testimony, which is you talked about the
need for flexible funding. And I'm just wondering if you could
describe that nexus between flexibility at the Federal level
and the intentionality that comes from a region? Because we
talk a lot about not being too top town and prescriptive, so if
we're going to fund these regional innovation clusters, how do
we meet what the needs are at the local level? So I'll let you
start, and I--you know, Ms. Nas wants to get into it, you know,
I know you're touching some of that as well. That'd be great.
Mr. Berglund. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, for the
question. In terms of flexibility, I think the issue, really,
is that there's just very--great variation between the regions.
So, using some of the examples from my written testimony, if
you look at what Georgia did in the Georgia Research Alliance
(GRA), at the creation of GRA, part of this fate's concern--
part of the business community's concern was that they didn't
have the research capability, and so they invested first in
building up their intellectual infrastructure. And then, as
time progressed, as that strength emerged, it then invested in
bringing the technology from the university into the
marketplace. And then, as they were successful at that, they
evolved again to setting up seed funding for the resulting
companies. So I think we need to meet the regions where they
are with their particular strengths.
Infrastructure, from a physical infrastructure viewpoint,
may be very important in some regions, but in other regions,
that won't be important, that they have an excess of available
space, or are able to find funding from other sources. So the
Youngstown Business Incubator, for example, took advantage of a
weakness of the community, that they had a lot of empty office
space, and turned it into an asset, by using it as space for
startup companies.
Chairwoman Stevens. Ms. Nas, did you have anything you
wanted to contribute to that?
Ms. Nas. Yes, Chairwoman Stevens, thank you. Following up
on Mr. Berglund's statement about meeting people where they
are, regions where they are, in the work we do we're very
intentional about meeting people where they are. I mean that
literally--so that might be creating a business boot camp out
in the community--in a community center--it might be us going
into an art classroom to talk about entrepreneurship, or it
might be our Youth Entrepreneurship Program, where we bring
innovation and entrepreneurship into the elementary school
classroom. We're really thinking intentionally about how we get
to entrepreneurs and innovators that we normally wouldn't get
to.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yeah. And giving you the freedom to be
able to do that, right? Without being so overly prescriptive
about the program requirements. And, a minute left, but, with
Dr. Fuchs, and your testimony, particularly focusing on supply
chain, and manufacturing diversification, and some of the
weaknesses, I just wonder, in terms of this--it--and it's not
going to do it justice in a minute left, so we might have to do
it for the record, or get more comments from you, but I'm just
chewing on what you talked about with some of these weaknesses
in our supply chain, and being dependent on one country, and
then also recognizing that there are some things in our supply
chain that we don't even produce.
So let's circle back to that, because I want to do that
justice, and we've only got 14 seconds, and I've been gabbing
for a while, and we've got some really great Committee Members
here who have questions, so I'm going to put a pin in that for
that you, but, you know, this is just--this is the start, with
a bunch of stakeholders in this innovation ecosystem world that
we're working on with EDA. And so, with that, Mr. Waltz, I'm
going to turn to you for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Waltz. Yeah, thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I'm not
100 percent sure who's best to answer this question, so, Ms.
Pollard, I'll go to you. And I'm relatively new in the last
couple of years to this Committee and to this position, so I'm
just kind of asking a level-setting question. I'm trying to get
my mind a round what the EDA does, and its various innovation
activities, versus what the Small Business Administration has
done, and is doing, historically, and where are those--and I
can describe some of them, but I'm assuming that you're
relatively familiar. You know, where are those duplicative,
where are they complimentary? Just trying to understand that
dynamic. So, Ms. Pollard, I'll throw it over to you. Mr.
Berglund, if you want to chime in, or anyone else, on that
question.
Ms. Pollard. Thank you. I really don't believe I am the
best person on the panel to answer that specific question,
coming from the vantage point of wanting to drive a discussion
about how to set up innovation within a State. But, having said
that, I'd like to have one of the other panel members respond
accordingly, specifically around EDA and Small Business
Administration. Thank you.
Mr. Berglund. So I'd be happy to do that, if that's all
right----
Mr. Waltz. Sure.
Mr. Berglund. So, broadly speaking, the Small Business
Administration (SBA) tends to focus on financing of individual
companies. They also play an important role, through their
Small Business Development Centers, as serving as an entry
point for any person that might be interested in starting a
company, but that can be a mom and pop type franchise, so--a
Subway store, for example. I think of them as the large part of
a funnel in helping potential entrepreneurs think about whether
they should start a business. EDA tends to focus on physical
infrastructure because of its authorizing statute, the large
part of it. However, they also have a section that is the
Regional Innovation Strategies Program, which is now called the
Build to Scale Program. These are smaller projects, about
750,000, a million dollars in size, that last for a shorter
time period.
So--not a lot of time to go into the level of detail. I'd
be happy to follow up with you or your staff in more detail,
but I'll pause here so you have the opportunity to ask other
questions, or--of other panelists.
Mr. Waltz. Sure. Dr. Fuchs, you had a comment there?
Dr. Fuchs. I was just going to add that research on the
Small Business Innovation Research Program has--by Josh Lerner
and others has suggested that it is quite effective in the
commercialization of emerging technologies, particularly in
areas that have existing good venture capital. There may be
room for growth in other areas, but it is important in that
role. It's interesting in its history. It actually originated
out of something called RAN, historically, which was about
research in areas of national need, and commercializing them
domestically, coming back to some of our conversations today.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you for that, Dr. Fuchs. If I could just
follow up, you said in your testimony, ``Increases in science
and technology funding alone will be insufficient to ensure
U.S. technology competitiveness without a strategy for how to
ensure that those investments realize our national
objectives.'' Can you just flesh that out a bit more, and the
role of a national strategy for science and tech can play in
promoting a more even nationwide distribution of science and
tech education funding commercialization?
Dr. Fuchs. Yeah. Thank you very much. So I think there's
threefold there. One is that we need to--we have limited
resources, in the end, and we need to think about how to invest
those resources, but at the same time, it can be confusing, as
I read in my testimony, exactly how to do that well. So I'm not
arguing for choosing technology winners, but--rather than
choosing the right goals, right? So in the semiconductor
industry, which I've studied extensively, right now, in the
next 10 years, we are going to have a problem of not having
hardware to continue to advance computational capabilities, not
having the device. I would argue that funding the last--the
Commodity Semiconductor of today may be far less important than
changing the game, and making sure we lead in the computational
capabilities of the future that even our AI (artificial
intelligence) aspirations require. So getting that right is not
trivial, and there are strategic national security and economic
prosperity setup objectives in that context.
Two is that, when I speak of infrastructure, and
infrastructure of the future, I mean reinvigorating the
country's infrastructure, from broadband, to electric grids,
to--the entire system. That can serve as a platform for
innovation, but also for developing the manufacturing skills we
need for the future, and the firms that we need to manufacture.
I was stunned when we've been studying firms that pivoted under
COVID-19, that--they--some of them come from being formerly
garbage distributors, and then construction workers of
buildings, and now they're like, ``Wow, manufacturing's great.
It's not smelly, and it's inside. I love this job.'' So we need
to figure out how to make those crosswalks in--but by doing the
infrastructure of the future, we can buildup our dilapidated
manufacturing ecosystems to have that firm capability as well.
Mr. Waltz. Well, thank you for that, and, Madam
Chairwoman, thank you for allowing her answer to go over our
time. And I couldn't agree with you more, Dr. Fuchs. I hope
that all of our colleagues can reach a deal on what
infrastructure is, and how to best support it. Thank you so
much. I yield.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yeah, thank you. And, just as a point
of reference, the Economic Development Administration will be
coming to see this Subcommittee for a deeper dive either in the
form of--sometimes we do internal meetings, but certainly as
part of ours for the record and hearing process. And it is a
great question about understanding the differences in the
investment, and I will note to my obligation of fiscal
responsibility that a proposed $20 billion investment in EDA is
much higher than its average levels of 300 million, right? And
it's an agency that for every $1 into an economic development
project--some of which are public works, and it hangs out in
the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, right? We have
oversighted of their innovation programs, but for every $1,
seven jobs created or retained. But it is absolutely worth us
being, you know, the authorizing stewards of this agency to
really analyze and address the suggested plus-up in funding,
and what we could get out of it. Certainly with Route 128 and
Silicon Valley, it remains immeasurable.
And, with that, we're going to go to just, you know, an
incredible Member of this Committee, Mr. Tonko from the nice
State of New York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chair Stevens. Can you hear me? OK.
Thank you for holding today's important hearing, focused on
economic development and further involvement of regional
innovation strategies. NIST (National Institute of Standards
and Technology) has two programs that are focused on building
manufacturing capabilities in regions across the United States,
Manufacturing USA, and the Hollings Manufacturing Extension
Partnership (MEP). Certainly the network of 11 New York MEP
centers cultivate the growth of high tech industry, and
certainly help smaller manufacturers to modernize. These
independent not-for-profit organizations share a common
commitment to providing direct, strategic assistance to
companies in the areas of entrepreneurship, technology
commercialization, product development, high tech business
incubator management, and technology transfer services.
New York State, and the Capital Region of New York, are
strong examples of where these programs have helped facilitate
the integration of innovation and technology throughout the
region's economic development efforts. It's estimated that in
Fiscal Year 2020 New York's MEP programs saw the creation or
retention of over 5,000 jobs and over $214 million in new
client investments. So, Mr. Berglund, what do you see as the
role of the Manufacturing USA Program, and the Manufacturing
Extension Partnership, in regional innovation efforts?
Mr. Berglund. Thank you, Representative Tonko, for that
question. I think both of them are critical organizations, or
can be critical organizations. I have much more familiarity
with Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program, which, full
disclosure, SSTI receives funding from MEP, so a strong
familiarity with the work that they're doing on the local
level. Part of what we try to do is see where there are
opportunities for the MEP Centers to work with some of the
entrepreneurship and technology commercialization activities
that are occurring in a region. So, good example in Pittsburgh
area of connecting entrepreneurs working on hardware startups
with local manufacturers to help design the influence of that
product so that it'll be manufactured here in the U.S., rather
than in China.
Mr. Tonko. And do you see these MEP Centers as necessary
partners in building new regional innovation economies?
Mr. Berglund. Oh, absolutely, and in particular the MEP
Centers have a national reach, and--into rural areas of the
country as well, where it's much more difficult for the
technology economy to take root, so critical actors.
Mr. Tonko. So what can we at the Federal level do to best
support these programs so that they can continue to benefit the
communities in which they are located?
Mr. Berglund. Well, I would say the--I think one next step
is on this regional technology hubs legislation that the
Senate's approved, that, as Chairwoman Stevens has talked
about, there's more of an intentionality with this program on
creating a whole innovation ecosystem. So part of what the
Federal Government has done well is in funding individual
programs that support individual activities, manufacturing
competitiveness, workforce development. The regional tech hubs,
in my mind, would be able to tie all of these different
elements together to deliver results in an area.
Mr. Tonko. And in your testimony you mentioned that
evaluation requirements for new investments in technology hubs
should follow the lead of the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership, and some of the NSF funded centers that do these
given evaluations annually, what do you think the MEP is a good
model for--why do you think they're a good model for evaluating
programs that invest in regional innovation economies?
Mr. Berglund. In part because it's ingrained in the MEP
system culture that the evaluation is going to happen. It's
going to be an external evaluation, where external evaluators
are contacting the companies to get the results. And MEPs also,
historically, have been interested in experimenting with
different forms of evaluation as well.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you so much. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great questions, thank you. And with
that we will turn to Ranking Member Frank Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chair. Secretary Pollard, in
some estimates Oklahoma currently ranks near the bottom of
States with respect to innovation. In your testimony you State
that Oklahoma should prioritize resources to grow the airspace
and autonomous systems, biotech, life sciences, and the energy
diversification sectors to maximize their current investment,
and I believe that's very logical. So could you discuss for a
moment how can the Federal Government help connect the pieces
to bolster innovation in these key sectors?
Ms. Pollard. Thank you. Excellent question. I think that
it's critical that we align funding with technology--regional
centers have core capability. The State of Oklahoma being those
three areas is critical, where we have a strong foundation, and
linking up that adaptable capital such that it's available
based upon the needs of that region or State, and also is
available in alignment with legislative cycles so that matching
can appropriately happen at a time when it's needed most.
Funding lags innovation, and we need to figure out how to
provide funding in a way that is more timely and meets the
needs of those unique technology areas. I also think that
focusing on public/private partnership is--how do we leverage
relationships that exist around core technology areas? Whether
that is with our military, whether that's with private
companies, and align those kind of partnerships, and enable
those with the right kind of funding sources to make them
really go.
I would also then just also add that, thinking about this
in regard to rural and urban, as we begin to expand our urban
centers out toward rural communities and create these
technological centers, we begin to enable rural communities in
a way that have not been in our past. And so how do we begin
to--technology clusters or hubs outside of urban centers that
begin to grow our rural capability and footprint, and improve
how we are providing education opportunities to rural
communities? Thank you.
Mr. Lucas. Continuing with you, Secretary, STEM
occupations are some of the fastest growing and higher paying
jobs, compared to non-STEM occupations, and innovation
economies rely on steady and a consistent flow of STEM workers
to be successful. What can States do to attract the STEM
workforce necessary to drive the economic growth?
Ms. Pollard. I think that our STEM programs, and our
programs through our higher ed and career tech might need to
actually be aligned with the State strategies around technology
development, or the region strategies around technology and
development, so that you have a diverse workforce ready and
able to respond as economic development opportunities are
presenting themselves.
One of the real opportunities is thinking about not just
how do we create the best engineering program, but how do we
also create engineering technician programs within career tech
to provide support to workforce diversity within companies that
are developing, or moving in or out of a State or region. And I
think if we can do a better job of aligning those programs with
capabilities of that region or State, we will have a much
better output in regard to a workforce that's prepared, and
ready, and able to support.
Mr. Lucas. One last quick thought. You know Oklahoma has a
large portion of the population residing in rural communities.
How can we make sure that rural communities are not left
behind, and have the same opportunities to grow their local
economies when it comes to these issues?
Ms. Pollard. Absolutely. I do believe it is creating
technology pillars outside of urban centers, and looking at
States and regional areas that have the capability to exploit
what they already have in an urban center out to those rural
communities. I think that also expands to tribal communities as
well, which are really important, and sometimes overlooked, and
I think it's one of the reasons Oklahoma is a very unique area
for this kind of expansion that we're going through right now
and at this time. So, you know, thinking about how you can
leverage setting up clusters, technology hubs, in those urban
and rural communities so that they're linked together through
partnership.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Secretary. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Pollard. Um-hum.
Chairwoman Stevens. All right, thank you. And with that,
the Chair will recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Dr.
Foster.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. Audible and visible here?
Chairwoman Stevens. Yeah, yeah. You're great.
Mr. Foster. OK, great. All right. Well, first off, thank
you for having this really important hearing. You know, this is
something that I've personally struggled with for years. I
guess I'm best known around here as being the, you know, the
Ph.D. physicist in Congress, but I'm also a businessman who's
actually accomplished pretty much exactly what we're all
struggling to mass produce here. When I was 19 my little
brother and I started this company in our basement with 500
bucks from my parents, and it now manufactures about 70 percent
of the theatre lighting equipment. Our company was born at the
birth of the microprocessor era, so we had the bright idea of
using that to control theatre lights.
And so our company now, you know, employs about 1,500
people, and manufactures in suburban Madison, Wisconsin. And
the location of our company is an interesting--well, it's
something that we've been thinking about since its very birth.
It was born--our company was born because of the University of
Wisconsin, where a lot of the intellectual property came from,
and my brother and I got heavily subsidized educations from the
State of Wisconsin, that they've collected on many times. But a
lot of the touch labor for our manufacturing comes from the
nearby rural areas. And so, for example, our--one of our
biggest assembly factories is in Mazomanie, Wisconsin, which I
would bet I'm the only person who's heard of, but is a very
nearby rural town.
And so it strikes me, as we've thought of where to locate
things, that the natural scale of this is commuting distance.
You know, our--most of our R&D happens in the near suburb of
Madison, where you can really get recent graduates. We've, you
know, prospered with a chain of recent graduates who, you know,
they had a spouse who was--had a high-tech job, and had to stay
in Madison, or near Madison. And then the--when you're talking
about, you know, the touch labor, you know, the good middle
class jobs that everyone loves so much, those, you know, those
happen and work best for people who can live in low-cost areas,
with low-cost housing and so on, in nearby rural areas. But
that's a very limited thing. When we think of the possibility
of relocating our company to Northern Wisconsin, where you're
many commuting distances away, it just stops working. When we
think of, you know, it won't work because of, you know, all the
reasons I just went through.
So how do you think about what's realistically possible
physically, in terms of how geographically dispersed we can
really accomplish this when we're trying to combine, you know,
a range of skills in this? Or what's the history of trying
this? You know, Mr. Berglund, I thought you looked like you
have the battle scars from, you know, a generation of efforts
at this, and where--you know, what does--really works, and, you
know, what should we be hoping for? What does success look
like?
Mr. Berglund. I think, Representative Foster, you
described it very well. It's a very challenging issue, and I
think the best connections--and maybe some of the other
panelists will have more specific suggestions, but I think some
of the research indicates that where we can make manufacturing
connections between research hubs and rural areas, that is the
opportunity for best connection in all rural--in rural areas.
Manufacturing just plays such an important part in rural
counties that being able to strengthen those rural
manufacturers is critically important.
Mr. Foster. Yeah--sort of divide rural into rural areas
that are within--two commuting distances of, you know, a city,
and those that are truly rural. You know, I represented, for
years, extremely rural areas, and it was--you know, it's just
tough sledding trying to get companies with tech needs to move
into those extremely rural areas.
Mr. Berglund. If I could--I would just say there are good
examples of small companies in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan,
in the central part of Pennsylvania, that maybe are $20 million
in sales, which doesn't sound significant to people on the
coast, but in terms of employment, is a significant employer in
that region. So it's also keeping in mind what size company
actually makes a difference in a region.
Mr. Foster. And, Madam Chair, could I ask for 30 seconds
for Dr. Fuchs to say what she had intended to?
Chairwoman Stevens. Absolute----
Dr. Fuchs. This is one of the reasons I believe we need to
use procurement. We need to build to build, and procurement of
futuristic infrastructure. If we did that in all rural areas, I
believe that we start to create the jobs to rebuild skills. And
I'm happy to talk about--I've been studying the offshoring of
manufacturing for the majority of my career in shop floors,
first here and then overseas, and--delighted to talk about that
further. But I've become--come to believe that's essential.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. Yield back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. And, with that, Dr. Baird is
recognized for 5 minutes of questioning, from the very nice
State of Indiana.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Chairwoman Stevens, appreciate that.
And, Ranking Member Waltz, I really appreciate the opportunity
to be a part of this important hearing, and I appreciate the
witnesses all being here. And I appreciate the emphasis that
many of our witnesses have expressed about the rural areas, and
how significant their growth and development is, because I come
and represent a large rural area in West Central Indiana, so I
appreciate those comments. I guess my question will be directed
to Secretary Pollard to start with.
You know, I have Purdue University in my district. I have
had the opportunity to see firsthand just how the regional
innovation efforts benefit the Hoosier State, and directly
affect the rest of the country. So just yesterday I met with a
startup company. They were wishing to potentially set up a
learning center associated with Purdue, and when I think about
building regional innovation economies, companies like this and
partnerships like this come to mind. They really wanted to have
the access to students, faculties, laboratories, and
researchers, and in order to start a pipeline, as their company
grows, to have employees to continue that continued growth of
that company.
So I guess my question comes down, Secretary Pollard--what
do you think Congress should take into consideration to come up
with realistic and sustainable proposals to support the
development of these new regional innovation economies,
particularly in these rural areas?
Ms. Pollard. Certainly. I think it is investing in
technology infrastructure outside of urban areas. We tend to
look solely at urban areas, or the large population areas
where, you know, technology has already been developed. One of
the examples we have here in Oklahoma is now this new Pandemic
Center, where we chose to move our Public Health Lab and that
Pandemic Center's establishment outside of Oklahoma City, about
an hour and 15 minutes away to Stillwater, where there's still
infrastructure from a higher ed perspective, but it begins to
leverage the broader rural locations within the State, and
fosters a center of collaboration. This facility is unique in
that it is meant to be a shared resource facility not only for
technology, but also for research and development and
education. And so working on broader public health education
programs for both degrees, as well as for continuing education.
And so in this way, as we establish more of those across our
State, whether that be in health tech, or whether that's in,
you know, aerospace and autonomous, we create this opportunity
to meet a broader group.
I would also then add that I think that COVID-19 has
taught us a lot. One of those is the opportunity for virtual
learning and virtual collaboration, as we are doing today, and
so ensuring that broadband infrastructure is across all of our
rural regions to enable that kind of learning and collaboration
is critical.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you for that. And you know, one
other thing that you mentioned here today is the fact that
animal agriculture and animal research can be an important
aspect of contributing to the kind of technology that we need
in other areas, so I really appreciated you mentioning that. I
think I have about 1 minute left, Madam Chair, and I'd like to
go to Dr. Berglund, because he mentioned the rural areas as
well, and the emphasis there. So I just give you the
opportunity to stress the points that you made in that area.
Mr. Berglund. Yeah. I think one point that I haven't made
yet, but I should mention, is the original proposal on those
regional technology hubs was for maybe eight to ten hubs
located in the U.S. And I have to say, we endorsed the original
legislation, but we did it somewhat unenthusiastically because
of that. We like this version of the legislation because it
doesn't put a limit on the number of hubs, so rural areas
should be able to benefit from it, smaller metro areas should
be able to benefit from it, as long as they're focused on the
activity areas outlined in the legislation.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. And I apologize for not being able
to get to the other two witnesses, but, Madam Chair, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yeah. Well, this is absolutely one of
the instances where 5 minutes for questions with this fabulous
group just does not seem like enough. And, with that, allow me
to recognize Congresswoman Ross from the wonderful State of
North Carolina for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much Madam Chair, and I agree. I
have seven questions, and somehow I don't think we're going to
get to all of them. But thank you, and thank you to the Ranking
Member for holding this very important hearing today. I
represent a district that includes much of the Research
Triangle Park (RTP) in North Carolina, the largest research
park in the United States, and a premiere global innovation
center, but it wasn't always that way. The Triangle now is an
ecosystem of hundreds of companies, government agencies,
academic institutions, startups, and nonprofits that work in
concert to attract talent, bolster the local economy, provide
research, and lead on clean energy.
Last week I held a roundtable in my district on regional
innovation, and the beginning of the park, when really the
people from our institutions of higher education were going to
other States, and so it was created to avoid the brain drain
from our institutions of higher education, including our HBCUs
(historically Black colleges and universities), because we have
a very strong HBCU network. And, as a matter of fact, the
former mayor of Durham, who came back to North Carolina
entirely because IBM was in RTP, talked about how our African-
American scholars left the South in the 1950's and 1960's, and
it was only things like the Research Triangle Park that brought
them back.
The success is due to the combination, though, of the
universities, local government, just giving land, unused land,
setting up the infrastructure for that, and then, of course,
our business community. And one of the things they pointed out
is that, in order to succeed in the future, there were two
things they emphasized, and one was from a former mayor of
Raleigh, that people no longer want to drive to a big office
park where there's not even anywhere to have lunch, and they--
what they want is a live, work, play environment. It does not
have to be in the center city, but the center city will draw
the people because it has the stuff there. So now Research
Triangle is reinventing itself by adding housing, places to
eat, places to exercise. So that was one thing. The second
thing is having that talent pipeline that comes from our people
starting K through 12. So not just the universities, but having
kids get interested in things like robotics, and particularly
reaching out to communities of color and women to create that
pipeline. Those were the two big things that were identified.
And we know it's a success now, but it wasn't initially a
success, so I'd like any of the folks to respond to this. We
would love for people to learn from what happened in the
Research Triangle Park, but, make no mistake, we're still
needing to reinvent ourselves, and attract that indigenous
pipeline of talent. So any of you to respond to this and how it
can help others?
Ms. Nas. I'd be happy to take that one, Representative
Ross. Thank you for the question, and thank you for
acknowledging that we have to create that foundation at a very
young age. I mean, to use a sports analogy, you don't expect
somebody to become an NFL football player having touched a
football for the first time when they're 25 years old, right?
So how is it that we're going to expect our youth, when they
grow up, to be able to become innovators and commercialize
technology if they haven't been exposed to it at an early age?
And that's exactly why we developed the curriculum we did,
knowing the importance of exposure to STEM curriculum, of
innovation and entrepreneurship curriculum, at a young age. But
the gap there was really thinking about the economics and the
business that goes with STEM education, because you can be an
innovator, but you may not know the business aspect of
innovation, so that's part of reasons to develop that.
Ms. Ross. And it--yeah, it looked like Secretary Pollard
had something to say.
Ms. Pollard. Yeah. I would just like to add that I think
there's a huge opportunity for K through 12 educators to
partner with, you know, the private sector to really develop,
you know, boot camps, science and technology boot camps, where
students can get immersed in what is happening out in the
commercial world, and understand how they can apply learning to
that, and also help set the stage for them making their choices
as they move to, you know, that next degree that they're
interested in pursuing post-K through 12.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Madam Chair, I yield back, but I look
forward to getting to ask my other six questions at some other
time.
Chairwoman Stevens. Yes, well said, Ms. Ross. And, with
that, allow me to recognize fellow Michigander Mr. Peter Meijer
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ranking Member
Waltz, and to all of our experts here today for joining us. I
am excited on this topic. Just yesterday oversaw, and was there
for the delivery of two world class cyclotrons to the Michigan
State University College of Human Medicine in downtown Grand
Rapids, so--I will not bore you with the details of the
theragnostics cancer tracing and remediation technology that's
being pioneered, but when we start to talk about some of these
regional innovation efforts taking place outside of those 15
counties that were mentioned in the beginning remarks.
You know, coming from a place that can be derided
frequently as flyover country, it's very important that, you
know, we don't have that sense of failure to recognize how
smaller companies, you know, the $20 million company in the
Upper Peninsula that Mr. Berglund mentioned, that can be vital
to that economy, but also can create really positive network
effects, where you can have that intermixing of research and
technology, of applied and basic efforts, and figuring out how
to better--not just commercialize, but hopefully lead to some
really impressive innovation as well. So I'm excited to boast
and brag about the great things happening in Michigan's Third
District out here, but I also wanted to ask Ms. Nas, again, a
fellow Michigander on this panel, and--wanted to get your
perspective from Flint. You know, would love to have these be
questions we go over in a Committee hearing room in D.C., but I
think we're both in Michigan for this, but on other sides of
the State.
You know, in this Committee we're very focused on the
importance of STEM education, obviously, and this has come up
in conversations before. You know, one of the key elements that
we've been missing, and this comes up time and again in my
conversations with employers who are in these more research-
oriented fields, is how to build out that pipeline of students,
how to get that interest at an early age. Some are already
going into, you know, middle schools to try to encourage
students to be thinking about pursuing a career in science,
showing them graduate students, you know, professionals who
look like them, who have gone through that same experience to
show them what is possible, and show them how they can kind of
get to that point. But how do we, from an EDA standpoint, or
from a Federal Government standpoint, continue to support and
create that culture of encouraging innovation just from those
earliest years on, and from all corners of the community as
well?
Ms. Nas. Thank you, Representative Meijer. I applaud what
you're doing in your district as well. You have a lot of really
creative innovation programs in your district. It's a good
point. I think we need more support of the K-12 level to
provide curriculum, to provide opportunities for our K-12
educators, particularly in elementary schools, to create
curriculum, to implement curriculum, during their school day
that allows students to learn the innovation mindset, to
establish that foundation at a very, very young age. Similar to
learning a foreign language, let's start early. Let's do the
same thing with innovation, and I would say economics as well,
and entrepreneurship. Because, again, with those skills the
kids learn about critical decisionmaking. They learn to think
as entrepreneurs, as businesspeople. They learn how to build
teams. They learn how to pivot, if their business idea doesn't
work. Those are skills that will carry with them throughout
their entire life, even if they don't wind up starting a
business--I think teachers need that.
We developed our curriculum so that it would correspond
with what teachers already need to teach during the school day,
because we realize that teachers are already overburdened with
all the content they have to teach, so I integrated very
carefully State of Michigan content standards within that Young
Sharks curriculum. We need to do that. We need to bridge that
gap in between STEM education, and then that business/economic/
entrepreneurship part of it. We need to put those two together,
and encourage teachers to do the same thing.
Mr. Meijer. And then you touched on half of what was going
to be my follow-up question, but just the other half--I mean,
what are the best practices to leverage, you know, the
involvement of the private sector in that as well, as one of
those likely career path opportunities?
Ms. Nas. So one thing we like to do is we like to bring
entrepreneurs, business owners, industry right into the
classroom, whether that's our K-12 students, students on campus
here, or with the business boot camp that we do out in the
community. We always try to have a local innovator serve as a
mentor to whatever age group we're working with. I think it's
key for people to be able to see people doing that work that
they could be doing in the future, or that they're already
doing. So if you can see somebody like you doing it, you know
that you can do it.
Mr. Meijer. Yeah. And the mentorship aspect is critically
important, and I appreciate that. And, with that, Madam Chair,
I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Stevens. Fabulous. With that, I want to
recognize a Member of the Committee for 5 minutes of questions
who I brag about being on this Committee, and that is Ms. Gwen
Moore from the other Great Lakes State of Wisconsin.
Ms. Moore. Well, thank you so much, Madam Chair and
Ranking Member, and I just--and other Members of the Committee,
who have asked such excellent questions. It's been really a
treat there--here this morning. I'm going to try to get in as
many questions as I can. And, Mr. Berglund, you mentioned in
your written testimony that the Water Council in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin was an example of these research technology regional
hubs, and I would like you to lean into--and, you know, these
are huge corporations that have formed this, but talk about the
importance of the involvement of the EDA, the involvement--and,
you know, bursting the myth somehow that the private sector can
just do this on its own without government support. And,
Professor Fuchs, I also--you know, you were--you lacked in
enthusiasm in your testimony, but I did get you wanted to
collaborate, collaborate, invest in infrastructure, invest in
intelligentsia, invest in technology, invest in economic
development. What do you say to people who say that we are in a
deficit situation, and we can't afford to invest? And, Ms. Nas,
I want you to close us out by talking about those who are left
behind. And you don't have to mention Dan Kildee, we already
know he's left behind. And I would yield for those responses.
Mr. Berglund. I--you've given three questions. I will try
and take no more than a minute so that the other panelists can
respond. I think the Water Council's a great example of the
private sector coming together initially and saying, ``We have
common problems, we need to work on those'', but recognizing
that they needed to bring in government partners as well. And
so, for the Water Council specifically, they benefited from
funding from SBA in the Regional Innovation Clusters Program.
Part of the strength of that program is that it was a 5-year
worth funding commitment that gives more of a ramp to be able
to spend the money. One of the disadvantages of current EDA
projects is they tend to be shorter term projects, and so can't
have the sustained impact. With that, I will yield to the other
panelists.
Dr. Fuchs. If we don't invest, we're not going to have the
revenues to get out of the deficit. That would be my answer,
very, very short. And then I'm going to give two short
examples. The one is, in advanced semiconductors, our research
looked at Beyond CMOS (complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor), the ability to continue computing. That led to
50 percent of growth in the United States and worldwide in the
1990's, the--Moore's Law. We are spending an order of magnitude
less today on solving that problem, which is a sort of basic
physics level challenge that needs to make its way rapidly to
commercialization, than we were spending on 1 to 3 year
equipment upgrading under--so we're, like, not spending the
right orders of magnitude, and that was an--we had access to
the archives. That was an industry internal dialog.
But the second is on infrastructure. Our infrastructure is
getting a grade of D, right? So when I travelled just now
through Pennsylvania, up north, there are houses there that
don't have broadband, there are houses--I mean, our electric
grid is not at its latest--it's not ready for--our
infrastructure is not ready for climate disaster. We have a
road that's lower than the river here in Pittsburgh. We need to
invest to have the platform and the worker skills to innovate
off of.
Ms. Nas. Thank you for the question, Representative. I
think it's really important that we remember that if we keep
leaving people out, we can't have sustainable economic growth.
We can fund programs, sure, but if we leave people out, it's
not sustainable. That could be a neighborhood entrepreneur who
enters, but gets lost in the system. Or it might be a high
school student in Flint who isn't aware of the full menu of
opportunities that are available. Maybe that person doesn't
know about cybersecurity programs, for example. And if we don't
continue to train and to provide opportunities, then there's no
way that we can continue the economic growth that we're all
hoping to attain.
Ms. Moore. Our legislation needs to reflect those values.
We can't just trust that people are going to give people the
opportunity. We've got to be really intentional about it.
Ms. Nas. Yeah, I agree with you on that, and it's
difficult, and it takes time. Many of you have mentioned it
today that, you know, first of all, it's not one-size-fits-all.
We need the very large investments, and then sometimes we need
some of the smaller investments. And we know that the payoff
might not be today, but if we can establish that foundation for
innovation, I do believe the payoff will come in 20 years.
Ms. Moore. Thank you, and I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Stevens. Great. We're through with questions.
I'd be open to doing another round, if anybody on the other
side of the aisle wants to do it, or we can close, and just,
you know, maybe, you know, kind of wrap it up in conversation.
You know, we were supposed to go to noon, so we've got about 22
minutes left, but I don't know if Rep. Baird or Rep. Meijer
would want to do another--you're going to--Dr. Baird, are you
OK with questions?
Mr. Baird. I'm OK.
Chairwoman Stevens. OK, good. Great. Well--and we've made
a bunch of new friends, which is wonderful, so--and, you know,
this is just the start of our process in the house, and we want
to thank Mr. Berglund for bringing up what's cooked out of the
Endless Frontiers Act in this regard because, you know, for
maybe the first time ever, the Senate's, you know, taken lead
and doing the work on this, and that's, you know, nice to see.
We've been at this for years, and we'll see what they kick over
to us, and this hearing's going to be very, very instrumental,
not only in terms of how we think through addressing and
answering some of these incredible challenges that we are
facing as a nation, responding to a chip shortage, turbulence
coming out of the COVID-19 pandemic, and our supply chain writ
large, but also how we continue to harness the capabilities of
American innovation across the board. Not overlooking any
region or any population, but harnessing the talent writ large,
and then also determining, from our Federal perch, making the
recommendation as authorizers, what we should invest as a
nation into these innovation ecosystems.
It came up certainly in Dr. Fuchs's statement about the
competition that we are in with China. Mr. Berglund also
touched on this. It's been a sincere privilege to have an area
that is incredibly diversified, that has overcome some of the,
you know, effects of deindustrialization, while also remaining
committed to industrialization, with Ms. Nas being here from
Flint. And then, certainly, very profound to hear from
Secretary Pollard, who, from her perch in Oklahoma, is
connected to Silicon Valley, and playing the game with Silicon
Valley while she continues to harness the full capabilities of
a State with incredible assets like Oklahoma.
And so what we're going to do is we're going to have the
record remain open for 2 weeks for additional statements from
Members, and I really encourage the Members to include these
statements, and ask additional questions, because we're going
to go back to this record. I know, as Chair, I go back to the
record, particularly when we're stitching up in amendments and
passage of bills through our Subcommittee into the Full
Committee, and, you know, we're continuing to encourage the
public engagement with what we are doing in this Committee,
because certainly it feels as though we are so polarized and
stuck as a Federal lawmaking body, that--all folks need to do
is look at what we are accomplishing, and achieving, and
deliberating on here on the Science Committee, as we have great
representation throughout this country, and certainly the Great
Lakes region, as we answer these questions, and make the
proposals of the day about how America will continue to
innovate.
Certainly that has been a part of our 21st century plight,
and it has been one whopper of a start to this century, with 9/
11, a Great Recession, and this pandemic. But coming out of all
of these things, our plight of innovation has not only doubled
down through, you know, the principles of Moore's Law, but has
continued to transform the global economy. So we are dedicated
and committed to continuing to ensure the success of regions
across this country. We thank you all for being here. I'm going
to excuse the witnesses; I'm going to gavel us out. The hearing
is now adjourned. Thank you all so much.
[Whereupon, at 11:42 a.m., the Subcommittee was
adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Dan Berglund

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Professor Erica R.H. Fuchs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Ms. Paula Nas

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Hon. Elizabeth Hutt Pollard

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
