- PRIVACY IN THE AGE OF BIOMETRICS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PRIVACY IN THE AGE OF BIOMETRICS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

JUNE 29, 2022
__________

Serial No. 117-63
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

47-841PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              JAY OBERNOLTE, California,
AMI BERA, California                   Ranking Member
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                MIKE CAREY, OHIO

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

June 29, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Bill Foster, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Jay Obernolte, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    14

Witnesses:

Ms. Candice Wright, Director, Science, Technology Assessment, and
Analytics, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    18

Dr. Charles H. Romine, Director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    43

Dr. Arun Ross, Professor, John and Eva Cillag Endowed Chair in
Science and Engineering, Michigan State University; Site
Director, Center for Identification Technology Research
Oral Statement...............................................    50
Written Statement............................................    52

Discussion.......................................................    59

PRIVACY IN THE AGE
OF BIOMETRICS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 29, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 a.m., via
WebEx, Hon. Bill Foster [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. All right, this hearing will now come to
order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess at any time. And before I deliver my opening remarks, I
wanted to note that today the Committee is meeting virtually,
and I wanted to announce a couple of reminders to the Members
about the conduct of the hearing. First, Members should keep
their video feed on as long as they are present at the hearing.
Members are responsible for their own microphones. Please also
keep your microphones muted, unless you're speaking. Finally,
if Members have documents that they wish to submit for the
record, please e-mail them to the Committee Clerk, whose e-mail
address was circulated prior to the meeting.
Well, the--good morning. Welcome to our Members and our
panelists. Thank you for joining us for this hearing on
securing privacy in the age of biometric technologies.
Biometric technologies have made great strides in recent years,
and offer a convenient upgrade to many security measures, from
opening your smartphone with a fingerprint, to passing through
Customs with a face match. Much of the discussion around
biometrics has revolved around the serious deficiencies in the
ability of facial recognition technology to accurately match,
particularly non-White, female, and young faces. These
discrepancies have been a legitimate obstacle to fair and
equitable implementation, and in the last few years, much work
has gone into closing these gaps, particularly at the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and in industry.
Accuracy across demographic groups has improved dramatically.
While facial recognition researchers and companies should
continue to address remaining racial bias in their algorithms,
we on the Science Committee should also explore the next
frontier of problems that accompany the inexorable expansion of
biometric technologies. The utility of biometric technologies
are surely understood by everyone in this virtual room here. We
are constantly opting in to lend our biometric information to
make our lives that much easier, unlocking our phone with our
masks or unmasked faces, accessing bank accounts with our
voice, and perhaps you've even visited a grocery store that
used facial recognition technology for easy checkout. And when
you opt in to these uses, there is a baseline expectation that
your information will be used as intended. Informed consent,
and regulations on data storage and sharing, are important
pieces of this puzzle. Illinois's Biometric Information Privacy
Act, for example, is currently the most protective law on the
books in the United States. The ACLU (American Civil Liberties
Union), in fact, successfully settled with a facial recognition
company, Clearview AI, for violating the rights of Illinois
residents, and the company must now offer residents an opt-out
mechanism.
Today our focus will be on how technological solutions can
secure our privacy, while allowing us to enjoy the benefits of
biometric tools. Biometric privacy enhancing technologies (B-
PETs) can, and should, be implemented along with biometric
technologies. So-called B-PETs--these so-called B-PETs can be
implemented at the point of capture, improving the precision of
collection tools to ensure that they are not picking up
features that are not necessary for use. They can insert, for
example, obfuscations on the data collected, degrading the
quality of the information, or introducing statistical noise so
that the biometric data is less usable for unintended uses. A
technique called template protection can ensure that one's
system--one system's biometric information is encrypted such
it--that it cannot be read by another system. For example,
someone's image obtained from the security systems at a
doctor's or psychiatrist's office, for example, cannot be
linked to the workplace's--to the worker's workplace identity
verification system.
Federal agencies, including NIST, who's represented at this
hearing today, as well as DHS's (Department of Homeland
Security's) Science and Technology Directorate, are already
working to develop and improve privacy protecting technologies
for biometric technologies. The America COMPETES Act, which I'm
helping to conference with, and--with the Senate, contains a
number of provisions that will future-proof the government's
definitions and standards for biometric identification systems
and invest in privacy enhancing technologies. I look forward to
hearing from our panel how we can further invest in these
protections as biometric technologies become more and more
prevalent in our daily lives.
And the timing of our discussion today is notable. The
Supreme Court has recently substantially weakened the
Constitutional right to privacy in their recent decision
overturning Roe v. Wade, and States attempting to criminalize
access to medical care may try to use biometric data to prove
where someone has been and what they did when they were there.
And third parties may also try to access biometric information
to collect the bounties now being offered by some States to
enforce their new laws, and this makes protecting Americans'
biometric data more important than ever.
And finally, I just wanted to observe that some of our
witnesses' testimony came a little bit late for this hearing,
and I apologize to the other Members, and--of the Subcommittee
that we didn't have the usual amount of time as we would
normally like to have had to prepare.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Foster follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to our Members and our panelists.
Thank you for joining us for this hearing on securing privacy
in the age of biometric technologies. Biometric technologies
have made great strides in recent years, and offer a convenient
upgrade to many security measures, from opening your smart
phone with a fingerprint to passing through Customs with a face
match.
Much of the discussion around biometrics has revolved
around the serious deficiencies in the ability of facial
recognition technology to accurately match non-white, female,
and young faces. These discrepancies have been a legitimate
obstacle to fair, equitable implementation. And in the past few
years, much work has gone into closing these gaps, particularly
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Accuracy
across demographic groups has improved dramatically. While
facial recognition researchers and companies should continue to
address remaining racial bias in their algorithms, we on the
Science Committee should explore the next frontier of problems
that accompany the inevitable expansion of biometric
technologies.
The utility of biometric technologies are surely understood
by everyone in this (virtual) room. We are constantly opting in
to lend our biometric information to make our lives that much
easier--unlocking our phone with our masked faces, accessing
bank accounts with our voice, and perhaps you've even visited a
grocery store that used facial recognition technology for easy
check-out. And when you opt in to these uses, there is a
baseline expectation that your information will be used as
intended. Informed consent and regulations on data storage and
sharing are important pieces of the puzzle. Illinois's
Biometric Information Privacy Act, for example, is currently
the most protective law on the books in the United States. The
ACLU successfully settled with facial recognition company,
Clearview AI, for violating the rights of Illinois residents,
and the company must now offer residents an opt-out mechanism.
Today our focus will be on how technological solutions can
secure our privacy while allowing us to enjoy the benefits of
biometric tools.
Biometric privacy enhancing technologies can and should be
implemented along with biometric technologies. So-called B-PETs
can be implemented at the point of capture, improving the
precision of collection tools to ensure they are not picking up
features that are not necessary for use. They can insert
obfuscations on the data collected, degrading the quality of
the information or introducing statistical noise so the
biometric data is unusable for unintended uses. A technique
called template protection can ensure that one system's
biometric information is encrypted such that it cannot be read
by another system--for example, someone's image obtained from
the security system at a doctor's office, for example, cannot
be linked to their workplace's identity verification system.
Federal agencies--including NIST, who is represented at
this hearing today, as well as DHS's Science and Technology
Directorate--are already working to develop and improve
privacy-protective technologies for biometric technologies. The
America COMPETES Act, which I am helping to conference with the
Senate, contains a number of provisions that will future-proof
the government's definitions and standards for biometric
identification systems and invest in privacy enhancing
technologies. I look forward to hearing from our panel about
how we can further invest in these protections as biometric
technologies become more and more prevalent in our daily lives.
The timing of our discussion today is notable. In
overturning Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court has substantially
weakened the Constitutional right to privacy. States attempting
to criminalize access to medial care may try to use biometric
data to prove where someone has been and what they did there.
This makes protecting Americans' biometric data more important
than ever.
I now yield to Ranking Member Obernolte for his opening
statement.

Chairman Foster. And The Chair will now recognize Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Mr.
Obernolte, for an opening statement.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Foster.
Good morning, everyone. I'm really excited about our hearing
this morning. On the benefits and risks of biometric
technologies, and exploring research opportunities in these
technologies, I'm really hoping that this hearing turns into a
productive discussion that helps us learn about ways to improve
biometric technologies in the future, at the same time
protecting peoples' privacy.
I was reflecting this morning on the fact that biometric
technology have really changed the way that we live our lives.
Just this morning I used facial recognition to open my phone,
used the fingerprint reader on my computer to open my MacBook.
When I got in my car this morning to come to my district
office, the car recognized my face to set the seat settings,
and, as I was driving, used facial recognition to make sure
that I was paying attention to the road, and that's just in the
first couple of hours of today, so it's definitely changed our
lives, and it's amazing to think that this was once the world
of science fiction, and now we just take it completely for
granted.
Obviously biometrics bring a lot of benefits to our daily
lives, and we want to make sure that we're able to continue to
allow those benefits, while protecting the privacy of the
people that rely on biometrics. So, for that reason, I am
particularly glad that Dr. Romine, from the National Institute
of Standards and Technologies, is with us here today to talk
about the work that NIST is doing in this space.
NIST has been working in research and development in
biometrics for over 60 years. They have had an incredible role
to play in developing standards for biometrics, and I'm hoping
that, in the same way that they helped the FBI establish
standards for fingerprint technologies in the 1960's, that
they're going to be able to take a leadership role in
establishing standards at the national and international level
for biometrics today. These standards are going to be critical
to enable the exchange of biometric data between agencies and
their systems, as well as providing guidance for how those
biometric systems are tested, and how performance is measured,
and how assurances are made that data is shared securely, and
that privacy is protected.
That's important because, I mean, as we all know,
biometrics are really no different than any other advanced
technology in that they have beneficial uses, but also their
misuse can harm individuals and harm our society, in this case
by compromising the privacy of individuals, or the security of
their information. So, as policymakers, we need to be acutely
aware about not only the benefits that these biometrics have to
our society, but also of the risks associated with the
technology, especially, in my opinion, when it comes to the
covert collection, and the issue of individual consent to have
one's information stored and used.
I think, as policymakers, we have to balance that awareness
against the potential benefits that biometrics bring to
society. You could easily imagine us taking a draconian
approach to regulating biometrics that effectively prevents the
development and use of biometrics, which would lose all of the
benefits that we enjoy from biometrics. And I'm not just
talking about unlocking our phones, or setting the seats on our
cars. Biometric technologies really have extraordinarily
helpful applications.
To give you a couple of examples, in Ukraine, the Defense
Ministry is using Clearview AI's facial recognition technology
to recognize Russian assailants and identify dead combatants.
Meredith's analytics tool Traffic Jam uses facial recognition
and AI (artificial intelligence) to detect patterns in sex
trafficking ads to help law enforcement identify victims of sex
trafficking. If we were to take an overly heavy-handed approach
to regulating biometrics, we would lose out on those lifesaving
applications as well.
And that's something I actually have some firsthand
experience with. Before serving in Congress, I was a member of
the California State Legislature, and I served on the Committee
for Privacy and Consumer Protection in the early days of facial
recognition, before the risks and the benefits of the
technology were well understood. And I can tell you, we saw a
lot of bills that were misguided proposals that could've
effectively banned the use of facial recognition technology
altogether. So it's clear that it's a lot easier for us to push
for legislation to outlaw technology entirely than it is to
conduct due diligence, and try to intelligently balance the
benefits against the risks of technology.
And that's actually why the work of NIST is so valuable
here. A better understanding of the technology, and carefully
developed safeguards and standards, will help us develop
biometrics in a way that provides safety for people's privacy
without stifling the innovation that's going to lead to future
breakthroughs and benefits to society. So looking very much
forward to learning about their work today, and to hearing from
our witnesses. Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening the
hearing. I am very much looking forward to the discussion, and
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Obernolte follows:]

Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening
this hearing. And thanks to our witnesses for appearing before
us today.
The purpose of this hearing is to discuss the benefits and
risks of biometric technologies and to explore research
opportunities in privacy-enhancing technologies for biometric
applications. I hope today's hearing will be a productive
discussion that will help us learn ways to improve biometric
technologies for the future.
Once confined to the world of science fiction, biometric
technologies have become integrated into our daily lives. From
unlocking an iPhone with a fingerprint or face scan, to asking
Alexa or Siri what the weather is, to boarding an airplane,
biometric technology is everywhere, and it is rare to go a day
in 2022 without interacting with some form of biometric
technology.
The benefits are clear: when used well biometrics give us
easier authentication, more secure logins, and personally
customized interactions with technology.
Given the prevalence of biometrics, I am particularly glad
to have Dr. Charles Romaine from the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) here with us today to tell us
more about the important work NIST is doing in this space. NIST
has been conducting biometrics research and development for
over 60 years, and in the 1960s, NIST helped the Federal Bureau
of Investigations (FBI) with work on fingerprint technologies
to support law enforcement and forensics.
Today, NIST conducts research projects as well as testing
and evaluation of several biometric modalities including
fingerprints, face, iris, voice, and DNA.
Additionally, NIST is also engaged in biometric standards
development at the national and international level. Standards
and their guidance are important to enable the exchange of
biometric data between agencies and their systems; provide
guidance on how biometric systems are tested and performance is
measured; define methods for assessing the quality of
biometrics; and to ensure government systems work well
together.
NIST's role in researching biometrics technologies and
establishing standards and guidance will not only drive
advances in how we use biometrics, but also give us a better
understanding of the potential security and privacy risks
associated with them.
Biometrics are no different than many advanced technologies
in that their misuse can harm individuals--in this case by
compromising their privacy or the security of their
information. Biometrics are a tool, and like any tool, they can
be used to benefit individuals, or to harm them.
As policymakers, we need to be acutely aware of the risks
associated with this technology, especially covert collection
and the issue of individual consent to have one's information
stored and used.
However, we must also balance that awareness against the
potential benefits that biometrics bring to society. Were we to
adopt a draconian approach that effectively prevents the
development and use of biometrics, we would lose these valuable
benefits-and not just the airport and smartphone convenience I
mentioned earlier.
Biometric technologies have extraordinarily helpful
applications. For example, Ukraine's defense ministry is using
Clearview AI's facial recognition technology to recognize
Russian assailants and identify dead combatants. Marinus
Analytics' tool Traffic Jam uses facial recognition and AI to
detect patterns in sex-trafficking ads to help law enforcement
identify victims.
If government takes an overly heavy-handed approach to
regulating biometrics technologies, we'll lose out on life-
saving applications like these.
I have seen this approach firsthand. I was a Member of the
California State Legislature during the early days of facial
recognition, before its risks and benefits were well
understood, and we considered a lot of misguided proposals that
would have effectively banned the use of facial recognition
technology. It is much easier to push for legislation to outlaw
a technology entirely than it is to conduct due diligence and
try to intelligently balance its benefits against its risks.
That's why NIST's work is so valuable. Better understanding
of the technology and carefully developed standards and
guidelines will help us develop biometrics in a way that
provides safeguards without stifling innovation.
I'm looking forward to learning more about that work today.
Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening this hearing. And
thanks again to our witnesses for appearing before us today. I
look forward to our discussion.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I have to say, I'm very
much envious of the car that you must be driving, so--with all
those features, it must be--I would wager you probably aren't
driving around in a 10-year-old Ford Focus.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, you know, actually, that technology is
coming to inexpensive cars as well. It's----
Chairman Foster. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. It's amazing.
Chairman Foster. That's right, yes. Anyway, if there are
other Members who wish to submit additional opening statements,
your statements will be added to the record at this point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning to our panelists, and thank you to Chairman
Foster for holding this hearing.
Biometric technologies are in many of the devices we use
every day. They allow us to open our phones with a facial image
match or access sensitive areas with a fingerprint. The
applications are vast and continue to expand with new
technological breakthroughs and innovative ideas. There is
still a lot of work to be done to address accuracy and bias in
biometric technologies. But in recent years, the accuracy of
these technologies--particularly facial recognition--has
improved by leaps and bounds. And as biometric technologies
become both more accurate and more pervasive society, we must
ensure they do not violate our fundamental rights to privacy.
It is our responsibility as policymakers to look after the
privacy of American citizens--a public good which may not
always be appropriately valued in the marketplace.
This responsibility includes monitoring Federal agencies'
approach to privacy in their own biometrics programs. The U.S.
government can use technology solutions to maximize both
security and privacy. We are pleased to have Ms. Wright from
the Government Accountability Office with us today to share
GAO's (Government Accountability Office's) findings about the
prevalence of facial recognition technology within Federal
agencies. GAO has conducted a volume of exemplary analysis on
how well agencies are observing best practices and technical
standards for privacy in general.
And defining what is private in the digital age is complex.
Here on the Science Committee, which I often call the committee
of the future, we are poised to rise to the challenge. What
does it mean if I upload an image for verification and change
my mind? How long does a company get to keep my image? If I
supply my voice to a video, should a third party be able to buy
my voice print without my consent? It is important to
acknowledge that the privacy implications from one biometric
application to another can vary widely.
This Committee is taking steps to dedicate more research
attention to this issue. The America COMPETES Act, currently in
conference with the Senate, includes the NIST for the Future
Act, which passed through this Committee on a bipartisan basis.
This critical legislation directs NIST to formalize a
measurement research program and work on performance standards
for biometric identification systems. It directs NIST to
establish common definitions for these systems, including
privacy and consent. It would also dedicate more resources to a
central theme of today's hearing, privacy-enhancing
technologies, or P-E-Ts. Our Committee has advanced another
bipartisan bill, the Promoting Digital Privacy Technologies
Act, that would dedicate more resources at the National Science
Foundation for research on privacy enhancing technologies.
PETs are critical to the ethical use of biometrics. I am
proud of my colleagues on this Committee for their hard work on
these bills. I hope today's discussion will help invigorate our
resolve to get them over the finish line and signed into law.
The technology opportunity around PETs is exciting. But the
political moment for privacy is grave. Last week, the Supreme
Court created a moment of reckoning for reproductive rights--
for human rights--in America. Central to this fight is the
right to make decisions about bodily autonomy and the right to
privacy. We must ensure that the biometric data of U.S.
citizens are not abused by bad actors or companies who intend
to put profit over privacy.
I yield back.

Chairman Foster. And at this time, I'd like to introduce
our witnesses.
Our first witness is Ms. Candice Wright. Ms. Wright is the
Director of--in GAO's Science, Technology, Assessment, and
Analytics team. She oversees GAO's work on federally funded
research, intellectual property protection and management, and
Federal efforts to help commercialize innovative technologies,
and enhance U.S. economic competitiveness. Since joining GAO in
2004 Ms. Wright has led reviews on a wide variety of policy
issues involving Federal contracting, risk to the defense
supplier base, foreign military sales, and homeland security.
After Ms. Wright is Dr. Charles Romaine. Dr.--Romine. Dr.
Romine is a Director of Information Technology Laboratory, ITL.
ITL is one of six research laboratories within the National
Institute of Standards and Technology. Dr. Romine is--oversees
a research program that cultivates trust and information
technology and metrology by developing and disseminating
standards, measurements, and testing for interoperability,
security, usability, and reliability of information systems.
Our final witness is Dr. Arun Ross. Dr. Ross is a Professor
in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at
Michigan State University (MSU), East Lansing, and he also
serves as MSU's Site Director of the NSF (National Science
Foundation) Center for Identification Technology and Research.
His experience is in biometrics, computer vision, and machine
learning, and Dr. Ross has advocated for the responsible use of
biometrics in multiple forums, including the NATO (North
Atlantic Treaty Organization) Advanced Research Workshop on
Identity and Security.
And, as our witnesses should know, each of you will have
five minutes for your spoken testimony. Your written testimony
will be included in the record of the hearing. When you've
completed your spoken testimony, we will begin with questions.
Each Member will have five minutes to question the panel, and,
if time permits, we may, in fact, have two rounds of questions
for our panel. And so we will start with Ms. Wright. And,
whoops, you'll have to unmute, I'm afraid.

TESTIMONY OF MS. CANDICE WRIGHT, DIRECTOR,

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT, AND ANALYTICS,

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Wright. Thank you. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Obernolte, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss GAO's work on Federal agencies' use of
biometric technologies, particular for facial recognition. The
technology, which measures and analyzes physical and behavioral
characteristics, is used to compare facial images from a photo
or video for identification and verification. As the technology
has continued to rapidly advance, its use has expanded in both
the commercial and government sector. Today I will share
highlights from our work on how agencies are using facial
recognition, and Federal efforts to assess and mitigate privacy
risks.
Last year we reported on the results of our survey of the
24 largest agencies, and their use of facial recognition
technology. Eighteen agencies reported using the technology.
The most common use was unlocking smartphones provided by
agencies. There were other uses, that included domestic law
enforcement, to generate leads for criminal investigations, as
well as monitoring or controlling access to a building or
facility to, for example, identify someone on a watchlist who
was attempting to gain access. Such use can greatly reduce the
burden on security personnel to memorize faces.
Federal agencies may own their own systems, or access the
systems of State and local governments, or commercial
providers, to conduct searches of facial images. Agencies noted
that some systems can include hundreds of millions, or even
billions, of photos. Multiple agencies reported accessing
systems owned by commercial vendors. For example, DHS reported
using Clearview AI to identify victims and perpetrators in
child exploitation cases.
Agencies are investing in research and development to
further their understanding and application of the technology.
Some examples include DHS's Science and Technology Directorate,
which sponsor technology challenges for industry to develop
systems. One recent challenge was to reliably collect or match
images of individuals wearing masks. In addition, NSF has
awarded grants to research methods to prevent identifying an
individual from facial images used in research.
With its expanded use in the Federal Government, there are
concerns about the accuracy of the technology, data security
risks, the transparency and its usage, and the protection of
privacy and civil liberties. In our survey of law enforcement
agencies, some agencies did not have complete information on
what non-federal systems are being used by their employees. In
fact, during the course of our work, multiple agencies had to
poll their employees, and discovered they were using non-
federal systems, even though the agency initially told us
otherwise.
Using facial recognition systems without first assessing
the privacy implications and applicable privacy requirements
can put agencies at risk of running afoul of privacy related
laws, regulations, and guidance. There are also risks that data
sets with personal information could be compromised in a data
breach, or be shared with unauthorized individuals. Unlike a
password, which can be changed if breached, a breach involving
data derived from a face may have more serious consequences, as
the facial image is more permanent. We recommended that
agencies improve their process to track the facial recognition
systems used by their employees, and assess the risk of such--
risks of such systems. Agencies are in varying stages of
implementing our recommendations.
In our work examining biometric privacy practices at TSA
(Transportation Security Administration) and CBP (Customs and
Border Protection), we found that TSA had incorporated privacy
protections for its pilot program to test the use of a
technology for traveler identity verification at airport
security checkpoints. However, CBP's privacy notices to inform
the public of facial recognition use in its biometric entry/
exit program were not always current or complete. Further, CBP
had not conducted audits of its commercial airline and airport
partners to ensure compliance with CBP's own requirements on
restrictions for retaining or using traveler photos. Fully
implementing our recommendations will be an important step to
protect travelers' information.
In closing, facial recognition technology is not going
away, and demand for it will likely continue to grow. As
agencies continue to find utility in the technology to meet
their mission, balancing the benefits of the technology with
data security requirements and privacy protections will
continue to be important. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Obernolte, and Members of the Subcommittee, this concludes my
remarks. I'll be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wright follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And next is Dr. Romine.

TESTIMONY OF DR. CHARLES H. ROMINE, DIRECTOR,

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY,

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Romine. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Obernolte, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, I'm Charles Romine,
Director of the Information Technology Laboratory at the
Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and
Technology, known as NIST. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of NIST on our efforts to evaluate the
privacy implications of biometrics technologies.
NIST is home to five Nobel Prize winners, with programs
focused on national priorities such as artificial intelligence,
advanced manufacturing, the digital economy, precision
metrology, quantum information science, biosciences, and
cybersecurity. The mission of NIST is to promote U.S.
innovation and industrial competitiveness by advancing
measurement science, standards, and technology in ways that
enhance economic security, and improve our quality of life.
In the NIST Information Technology Laboratory, we work to
cultivate trust in information technology and metrology. Trust
in the digital economy is built upon key principles, like
cybersecurity, privacy, interoperability, equity, and avoiding
bias in the development and deployment of technology. NIST
conducts fundamental and applied research, advances standards
to understand and measure technology, and develops tools to
evaluate such measurements. Technology standards and the
foundational research that enables their development and use
are critical to advancing trust in and promoting
interoperability between digital products and services.
Critically, they can provide increase assurance, thus enabling
more secure, private, and rights-preserving technologies. With
robust collaboration with stakeholders across government,
industry, international bodies, and academia, NIST aims to
cultivate trust and foster an environment that enables
innovation on a global scale.
Since its establishment nearly a decade ago, NIST's privacy
engineering programs mission has been to support the
development of trustworthy information systems by applying
measurement science and system engineering principles to the
creation of frameworks, risk models, guidance, tools, and
standards that protect privacy and by extension civil
liberties. The ability to conduct thorough privacy risk
assessments is essential for organizations to select effective
mitigation measures, including appropriate privacy enhancing
technologies. Modeled after NIST's highly successful
cybersecurity framework, the NIST privacy framework is another
voluntary tool developed in collaboration with stakeholders
through a public and transparent process. It is intended to
support organizations' decisionmaking in product and service
design or deployment to optimize beneficial uses of data, while
minimizing adverse consequences for individuals' privacy, and
for society as a whole.
Since the 1980's, NIST has coordinated development of the
ANSI (American National Standards Institute)/NIST/ITL standard
data format for the interchange of fingerprint, facial, and
other biometric information for interchange of biometric data
in law enforcement applications, extending the modalities from
fingerprints to include face, iris, voice, and DNA. The
standard is used globally by law enforcement, homeland
security, defense, intelligence agencies, and other identity
management systems, and owners and developers, to ensure
biometric information interchanges are interoperable, and
maintain system integrity and deficiency. Since 2002, NIST has
also supported development of international standards for data
interchange in primarily civil applications, including ID
cards, including e-passports.
Different uses of biometrics, for example, as
authenticators to protect access to sensitive data, or
convenient entry solutions and fraud prevention, give rise to
different degrees of privacy risk. Organizations need to have
the means to be able to distinguish between the different
degrees of privacy risk and implement appropriate mitigation
measures. The NIST privacy framework provides the structure for
organizations to consider which privacy protected outcomes are
suitable to their use cases. The research on privacy enhancing
technologies that NIST conducts, and the guidelines and
standards that NIST publishes, helps organizations in
implementing effective mitigations appropriately tailored to
identified risks.
Privacy plays a critical role in safeguarding fundamental
values, such as human autonomy and dignity, as well as civil
rights and civil liberties. NIST has prioritized measurement
science research and the creation of frameworks, guidance,
tools, and standards that protect privacy. In addition to
maintaining the NIST privacy framework, NIST also includes
privacy considerations in many of NIST's critical cybersecurity
guidelines, as well as the draft AI risk management framework.
Thank you for the opportunity to present on NIST activities
on privacy enhancing technologies for biometric applications,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Romine follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Thank you. And after Dr. Romine is Dr.
Ross.

TESTIMONY DR. ARUN ROSS, PROFESSOR,

JOHN AND EVA CILLAG ENDOWED CHAIR

IN SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING,

MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY; SITE DIRECTOR,

CENTER FOR IDENTIFICATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH

Dr. Ross. Respected Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Obernolte, and esteemed Members of the Subcommittee, I'm
grateful for the invitation to testify today. I consider this
to be a great privilege and honor to engage with the corridors
of power that so graciously serve our Nation. Biometrics is a
valuable technology that has broad applications in a number of
different domains. However, it is necessary to ensure that the
privacy of individuals is not unduly compromised when their
biometric data are used in a certain application. The purpose
of my testimony is to communicate some of the ways in which the
privacy of the biometric data of individuals can be enhanced,
thereby facilitating the responsible use of this powerful
technology.
Firstly, then, the benefits of biometrics. The need for
reliably determining the identity of a person is critical in a
vast number of applications, ranging from personal smartphones
to border security, from self-driving vehicles to e-voting,
tracking child vaccinations to preventing human trafficking,
crime scene investigation to personalization of customer
service. Biometrics is increasingly being used in several such
applications. For instance, many smartphones employ automated
face or fingerprint recognition for unlocking and payment
authentication purposes. This increased use of biometric
technology is being driven by significant improvement in
recognition accuracy of these systems over the past decade.
Indeed, the phenomenal rise of the paradigm of deep learning
based on neural networks has fundamentally changed the
landscape of face recognition and biometrics.
But this brings me to my second point, the privacy concerns
associated with the technology. For example, face images of an
individual can be linked across different applications using
biometric technology, thereby creating a comprehensive profile
of that individual, or, in some cases, unintentionally
divulging a person's identity where privacy was expected.
Another example, rapid advances in the field of machine
learning and AI have led to the development of so-called
attribute classifiers that can automatically extract
information pertaining to wage, sex, race, and health cues from
images. This can potentially breach the privacy of individuals.
One more example, a number of face data sets have been curated
for research purposes by scraping publicly available face
images from the Web. Legitimate concerns have been expressed
about using these images for research purposes without user
consent. In principle, therefore, an anonymous face image can
be linked to one or more face images in a curated data set,
thereby potentially revealing the identity of the anonymous
face.
Now to my final point. How can biometric technology be
responsibly developed and deployed, while keeping privacy in
mind? Firstly, by utilizing schemes such as homomorphic
encryption, which not only ensure that the original biometric
data is never revealed, but that all computations take place in
the encrypted domain. Secondly, by engaging a paradigm called
cancelable biometrics, where the biometric data of an
individual is intentionally distorted using a mathematical
function. The distorted data can still be successfully used for
biometric recognition purposes, but within a certain
application. This pre-empts the possibility of linking the
biometric data of an individual across applications. Thirdly,
by perturbing a face image in such a way that its biometric
utility is retained, but the ability to extract additional
attributes pertaining to age, sex, race, or health is obscured.
Fourthly, by making it more difficult for face images to be
scraped from public websites and social medial profiles.
Fifthly, by deploying privacy preserving cameras where the
acquired images are not interpretable by a human, and can only
be used within a specific application. Such cameras, when used
in public spaces, can ensure that the acquired images are not
viable for previously unspecified purposes.
In addition, I must note that academic researchers in
biometrics are becoming increasingly aware of the privacy and
ethical implications of the technology they're developing. This
means that recognition accuracy is not the only metric being
used to evaluate the overall performance of a biometric system.
Rather, metrics related to security and privacy are also being
increasingly considered. This shift in the research culture is
remarkable, and bodes well for the future of the technology.
Thank you, and I welcome any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ross follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Foster. Well, thank you, and at this point we will
begin our first round of questions, so the chair will recognize
himself for five minutes.
First, on the prospects for a secure and privacy-preserving
digital ID, though we're all aware of some concerning aspects
of biometric technologies, it's important to recognize that
there are valuable uses for these technologies that could
improve our lives and security. Now, privacy protections must
evolve along with biometric capabilities so that we can reap
the benefits safely. With our Improving Digital Identity Act of
2021, I, and a bipartisan group of colleagues, have called upon
Federal agencies to modernize and harmonize our Nation's
digital identity infrastructure, in large part by leveraging
the existing biometric data bases that individual States
already have in place as part of their programs to support the
REAL ID, but additionally using NIST standards to make sure
that these identity tools are interoperable, and can be used
for presenting that identity both online and offline in a
privacy preserving way.
So, first, Dr. Romine, how could biometric technologies
increase our privacy by making our identities more secure
against theft and fraud?
Dr. Romine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly appreciate
the concern that you and the Ranking Member have on this issue,
and I'm delighted to be here, excuse me, talking about this
today. The guidelines that we have put in place for privacy
enhancing technologies, broadly speaking, we have investments
in our privacy engineering program related to understanding how
we can develop new technologies that can enhance privacy
protections in many different aspects of technologies, and
that, coupled with the guidance that we are updating today on
identity management, and appropriate protections for identity
management technologies, I think there are going to be,
certainly, opportunities to improve, as you point out, the
protections of biometrics information across the board through
some of these updated guidelines, and I look forward to
discussing that with you and your staff further.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And--so, obviously, any broad
implementation of biometric identification techniques would
require commensurately broad implementation of privacy
protective measures, so what--so the so-called B-PET methods,
how could they be strengthened? Are they really ready for
primetime? Things like homomorphic encryption, I've been told
that there's still a privacy budget that you have to enforce,
that you can't sit there and interrogate this--using
homomorphic decryption, you can't just do it repeatedly
without, at some point, revealing the underlying data base. So
there must be limits to these, and have we pretty much
understood and hit the limits of these, or are--is there a lot
of work yet to be done to understand how effective it can be to
exchange information between trusted entities without revealing
everything?
Dr. Romine. Well, thank you, sir. A very short time ago
homomorphic encryption was a theoretical idea whose performance
was so unbelievably slow that it was not practical. Since then,
enormous strides have been made in improving the performance.
But I will say that these privacy enhancing technologies, in--
particularly using cryptography as a protection mechanism, have
enormous potential, but there's still a lot more work to be
done in enhancing those to make them significantly practical.
And, as you point out, there are situations in which, even with
an obscured data base through encryption that's queryable, if
you provide enough queries, and have a machine learning backend
to take a look at the responses, you can begin to infer some
information. So we're still in the process of understanding the
specific capabilities that encryption technologies, such as
homomorphic encryption, can provide in support----
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And, Dr. Ross, do you have any
comments on this, and--you know, particularly the fascinating
idea that you can cancel your fingerprints, in some sense? How
does that work, and does it really work yet?
Dr. Ross. Yes, thank you for your question, Chairman
Foster. So cancelable biometrics has been proposed as one way
to both preserve the security and privacy of the biometric
data, but also the ability to cancel one's biometric template.
The way it works is as follows. Let's say you have a
fingerprint image. Now you subject it to some distortions using
a mathematical function, and the distorted image is then used
for matching purposes. In other words, if the particular image
is compromised, then you would just change the mathematical
function, and therefore you cancel the original template, if
you will, and now you generate a new fingerprint template based
on this revised mathematical function. And so, in principle,
this can allow us to not store the person's original
fingerprint, but only the distorted version, or the transformed
version, of the fingerprint, and that's why--the cancelable
property, which is really imparted by merely changing the
transformation function.
Now, to your question about evaluation----
Chairman Foster. I'm afraid I don't want to abuse my time
limit here, which has expired, but there--I believe we should
be able to get a second round--so at this point I'll now
recognize Congress's other AI programmer, our Ranking Member,
Representative Obernolte, for five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Chairman Foster, and thanks to
our witnesses. It's been a really interesting hearing, and I'm
looking forward to the questions. You know, I've been
reflecting on the fact that, when we talk about privacy, it
really is a non-binary ethical problem, right? It's--you can't
say that data is--you know, is completely private or data is
not. You know, we're dealing with this strange kind of
continuum, where we have to weigh the amount of privacy we're
willing to give up against the potential benefit that we expect
by giving up that privacy, and it's a complicated thing. So
that's--I'd like to kind of organize my questions around that,
because I think solving that problem is going to be key to
establishing a regulatory framework of what's expected when we
ask companies to protect privacy.
So, Ms. Wright, I think I'll start with you with a
question. I'm really, really happy to see the GAO participate
in this hearing, and you know, I think that this is--this sends
a powerful statement to those that we intend to regulate when
we start with ourselves in government, because, I mean,
obviously we interact with a lot of data from a lot of
different users, and we ought to be experimenting on--really
ourselves on solving this problem before expect others to solve
it, so I found your testimony really compelling.
I have to admit, I was very alarmed when I read that 13 out
of the 14 agencies you survey did not have complete information
about their own use of facial recognition technology, but then
I tunneled a little more, and I realized that most of those
were people using facial recognition technology to unlock their
own smartphones, things like that. So it made me think about
the fact that maybe there's a difference between privacy when
it comes to, you know, our own data, I'm using my face to
unlock my phone, and the privacy when we're using other
peoples' data, especially when we have a large amount of data.
So do you think that we need to--when we do these surveys in
the future, that we need to make a distinguishment between
those different kinds of uses?
Ms. Wright. I certainly think that that's really important.
With the cases where we found agencies didn't know what their
own employees were using, it was actually the use of non-
federal systems to conduct facial image searches, such as for
law enforcement purposes, and so in those scenarios what was
happening is perhaps the folks at headquarters didn't really
have a good sense of what was happening in the regional and
local offices, and that's where we think it's really important
for agencies to have a good understanding of what are the
systems that are being used, and for what purposes, and then to
also make sure that, by accounting for that and inventorying
that, they then have the necessary tools to ensure that they're
balancing the potential privacy risks associated with using
those systems.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. I mean, just--isn't--all of these
things, if we're--you're using, you know a commercial source
for this kind of technology, it has to go through procurement,
right? Would procurement maybe be a fruitful avenue to look at,
in terms of informing this flow of information?
Ms. Wright. Certainly. There's--there were a couple of
different scenarios, one in which agencies might have been
accessing State and local systems, or commercial systems,
through a test or trial period, and then there also might be
instances where they actually have an acquisition or
procurements in place. We actually have some ongoing work right
now that's looking at more--looking, again, at local--excuse
me, at law enforcement's use, and the kinds of mechanisms that
they're using in acquiring systems from commercial vendors, so
I think that information is going to be really telling for us
to understand what sorts of privacy requirements are being put
in place when agencies are requiring services from these
commercial vendors.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Yes, that makes sense. All right. Dr.
Romine, I found it really interesting, in your written
testimony, when you were talking about the privacy framework,
and the fact that it's not a static thing, it's not binary,
which is very much in keeping with the way that I look at it as
well. So could you talk a little bit about how you would
evaluate, you know, the fact that this has to be dynamic? I
mean, for example, I think part of it has to be based on use,
right? If you look--if you're using facial recognition for
verification, that's a different use case than identification.
So, I think users' expectations on privacy are going to be
different. So how do you approach that kind of ethical
conundrum?
Dr. Romine. That's exactly right. I think you've hit it on
the head, in the sense that the context of use is critical to
understanding the level of risk associated with the privacy
considerations. One of the things that our guidance is intended
to do, and the privacy framework is intended to do, is give
organizations the ability to establish privacy risk management
principles as part of their overall risk management for the
enterprise. You talk about reputational risk, and financial
risk, and human factors risk--or human capital risk, and
privacy risk hasn't been included, typically, in that, and so
we're giving organizations the tools now to understand that,
you know, data gathered for one purpose, when it's translated
to a different purpose, in the case of biometrics, can have a
completely different risk profile associated with it. So it
isn't inherent in the data, it's the context in which that data
are being--those data are being used. So our tools allow for a
deeper understanding on the part of the organizations on that
context issue.
Mr. Obernolte. Sure. Well, I see I'm out of time. If we get
another round here, I'm going to ask you about scope creep,
because that's going to fit right into what we're talking about
about framework. But thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and we will now recognize
Representative Carey for five minutes. Mike? You're passing?
OK. We will recognize Representative Bice for five minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Obernolte. I have a couple of questions that I just want to
touch on. You know, this is a topic of conversation that has
come up in Oklahoma a couple of times on the State side. Ms.
Wright, you testified that most agencies accessing non-federal
facial recognition technology don't track use or access related
to privacy risks. As far as you are aware, is there any Federal
law that requires agencies to track this information?
Ms. Wright. So there's a broad privacy framework, I guess
I'll say, where you have the Privacy Act, that does call for
agencies to limit how--their collection, as well disclosure and
use of personal information in a government system, and so a
photo would be considered an example of a--of personal
information. You also have the E-Government Act as well, which
does include provisions for agencies to conduct privacy impact
assessments when they're using systems, and, again, that's--to
be able to use those privacy impact assessments to analyze how
the information is collected, how it's stored, and shared, and
managed in a Federal system. And then lastly I'll just note
that, when we spoke with OMB, they had noted that agencies must
ensure that privacy requirements apply to any systems that are
being operated by contractors on behalf of Federal agencies.
Mrs. Bice. And, actually, we haven't even talked about the
contractor piece, which is sort of an interesting tag-along,
but I want to circle back around to your comment about these
assessments. Do you think that agencies are doing the
assessments, and if so, what are--are those outcomes sort of
published so that other agencies can understand maybe risks,
or, you know, the breadth of what they're utilizing within the
agencies?
Ms. Wright. We've seen a mix of how agencies are
approaching the privacy impact assessments. I think in the--in
my statement earlier, one of the things I mentioned was, you
know, when you don't even--when you have agencies who are using
systems, and there are agencies--or, excuse me, employees who
are using systems, and their agencies aren't even aware, then
there's the likelihood that those privacy impact assessments,
or any other privacy risks, have not been assessed, and we
think that that's a really important thing for agencies to be
keeping in mind as they are continuing to use facial
recognition systems.
Mrs. Bice. Do you think it would be helpful for Congress to
look at requiring these assessments to be done maybe on a
periodic basis for agencies that are utilizing these types of
biometrics?
Ms. Wright. So, again, the E-Government Act calls for
agencies to do that, but the extent to which they're doing that
really varies, and I--and so perhaps that's work that we
could--you know, could talk about, you know, if there's
oversight opportunities there to look at the extent to which
they're using privacy impact assessments, especially in the
realm of biometric.
Mrs. Bice. Perfect. And what do you think some of the
potential adverse consequences might be of agencies failing to
track information, either themselves or through third party
systems?
Ms. Wright. So one--a couple of things come to mind, is--
one, are they using systems that have reliable data, that have
quality images that will then affect the sorts of matching
results that will come back, and the extent to which those can
be trusted. You know, you could see where there's a potential
for a high mismatch error rate, which then might mean, in the
law enforcement example, you know, where you might be chasing
down a lead that isn't going to be fruitful, or you might be
missing an opportunity to chase down a lead, so I think that
that's one piece of it.
The other piece too is, when we're thinking about this from
a privacy perspective, is how are the images being collected,
and how are they being used, and does the individual have any
say? Did they provide any consent, for example, to their photo
being captured, and then used in this way? So there are
certainly a number of different risks associated. There's
certainly the issue of data security. Are the systems that are
being used secure? You know, we've had cybersecurity as a high
risk area on the GAO high risk list for many, many years within
the Federal Government, and so you can imagine, you know, this
only opens up the door to the potential for even greater
security breaches.
Mrs. Bice. And I would say, sitting on the Cyber
Subcommittee under House Armed Services, I think you're exactly
right. We look--we talk about this from sort of a data privacy
perspective, but we also need to recognize that there's
certainly a huge potential for cybersecurity challenges when
you're collecting these types of biometrics, and storing them
either through a third party, which I think in some cases can
be maybe more of an issue, but certainly, you know, if agencies
are actually storing that information themselves. So--my time
is almost expired, so, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and I believe we will have time
for a second set of--second round of questions here. And so I
will now recognize myself for five minutes.
Ms. Wright, it is, I guess, abundantly clear that the U.S.
taxpayer has suffered greatly from identity fraud, and
everything from, you know, IRS (Internal Revenue Service)
refund fraud to, you know, unemployment benefit fraud during
COVID, you know, you name it. Has anyone, to your knowledge,
inside GAO or elsewhere, just netted out the total loss to the
Federal Government from identity fraud that might be, you know,
prevented with using sort of state-of-the-art identity proofing
mechanisms?
Ms. Wright. It's certainly not something that came up in
the course of the recent work that we've done, and I'm not
aware, but certainly happy to take that back, and follow up
with you on that.
Chairman Foster. Yes. So I think you'll be asking you, for
the record, sort of, you know, what the scope of such a survey
would be, because there appear to be just little bits and
pieces of documentation of the enormous losses that the
taxpayer suffers from this. And so trying to get that balance
right too, I think, could be an important outcome here.
Ms. Wright. Certainly. Happy to do that.
Chairman Foster. Yes. Secondly, one of the tough things
that we're going to face as a government is sharing data with
other governments. You know, if you talk about biometric data
bases, or the difficulty of regulating crypto, where you'll--
ultimately going to need to have, you know, uniquely
identified, biometrically de-duped crypto driver's license, as
it were, if you're really going to prevent it from being used
for ransomware, and all this sort of thing, so that's going to
involve setting up, you know, very much like, I guess, a
passport system, something where you have to identify that
someone is operating multiple identities in multiple
jurisdictions.
And, actually, you know, Dr. Ross, are you familiar with
sort of the state-of-the-art, and what may be useful there? Are
there investments that we can make toward more research that
would allow you to, you know, ask very sensitive questions of
big data bases that are owned by other States or other
governments?
Dr. Ross. Certainly, and I think one concept that can be
harnessed, but which has to be further researched, is the
notion of differential privacy, which would indicate that,
within a certain jurisdiction, you're able to do certain
identity assessments using biometrics, and you have specific
use cases, specific purposes, in which identity can be matched,
but in other cases the identity cannot be matched. And so, by
defining the policies, one could then use these principles that
we alluded to earlier, including homomorphic encryption, and
including differential privacy, in order to ensure that that
kind of functionality can be performed.
However, I must note that research is still in its infancy
in the context of biometrics, and certainly more investment is
definitely needed in order to assess the suitably of--
suitability of this in operational environments, and so further
collaboration and investment is definitely needed to implement
these techniques in operational environments.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. Dr. Romine, are--when you're
involved in international standard settings, which is part of
NIST's mission, do you get the feeling that the United States
is leading the way, or are there peers around the world that
are as sophisticated technologically in biometrics, and in
privacy preserving methods?
Dr. Romine. In the work that we're doing in the
international standards arena surrounding identity management,
we certainly believe we are leading in that space. There are
certainly other like-minded countries that are partners with us
that value, you know, democratic ideals, and so on, and so we
strive to work closely with them, and they do have very strong
technical capability in these areas as well.
Chairman Foster. Yes, I've been struck that in at least
some European nations you have a right to know when any
government official accesses your data, you know, at least
outside a criminal investigation. And so are these things that
can be cryptographically guaranteed, or is that really an
unsolvable problem to--if you understand my question? You know,
to--I dream of some technology that would allow you, with
cryptographic certainty, to know that someone's touched your
data.
Dr. Romine. It's certainly theoretical possible--
theoretically possible to use cryptography to address the
concern there. I wouldn't call it foolproof, necessarily. The
history of advancing technologies is colored with many
different sort of advances, and risks, and advances, and risks,
and the risks are addressed by new technologies, which creates
additional risk. So the goal, for us, is just to ensure the
trustworthiness of the underlying systems, and certainly
cryptography can be an important ingredient there.
Chairman Foster. Um-hum, yes. Dr. Ross, did you have any
thoughts on the feasibility of that as a long term goal?
Dr. Ross. Yes, and I think it's an excellent question,
because one thing this entails is keeping a ledger of
interactions between humans and the data that is being stored.
For example, a blockchain principle has been used to keep track
of certain transactions that have occurred, and these are
immutable. So I believe that some of these principles can be
leveraged into the field of biometrics, but I must maintain
that more research is needed, more investment is needed, but
certainly the technology is available, but then it has to be
incorporated into the context of biometrics.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. My time for this round is
expired, and I'll now recognize Representative Obernolte for
five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Dr. Foster. Dr. Romine, we were
having that discussion about, you know, the continuum of
privacy, and how that works ethically with our efforts to
regulate it, and in your written testimony you talked about
scope creep, you know, this idea that privacy could be violated
when the scope of how biometric data is used is--differs from
the expectation of the person who provided it. But, I mean,
that's ethically complex too, right? Because sometimes there
are societally beneficial uses that we put that to, and a good
example is the one we've been talking about, with using
Clearview AI to halt sex trafficking. And if you ask the
people, you know, that are safe from sex trafficking, you know,
they certainly didn't give permission for the use of their data
in that context, but if it's--if you ask them if it's OK with
them, they'd say yes, please, right? So, you know, how do you
navigate that minefield?
Dr. Romine. That's a terrific question. One of the things
to keep in mind is that, you know, when you've acquired
biometrics data, for whatever purpose, any organization that's
acquired such data, these are now assets in their control, and
sometimes the pressure to use those assets in ways that haven't
been--that weren't originally intended is pretty enormous. The
idea that, hey, we could do this, instead of thinking, should
we do this, with those data, and so that's one of the reasons
that we always have to stress the importance of context of use
in these areas. And, you're absolutely right, in some cases a
new context of use may be enormously beneficial, and perhaps
not even controversial, and in other cases could be extremely
potentially damaging.
I want to say, by the way, this is the difference between
cybersecurity and privacy, in the sense that a cybersecurity
event does not have to take place for privacy harms to occur.
Simply using, in this case, biometrics data in ways that were
not intended, and perhaps violate the expectations of those who
have provided those data, can create those privacy events.
Mr. Obernolte. Sure. Yes, I completely agree. In fact, I
want to ask a question about that to Dr. Ross. In your written
testimony you were talking about privacy violations that can
occur with using facial recognition to infer racial, sexual, or
health characteristics that weren't intended by the person who
provided the data, which I thought was really interesting, but,
you know, how do you navigate that, in an ethical sense?
Because when I post a picture of myself on Facebook, and one of
my friends looks at that and says, boy, he really looks unwell,
right? I can't then point my finger at them and say, hey,
that's a privacy violation, you know, I didn't intend for you
to infer anything about my health. They would just roll their
eyes, right, because it's understood my picture is out there,
and, you know, and those inferences can be made by anyone who
sees it. So why do we make a distinction between that when--
that use when a human does it and when a machine does it?
Dr. Ross. Thank you. Again, an excellent question. So we're
really distinguishing between human-based analytics versus
machine-based analytics, and when you employ a machine to do
this, then you can do this en masse. You can have billions of
images, you can run the software over these billions of images,
and then make some assessments in the aggregate without user
consent. And so it is the ability to do this repeatedly over
massive amounts of data, and then use that aggregate in order
to say--perform additional activities that were not indicated
to the user, that is where the problem lies. If the user were
to give consent, saying that, yes, the--these images can be
used for further analytics, then I believe that using the
machine will be productive in some cases, but in other cases,
as you pointed out, there might be a violation of privacy.
I think it all boils down to user consent, and also the
fact that you can do this en masse, and so how do we do this in
a manner that the person is aware of on how their data is being
used, and in a manner that does not unwittingly glean
additional pieces of information that might violate their
privacy.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Yes, I somewhat agree. You know, I
think that, you know, the distinction is not the amount of data
that's processed, but the inferences that can be made that
might be unintuitive to the person providing the data. And
quickly here, another question for you, Dr. Ross, before I run
out of time, you talked a lot in your testimony about privacy
by design, which I think is a really elegant concept, but
consider me a skeptic, because, you know, for example, if
you're using an algorithm that distorts images in a way that
sex or ethnicity can't be read, right, we're going to run into
exactly the same problem, aren't we, that we did with
cryptography, where, you know, cryptographic algorithms that
were developed 10 years ago don't work anymore because
computers are so much more powerful. As recognition technology
gets better, you know, aren't those algorithms not going to
work anymore either?
Dr. Ross. A great point, very insightful comment, and I
think this is where more mathematics is needed, as we start
developing biometric technology and deploying it. What we call
as theoretical guarantees, understanding what the privacy
leakages are, information leakage, and what is lacking here is
privacy metrics, really. And privacy metrics, in some sense, is
a moving target, because if technology cannot deduce some
attribute from a face image today, it might be able to do it
tomorrow. And so what is deemed to be private now, today, may
no longer be deemed to be private tomorrow, and that is where
the concern is.
Mr. Obernolte. Uh-huh.
Dr. Ross. And this is why, when the technology evolves, and
these collaborations are established, it must be revisited.
It's not static in time. It is dynamic in time, because, as
technology advances, these policies must evolve, and also the
metrics that are being used to evaluate must evolve. In short,
I completely agree with your statements. Some of the problems
in cryptography can potentially manifest itself in these other
techniques, but it's not unsolvable.
Mr. Obernolte. Right.
Dr. Ross. I think, with adequate technology development,
especially employing mathematical transformations, I believe
that a solution can be found.
Mr. Obernolte. Wow. It's a fascinating discussion. Thank
you for that. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I think there may actually
be time for an additional round, but we'll see how things go.
We'll now recognize Representative Perlmutter for five minutes.
Mr. Perlmutter. I was hoping that Mrs. Bice might go first,
because I'm just catching up to all of you, and I'll never be
able to catch up to Jay or Bill on this subject, but Stephanie
I can at least talk to her about it at softball. So anyway, I
want to thank the panel. There was a word you used, Dr. Ross,
immutable, and then you got into this conversation with Mr.
Obernolte about the fact that, you know, technology may make
some of what we're trying to do today, in terms of privacy and
cybersecurity, you know, outdated tomorrow. So I just--it
reminded me of a great Oklahoman, Will Rogers. You know,
there's--it was about certainty, but I'll use it with
immutability. The only thing that's immutable are death and
taxes.
So I guess my question is--and I'm really just a science
fiction person when it comes to this, and--you know, is
thinking of Minority Report with Tom Cruise, and you may have
all kind of addressed that. I mean, every place he goes, they
know him already, and eventually he has to have his eye taken
out because of this. And I'm--I went and I bought an iPad
holder from a company called Weather Tech the other day. We
were in there for something else, I saw it, it looked good, so
I bought the thing. All of a sudden I am getting iPad holder
ads like crazy, you know, and I didn't even look at--for it
online. I just bought the darn thing. I mean--so that's--I just
feel like I've got either Big Business looking over my
shoulder, or Big Government looking over my shoulder.
I'm making more of a statement than asking a question, but
I guess--Ms. Wright, I'll start with you. I mean, is there
anything--Dr. Romine was talking about, you know, privacy
versus cybersecurity. What can we do in the Congress to assure
ourselves a little more privacy?
Ms. Wright. So I think a really key important factor is how
do we hold--I'll start with Federal Government--how do we hold
agencies accountable for the information that they're
collecting, the purpose for which the information is being
used, how it's being stored, shared, and destroyed? I think
those are some really fundamental things to start with as we
think about this issue of privacy. You know with--and then to
really thank about what applications or use cases we think
are--should be--excuse me, should be permitted or restricted,
because I think then you'll start to get a handle on, you know,
where the concerns are with respect to privacy. And, again, at
the end of the day, this is all about tradeoffs. And while
there might be some convenience factors, there might be some
security benefits as well, you know, there's also the issue of
privacy, and being able to protect your personal information,
and I think that's where, you know, the tension lies.
Mr. Perlmutter. Well, and there's a tension, too, between
the kind of privacy we might want from State, or Federal, local
governments versus the kind of privacy we may want from private
enterprise. You know, I mean, the thing I ran into, I mean, it
was a spontaneous purchase of this iPad holder, and all of a
sudden I'm getting ads about it. You know, I mean, so there's--
you've got two really sizable kind of entities out there that
are looking over your shoulder, and I think we in the Congress
need to, you know, think about both of those when we're
thinking about--particularly about privacy, and about
cybersecurity.
So, gentlemen, you--anybody have a comment to my sort of
general proposition here? I--it's not very much science-based,
but it's personal-based.
Dr. Ross. I would be happy to share some comments. So I
think the issue that you're describing is actually very
important, namely exchange of biometric data. Biometric data
collected for one purpose can then be transmitted to another
agency, to another entity, which might use it for a different
purpose, and I think that is a legitimate concern. And one way
in order to kind of prevent this, even before it happens, is by
ensuring that when we store the biometric data in one entity,
that it's suitably encrypted, suitably transformed, and when it
is used in a different entity, or by a different entity, it is
encrypted differently, or it is transformed differently. What
happens here is then now these two sets of data cannot be
linked, because they have been transformed differently, and I
think that becomes very important.
Now, on the flipside, it might actually prevent, say, one
agency from communicating with another agency because the
biometric data cannot be linked. And this is where use case
specific policies must be instituted. There are certain
situations when it is acceptable, and other situations, like
the one that you described, it is not acceptable. And this is
where technology co-developments must be augmented with
legislative instruments to engage the data in a manner that is
appropriate in different use cases.
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. We'll now recognize
Representative Bice for five minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. And, for Representative Perlmutter,
my friend and coach, I think part of that--I recognize the
connections there, it is re-marketing. Your e-mail is likely
tied to your credit card in some way, or you may have entered
your e-mail address when you checked out, and your e-mail is
tied to social media, and so then, when they realize that you
purchased that, they started marketing to you all sorts of
things. And that's been going on for quite some time, but it is
a little, I think for a lot of folks, concerning because you
begin to wonder how did they know, how did they get this
information, and that is Big Data at its finest.
I want to talk--here in Oklahoma this last session, we
passed House Bill 2968, the Computer Data Privacy Act, and the
bill allows for the option for personal rights to be returned
to the individual, along with the option for cancellation of
the information in a private company's data base. To me, this
seems like it could be a solution for privately collected
biometrics data, but this is to any of the witnesses here. What
do you think are the most concerning acts--aspects of
developing biometric technology?
Dr. Ross. I would be happy to offer some comments, if you
don't mind.
Mrs. Bice. Sure.
Dr. Ross. And, to both parts of your excellent question, I
think one of the most obviously concerns about biometrics is
the ability to link different data sets, and I think that
clearly constitutes a problem in some cases. In the--in other
cases, it is an advantage. And once again, as the technology
improves, as the recognition accuracy numbers improve, this
kind of linking can be done more--with more certainty, because
the errors are decreasing. And I think this is where policies
for regulating the use of the technology become important. In
some use cases, it is absolutely essential to have the
functionality. In some other cases, it may not be required.
Secondly, in fact, in response to your first comment,
again, an excellent comment, is when a user in a private
enterprise offers their face image, or fingerprint image.
It would be nice if they can say for what purposes it can
be used. For example, if it's a face image, they might say,
well, you can use this for biometric recognition, but it should
not be used for assessing, say, age or health cues. And the
moment they specify that, the data should be transformed in a
manner that would facilitate the functionality prior to storing
it in a data base. This gives some degree of control to the
user, because the user is now able to specify what kind of
information can be gleaned, and what kind of information should
not be gleaned, and the technology is then being harnessed to
impart this kind of functionality. And I think that is one
important area in which more investments is needed. Many
techniques have been proposed in the literature, but these have
not been evaluated. The scalability of these things have to be
assessed, and so that is a tremendous opportunity, if we were
to invest in this front. But excellent questions, and thank you
for hearing me.
Mrs. Bice. Anyone else care to comment on that particular
aspect?
Dr. Romine. I'd be happy to weigh in. Some of the
challenges involve the ability to, as my colleague said--Dr.
Ross said, to glean certain kinds of information, and some of
the potential societal harms or inequities that may occur as a
result. I'll go back to the Ranking Member's question about his
Facebook image, and having a friend of his see it and say, wow,
you don't look very good. Imagine if, instead of his friend, it
was an insurance company deciding, wow, you don't look very
good, and taking steps, as a result of that assessment. Those
are the kinds of societal harms that I think we need to be wary
of.
Mrs. Bice. Perfect. I think this is a really great point,
that use of those biometrics is incredibly important, and we
need to be able to develop systems and controls to be able to
allow for, you know, individuals to have some sort of say in
how their information is utilized. Thank you for your times,
the witnesses today, and, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And I think we will now embark
on actually a final round of questions, and then close the
hearing. And so I'll now recognize myself for five minutes
here.
Dr. Ross, you seemed to be coming close to describing
something that sort of resembled a licensing regime for
collecting biometric data, that--let's say someone wanted to
put, you know, a camera, facial recognition camera, in front of
their nightclub, you know, to find people that had repeatedly
shown up in the nightclub and caused violence. All right,
sounds like a legitimate thing. But then, if they start
transferring that information around, then there are a bunch of
issues that come up.
And so are there standards--this might also be a question
for Dr. Romine. Are there standards that are being mooted for
how you would license the collecting of the data, and also
licensing the transferring the data, so that you'd actually
ultimately--if you're holding biometric data on someone, you
would have to also be able to demonstrate a chain of custody
that showed that you had achieved this--you had obtained this
only through a set of licensed distributors of data, with
customer consent at each point. Are--have people gone that far,
or any country gone in that direction?
Dr. Ross. Thank you for your question, Chairman Foster.
I'll address the first question, and I assume my distinguished
colleague will address the second part. So the first part,
there is research that is being conducted in which privacy is
being moved closer to the censor than to the data, because once
the data is acquired, it is available. Yes, you can encrypt it,
you can transform it, but someone has access to the data. What
if we move the privacy aspect to the camera itself in such a
way that a camera is designed in a manner that it can only
extract or acquire other specific aspects of the scene?
And that becomes very important, because nowhere will the
digital version of the full scene be available, and so
perturbing the images, even prior to storing them at the censor
level, might be one way in which the scenario that you
described can be handled, because the data will no longer lend
itself to be processed by a different organization or entity,
because the data has already been perturbed at the time it was
acquired by the camera. So that would be one technological
solution, but, as I mentioned earlier, these things have to be
evaluated, and so much more research, much more investment,
much more evaluation, these are needed in order to substantiate
these principles.
Chairman Foster. Um-hum. And will this ultimately require,
for some purposes, basically a government back door on this
obfuscation? You know, for example, if you have cameras looking
at elevators, just to make sure you're opening and closing the
elevators as fast as possible, where you only really have to
detect the presence of a human, and then all of a sudden you
find that some massive crime has been committed, the government
might want to go to a trusted court system and say, OK, bypass
the obfuscation, I want to see that person's face who was in
the elevator. Are these necessary things, or are these policy
options that we're going to have to face?
Dr. Ross. I think it'll be a good mix of technological
innovation and policy. There are ways in which the same data
can be stored in different formats, different transformations,
so that it can be used for some purposes, and not for other
purposes. So I think that technology can be applied in order to
transform the data in different formats, but then individual
formats should be guided by policy as to who can access it, and
who should accesses--access it, and who cannot access it. So I
think it would require a good coupling between the
technological innovations that we are aware of, and some very
nice policies to make it happen.
Chairman Foster. Yes. Dr. Romine, do you have any comments
about--when you engage with our--some of your foreign
colleagues in this, you know, do they face a very different set
of attitudes as in the United States?
Dr. Romine. Well, certainly that's true. For example, as
you know, the GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) in
Europe envisions a very different way of approaching
protections for privacy than we currently have here in the
United States. But that said, one of the reasons that the
privacy framework that we've developed is regulation agnostic,
and even technology agnostic, is that we want it to be
adaptable, usable, around the globe, and to be able to provide
assurance that, if you follow these guidelines, you have
evidence to support you're complying with whatever regulatory
regime you happen to be in at any given time.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. I will now recognize
Representative Obernolte for five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Chairman Foster. I'd like to
continue our discussion about the--kind of the ethical
philosophy around privacy. And a couple of interesting things
have come up in this last round of questioning about--like how
do we safeguard this privacy, you know, from a 30,000 foot view
level? And, you know, I think there's some things that could
work, and some things that probably won't work. I think, Dr.
Ross, you were mentioning disclosure, which I've--I used to
think that that was a great idea, and then I started looking at
end user license agreements for software.
You know, I mean, it's like--it's--there are pages and
pages, people scroll through, they click agree at the end. No
one ever reads that, so what good is it possibly going to do
for us to add another paragraph that says here's how we're
going to use your--the facial data that you give us? You know,
it's--there was an episode of South Park a couple of years ago,
when--it was a parody of one of the characters that--
inadvertently given Apple the right to do medical
experimentation on him, you know, and his friends were kidding
him, what, you just clicked that and signed it without reading
it? Who does that? And the answer is everybody does that,
right? So I don't think disclosure is the answer. I think maybe
control over who has access to the data--you know, if I give my
data to Apple, you know, for use for a certain purpose, you
know, the fact that Apple should not give that data to somebody
else to use for a different purpose, I think that that's--you
know, that's closer to the mark.
But, I mean, I think ultimately we're not going to find a
real regulatory solution to this problem without looking at the
things we're trying to prevent. You know, it's what attorneys
call the parade of horribles. And--so I want to ask about that,
and, I guess, Dr. Romine, I'll ask you about this. So, like,
we're entering in this era when anonymity is a lot less than it
used to be, and that's going to be true regardless of whether--
what approach we as a government take toward privacy. So can
you walk us through, like, the worst things--if we fail to act,
like, the worst things that could--can happen? Because I think
those are the ones that we have to be trying to prevent.
Dr. Romine. Fair enough. I will say figuring out what the
worst things are might take me some time, but some of the
things that I've already alluded to, this idea of organizations
making decisions based on inferences from biometric data that
disadvantage certain groups over others.
Mr. Obernolte. OK, let me stop you there, though, because
the--we've had that problem--I mean, there's ethics around AI
algorithms in hiring right now that we're dealing with that
issue, right? But I think--I mean, the solution to that is you
focus on the fact that that behavior is already illegal. So, I
mean--like, if I'm going to kill somebody, it's equally illegal
for me to kill them with a knife or a gun. You know, the tool
doesn't matter, the act is what matters. So why is that
different with the--in the case of privacy?
Dr. Romine. So I don't think it's so much different as it
is--it's a consequence of the lack of privacy, or privacy
compromise. So privacy in this case, or the compromise of
privacy, a privacy event, would lead to that activity. There
are other things that I could imagine--there are, you know,
aggregate societal decisions that are made that may be
predicated on aggregate data for--that violates privacy
considerations, those kinds of things. You know, Policies may
be instituted that are inimical to certain populations as a
result of issues relating to privacy, so--or biometrics.
So, you know, in all of these cases, what we've discerned
is that this--there is no technological solution that's going
to solve the privacy problem, and there is no purely--I think
there is no purely policy solution that's going to solve the
problem. It's an ongoing joint effort of providing appropriate
technologies for improving privacy protections, and matching
those with appropriate policy decisions that can--you know, can
prevent some of these tragedies.
Mr. Obernolte. Sure. I agree with you, but I definitely
think that, in crafting policy, we need to be looking at the--
asking ourselves the question what problem are we trying to
solve? What are we trying to avoid? And, you know, merely
focusing on anonymity I think is a fool's errand, because we
have a lot less anonymity now than we used to, and we will.
There's nothing we can do about that. I think there's a big
difference between--when we talk about the parade of horribles,
whether or not it's government using--violating people's
privacy, or other entities, because government has a coercive
power that other entities don't.
And, you know, if you want parade of horribles, look at
what China does with some of the personal data they have for
people, right? So that's head of--that's the top of my list of
parade of horribles. But I really don't--I don't think we're
going to get there, you know, without--from a policy framework
standpoint without thinking about the problem we're trying to
solve holistically. Anyway, it's a fascinating discussion, and
I'm sure we're going to continue having it over the next couple
of years, but thank you very much, Chairman Foster, for having
the hearing. I've really enjoyed it. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and we'll now recognize our
lawyer in residence for five minutes, Representative
Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. And I think Mr. Obernolte is really sort of
focusing on the question of the day. I remember serving in the
State Senate about 20 plus years ago, and we were just trying
to have a--you know, an Internet within the Colorado
legislature, and something came up, and we were talking about
Social Security Numbers, and should we release them, and all
that stuff, and--you know, for privacy purposes, and I said,
well--I was sort of being cavalier, I said, there's no such
thing as privacy. And, kind of your point, there's no such
thing as anonymity, and it's only grown in--since--in the last
30 years.
So the question is--I think from a policy perspective--
technologically, you know, we can address things, and as Ms.
Wright said, you know, you give up some things to get some
things. You can make it tougher for a cyber criminal, or for
somebody to use your data, but you're giving up some
efficiency, or some ease of use in the process. The Supreme
Court, in several decisions, none of which I like, and the one
I like the least is the reversal of Roe v. Wade, but they
basically say that, under the United States Constitution, there
is no such thing as a right to privacy. And I don't know--I
mean, I want to feel secure that when I go buy something
spontaneously, that that doesn't alert everybody under the sun
to something, or when I walk by a--you know, a grocery store,
or a gas station, or something, that all of a sudden that
doesn't, you know, send off all sorts of--Perlmutter's in the
neighborhood, let's sell him X, or let's get him.
You know, I guess this is for everybody, including my two
colleagues. I don't know--so I think Jay's question--what is it
that we're trying to solve? What is--what do we want here? I
mean, do we want to create a right to privacy now that the
Supreme Court says there isn't such a thing? We certainly
legislatively can say something like that. And then how far do
we want to take it? I think those are the questions. And then,
for the technologists, you know, help us put that into place,
knowing that technology is going to evolve and change, and
things that we thought were in place will be replaced.
I don't know, that's just sort of Ed Perlmutter thinking,
based on Jay Obernolte's line of questioning, so--I don't know,
if anybody's got a thought--I think that, you know, it's the
responsibility of the technologists, and you, Ms. Wright, as
the director of the--you know, kind of the--this agency that
thinks about this stuff to say, OK, from a technology
standpoint, we can do some things if you guys give us some
clear direction. And I think Bill's trying to do that on some
of his digital legislation, and I think Jay has some stuff too.
So, I don't know. Dr. Foster, I'm going to turn it back to you,
and you can do with my two minutes whatever you wish.
Chairman Foster. Well, all right. So that's an
interesting--you know, this is a--or, here, I'll ask you a
question. So much of this is going to have to do with our cell
phones. So, Dr. Romine, is there good coordination and
communication with the manufacturers of the cell phones? You
know, there's incredible AI horsepower being built into the
next generation of smartphones, but not all of it's inside the
secure enclave, where you'll have some idea that it's trusted
computing. And so are you having thoughtful interactions, or
are--do you get the feeling that they're just trying to set up
a walled garden that keeps everyone's privacy information under
their control?
Dr. Romine. So in this we work with a very large and broad
cross-section of technology, including cell phone manufacturers
and providers. An interesting--I--having further reflection on
the--Ranking Member Obernolte's question about significant
harms, you know, one of the significant harms I can imagine is
either through cell phone tracking or face recognition, you
know, cameras that are--street cameras and so on, someone
trying to access, you know, safe and reliable medical services,
whether it's psychiatric services or something else, suddenly,
you know, that becomes a matter of public record. Someone has
now sort of been outed because of biometrics information,
because of privacy information, trying to obtain services. So
this is another one of these very serious potential issues. But
yes, we're working--in discussion with cell phone
manufacturers, and other advanced technology firms all the
time.
Chairman Foster. All right. OK. Well, thank you, and--well,
here--we could go on all afternoon on this. I just really--I
suppose I have to close the hearing now, but, before we bring
the hearing to a close, I want to thank our witnesses for
testifying before the Committee. It is really valuable for us
in Congress, as we struggle with all the policy issues here on
biometrics and privacy, that we have access to real quality
experts so we can understand the technological reality of the
feasibility of things, and don't generate legislation based on
wishful thinking, instead of technical reality.
Now, the record here will remain open for 2 weeks for
additional statements from the Members, for--and for any
additional questions that the Committee may ask the witnesses.
And the witnesses are now excused, and the hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
