- A REVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR NASA

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT'S
FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR NASA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

JUNE 23, 2021
__________

Serial No. 117-21
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

44-861PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         VACANCY
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                VACANCY
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

June 23, 2021

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Chairwoman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Witnesses:

The Honorable Bill Nelson, Administrator, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA)
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Discussion.......................................................    25

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Bill Nelson, Administrator, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA)................................    62

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Question submitted by Representative Brian Babin.................   114

A REVIEW OF THE PRESIDENT'S
FISCAL YEAR 2022 BUDGET
PROPOSAL FOR NASA

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 23, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building and via Webex,
Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson [Chairwoman of the Committee]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Johnson. Now the hearing will come to order
and, without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess at any time. Before I deliver my opening remarks, I just
want to say that, since we are in person and virtual today, I
am delighted. It's been a while since we've been here, and I
hope that we will continue to expand as we move along. Couple
of reminders, though. Members and staff who are attending in
person, and are unvaccinated against COVID-19, must stay masked
throughout the hearing. Unvaccinated Members may remove their
masks only during the question and answer, the 5-minute rule.
And you're on your own to make that determination. Members who
are attending virtually should keep their video feed on as long
as they are present in the hearing, and Members are responsible
for their own microphones, so please also keep your microphones
muted until you are speaking. And finally, if Members have
documents they wish to submit for the record, please e-mail
them to the Committee Clerk, whose e-mail address was
circulated prior to the hearing.
We have a--we've done that. We want to say welcome, and
welcome back to our Administrator. I look forward to working
with him, and we are all delighted that we have a person that
is familiar with the work of the Committee, and especially the
work of space. Senator Nelson served on our Committee. In fact,
he chaired the Space Subcommittee for 6 years, during which
time that--he flew into space about--aboard the national Space
Shuttle Columbia. And now we welcome him back today to testify
before our Committee as the National--NASA (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration) Administrator after a
distinguished career in both the House and Senate. We look
forward to his testimony, and welcome again.
It is no secret to our colleagues that I am a strong
supporter of NASA. It is one of the crown jewels of our
Nation's R&D (research and development) enterprise, and equally
importantly, it is a source of inspiration for our young
people, and indeed for people young and old around the world.
And I'm a Texan, where President Johnson took the lead, and
heard the call from President Kennedy to keep going with it.
Because NASA turns daring aspirations into reality, whether it
is flying a helicopter above the dusty expanses of Mars, or
pushing the boundaries of aeronautics research here on Earth,
working with 14 other nations to build and operate an
International Space Station (ISS) in Earth orbit, or building a
fleet of spacecraft to monitor our challenging climate, or
searching for life elsewhere in the universe.
I like to say the Science, Space, and Technology Committee
is the Committee for the future, and I think that is equally
true of NASA. The dedicated men and women of NASA are helping
create our future in space and here on Earth, and they should
take great pride in both what they have accomplished to date
and in what they are striving to accomplish in the days and
years ahead. Yet turning NASA's aspirations into reality will
take more than determination, or even good budgets. For
example, to execute an ambitious national initiative like the
Artemis Moon-Mars initiative will require clear goals and
objectives, thoughtful planning, realistic scheduling, and a
credible organizational and management structure, and attention
to the multitude of details that spell the differences between
success and catastrophic failure.
And also critical to the success will be finding out as
soon as possible where the problems are that need attention.
That is why I have argued that it is an early priority to carry
out an independent review of the entire Artemis initiative so
that you can take whatever corrective actions we need as soon
as possible. The lessons of the past are clear. Failing to
uncover problems because of arbitrary schedule pressure
inevitably winds up costing more in both money and delays, and
increased risk. If Congress is going to be asked to provide
increased funding, it first will need to have confidence in
NASA's initiatives, and it is critical that we see a path to
success. Another issue needing attention in the future of this
International Space Station. It will not last forever. We need
to know how long it will remain viably, structurally, and
operationally. We need a clear plan for transitioning to what
comes next, and we need to know what the future of the United
States and its international partners in Low Earth Orbit should
be, especially given the reality of the new Chinese space
station.
I could go on, but as I said, these are very challenging
times for NASA. However, make no mistake, the Committee wants
NASA to succeed. I hope that today's hearing will be just the
start of a continuing dialogue and collaboration with you, Mr.
Administrator, and with that, I want to again welcome you, and
look forward to your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning, and welcome back, Mr. Administrator. I say
welcome back, because when he was first elected to Congress,
Senator Nelson served on our Committee. In fact, he chaired the
Space subcommittee for six years, during which time he flew
into space aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia.
And now we welcome him back today to testify before our
Committee as NASA Administrator after a distinguished career in
both the House and the U.S. Senate. We all look forward to your
testimony, Mr. Administrator.
It is no secret to my colleagues that I am a strong
supporter of NASA. It is one of the crown jewels of the
nation's R&D enterprise, and equally importantly, it is a
source of inspiration for our young people, and indeed for
people young and old around the world. Because NASA turns
daring aspirations into reality, whether it is flying a
helicopter above the dusty expanses of Mars, pushing the
boundaries of aeronautics research here on Earth, working with
14 other nations to build and operate an international space
station in Earth orbit, building a fleet of spacecraft to
monitor our changing climate, or searching for life elsewhere
in the universe.
I like to say the Science, Space, and Technology Committee
is the Committee for the Future. And I think that is equally
true of NASA. The dedicated men and women of NASA are helping
create our future in space and here on Earth, and they should
take great pride in both what they have accomplished to date
and in what they are striving to accomplish in the days and
years to come.
Yet turning NASA's aspirations into reality will take more
than determination or even good budgets. For example, to
execute an ambitious national initiative like the Artemis Moon-
Mars initiative will require clear goals and objectives,
thoughtful planning, realistic scheduling, a credible
organizational and management structure, and attention to the
multitude of details that spell the difference between success
and catastrophic failure.
And also critical to Artemis' success will be finding out
as soon as possible where the problems are that need attention.
That is why I have urged that it be an early priority to carry
out an independent review of the entire Artemis initiative so
that you can take whatever corrective actions are needed as
soon as possible.
The lessons of the past are clear: failing to uncover
problems because of arbitrary schedule pressure invariably
winds up costing more in both money and delays, and in
increased risk. If Congress is going to be asked to provide
increased funding for Artemis, it first will need to have
confidence that NASA's initiative is on a credible path to
success.
Another issue needing attention is the future of the
International Space Station. It will not last forever. We need
to know how long it can remain viable structurally and
operationally. We need a clear plan for transitioning to what
comes next, and we need to know what the future of the United
States and its international partners in Low Earth Orbit should
be, especially given the reality of the new Chinese space
station.
I could go on, but as I said, these are very challenging
times for NASA. However, make no mistake-this Committee wants
NASA to succeed. I hope that today's hearing will be just the
start of a continuing dialogue and collaboration with you, Mr.
Administrator, and with that, I want to again welcome you, and
I look forward to your testimony.

Chairwoman Johnson. The Chair now recognizes my
outstanding Ranking Member, Mr. Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chair, and before I start, I
want to thank you for holding this hybrid hearing, and enabling
Members, staff, and Administrator Nelson to participate in
person safely. After a year and a half of virtual hearings, I
think I speak for the entire Republican Conference when I say
it's good to be back doing the people's business in person. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Today's hearing is important and timely. For several years
NASA's conducted review after review of human space flight
program. Although the overall goal to return U.S. astronauts to
the Moon remains constant, NASA's changed its plans on how to
accomplish that goal several times over numerous reviews. After
numerous independent advisory groups, like the National
Academies of Science, and the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel,
have highlighted, program stability is critical to ensuring
overall mission success.
As Administrator Nelson knows, Congress has provided this
consistency for nearly 20 years following the Columbia accident
investigation, the cancellation of the shuttle, and the
development of deep space capacities. Despite the ebbs and
flows of each new administration's priorities, Congress has
maintained a steady course to the Nation's space program.
That's why I was pleased to see that the Biden Administration
is continuing the Artemis Program. Keeping our sights on
returning to the Moon in a manner that enables exploration to
Mars, and beyond, is paramount at this critical juncture. The
Orion spacecraft was delivered to the Kennedy Space Center last
year, and the space launch system was also recently delivered
to Kennedy Space Center after a successful green run. It's
exciting to see the SLS (Space Launch System) being stacked
with boosters in the vehicle assembly building (VAB) as we
speak.
NASA's exploration ground systems are working diligently
to receive, process, and launch these critical national
systems, but more work remains. NASA's human landing system
(HLS) procurement is stalled by GAO (Government Accountability
Office) protests. Everyone wants to get started on this
critical piece of hardware, but we must first let the process
play out, and adjust course based on GAO's ruling and available
funding. I look forward to working with our colleagues in the
Senate, and on the Appropriations Committees, and in the
administration to chart a path forward that enables the success
of our space program.
The largest unknown looming on the horizon is the budget.
Finding an extra $10 billion for the human landing system is no
easy task. While the Senate recently authorized an additional
$10 billion, and required NASA to select an additional
contractor, if NASA doesn't get additional appropriated
funding, this could become an unfunded mandate that could end
up with NASA having to cut billions of dollars from other
programs. I'm sure no one wants to see this happen. That's why
it's important for NASA to propose realistic plans, budgets,
and schedules, and not rely on Hail Mary passes to save the
day. Other nations, like China, are making slow and steady
progress, and are following disciplined plans. We must maintain
steady support for our national space program so that the new
frontiers in space will be explored by free nations, not by
oppressive regimes.
With that, Madam Chair, it is wonderful to be at the dais
with you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Before I start, I would like to thank Chairwoman Johnson
for holding this hybrid hearing and enabling Members, staff,
and Administrator Nelson to participate in person safely. After
a year and a half of virtual hearings, I think I speak for the
entire Republican conference when I say that it is good to be
back doing the people's business in person - so thank you.
Today's hearing is important and timely. For several years
NASA has conducted review after review of its Human Spaceflight
Program. Although the overall goal to return U.S. astronauts to
the Moon remains consistent, NASA has changed its plans on how
to accomplish that goal several times after numerous reviews.
As numerous independent advisory groups like the National
Academies of Sciences and the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel
have highlighted, program stability is critical to ensuring
overall mission success. As Administrator Nelson knows,
Congress has provided this consistency for nearly 20 years
following the Columbia accident investigation, the cancellation
of the Shuttle, and the development of deep space capabilities.
Despite the ebbs and flows of each new Administration's
priorities, Congress has maintained a steady course for our
Nation's space program.
That's why I was pleased to see that the Biden
Administration is continuing the Artemis program. Keeping our
sights on returning to the Moon in a manner that enables
exploration of Mars and beyond is paramount at this critical
juncture. The Orion spacecraft was delivered to the Kennedy
Space Center (KSC) last year, and the Space Launch System (SLS)
also was recently delivered to KSC after a successful ``Green
Run.'' It's exciting to see the SLS being stacked with boosters
in the Vehicle Assembly Building as we speak. NASA's
exploration ground systems are working diligently to receive,
process, and launch these critical national systems.
But more work remains. NASA's Human Landing System
procurement is stalled by GAO protests. Everyone wants to get
started on this critical piece of hardware, but we must first
let the process play out and adjust course based on the GAO's
ruling and available funding. I look forward to working with
our colleagues in the Senate, on the Appropriations Committees,
and in the Administration to chart a path forward that enables
the success our space program.
The largest unknown looming on the horizon is the budget.
Finding an extra $10 billion for the Human Landing System is no
easy task. While the Senate recently authorized an additional
$10 billion and required NASA to select an additional
contractor, if NASA doesn't get additional appropriated
funding, this could become an unfunded mandate that could end
up with NASA having to cut billions of dollars from other
programs. I am sure no one wants to see this happen. That's why
it's important for NASA to propose realistic plans, budgets,
and schedules and not rely on ``Hail Mary Passes'' to save the
day.
Other nations, like China, are making slow and steady
progress and are following disciplined plans. We must maintain
steady support for our national space programs so that new
frontiers in space are explored by free nations, not oppressive
regimes.

Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. At this time I'd
like to introduce our witness. Senator Bill Nelson was sworn in
as the 14th NASA Administrator May the 3rd, 2021. He is no
stranger to this Committee, and Congress, having chaired the
Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee for six years, and later
serving as the Ranking Member on the State Commerce, Science,
and Transportation Committee in the Senate. He's served in the
House for 13 years, and was later elected three times to the
U.S. Senate, representing Florida for 18 years. Senator Nelson
attended the University of Florida and Yale University. He
received a J.D. from the University of Virginia. After law
school, he served on active duty as Captain in the U.S. Army.
He has served in public office over four decades, in the State
Legislature, as a State Treasurer, and in the U.S. Congress. In
1986, he flew on Space Shuttle Columbia as a payload
specialist, orbiting the Earth 98 times over six days, while
conducting research experiments. After leaving the Senate, he
continued to be engaged in NASA activities, serving on the NASA
Advisory Council, until his nomination of the NASA
Administrator. We are delighted to have him here today,
Administrator Nelson, and we look forward to your testimony.
Our witnesses should know you will have five minutes for
the spoken testimony. Your written testimony will be included
in the record for the hearing, and when you have completed your
spoken testimony, we'll begin with questions. Each Member will
have five minutes to ask the question. So now, Administrator
Nelson, you're recognized.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE BILL NELSON,

ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL AERONAUTICS

AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION (NASA)

Mr. Nelson. Thank you, Madam Chair. If it looks like I'm
smiling, I am. Coming back into these halls brings back so many
pleasant memories, and so many cherished friendships. Most of
these portraits of people I have served with, and it--it's an
outstanding Committee. I want to welcome the new Member of
Congress, and, Madam Chair, if you're getting folks that are so
experienced like your new Member coming from Sandia, again,
it's just an example of the reputation of the Members of this
Committee to be a very well experienced and very serious
Committee.
We're going back to the Moon in preparation to go to Mars,
and space is hard. A lot of people focus in on the date, about
2024. We're going back to the Moon with humans in 2023. It's
going to be following the first launch, which is at the end of
this year, 2021. The largest, most powerful rocket ever, the
SLS Space Launch System. We are then going to hitch up with
whoever is the winner of all the competitions after the GAO
makes its decision, and we are in a blackout period now until
August the 4th, when the GAO is going to determine whether or
not the bid protest is successful. All of this occurred before
I was there, but I'm here to defend what NASA has done, but
with regard to what's going forward, we're not going to know
until August the 4th, when the GAO decides. Pam Melroy, who I
just swore in on Monday, now is with us as our deputy. Our No.
3 in the agency is Bob Cabana, also an astronaut commander, as
is Pam. He's long experienced in the administration in Johnson,
then the head of Stennis, then the head of Kennedy, and well
respected, and the three of us already trying to make the plan
so that when the GAO decides that we can move out quickly,
depending upon what the GAO decides as a legal matter.
Now, that's just the human exploration. Look what's
already happened. What American is not excited about
Perseverance, and little Ingenuity flying around all over the
Mars surface? Again, a pinpoint landing. But remember, as the
Ranking Member said, remember, it was followed by only the
second Nation to be able to land a rover successfully. The
Chinese government, the Chinese Space Program did that, and
they have a very aggressive program, and we've got to beware of
that. They're putting a series of landers on the south pole of
the Moon. So are we. It's called the CLPS (Commercial Lunar
Payload Services) Program. It's--the C stands for commercial.
We're going to go down there to the south pole why? Because
there's water down there, and it's frozen. And when you have
water, that means you've got oxygen, and you've got fuel,
hydrogen. So both of our nations are going down there, but the
fact that they are planning this, just beware.
Look at what's happening in the Earth science and the
planetary science. We just announced two missions that are
going to go to Venus. We haven't been to Venus in 30 years. Why
Venus? You think of it, the Sun, the next planet is Mercury,
it's hot. The next planet is Venus, and it's covered with a
shroud of clouds, and that's caused it to heat up so much that
it can melt lead on the surface. The next planet is Earth. It
has a habitable atmosphere. The next planet is Mars, and it has
a very thin atmosphere. Now, what is it about Mars, and about
Venus? Do they have the chemical compositions that they
could've had life? Because, after all, this universe has been
developing for 13-1/2 billion years.
And I'll conclude with this, Madam Chair. Another part of
our science, we're sending up, in November, this telescope.
It's going out of French Guiana on an Ariane rocket. It's about
a $9 billion telescope, and it is going to peer back to the
light source 13.35 billion years. That's only 150 million years
after the Big Bang, which is the beginning of the very cosmic
systems. And we're going to be able to capture that light that
has been traveling all those billions of years, and find out
things that we never found out before. We found out a lot from
Hubble, which is still up there trying to work. That's the
excitement of what is going. And finally, Madam Chairman, Earth
science. In every one of your pockets is that cell phone, which
I forgot to turn off, and it has a camera that we all use. That
camera is on a chip, and that camera was developed by NASA to
observe the Earth, to get the precision measurements because of
what's happening to our planet. If you want to mitigate the
climate, you've got to measure it, and that's what NASA does.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nelson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. We now will begin
our first round of questions, and I will recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Administrator Nelson, you have often discussed your
concerns about China's ambitions and advancements in space, and
it is clear that, with sustained planning and methodical
preparation, they have made steady and measured progress. They
successfully landed on the far side of the Moon, they have
returned lunar samples to the Earth, they landed a rover on the
surface of Mars, and they are establishing a small space
station on Low Earth Orbit. And they indicated that they are
planning for human landings and outposts on the Moon. China
clearly is in space for the long term, and we need to recognize
that and respond accordingly.
To me, that doesn't mean undertaking a crash program with
unrealistic timetables, but it does mean that in human
spaceflight, NASA needs to focus its efforts, and develop a
clear plan and program to achieve these goals set by successive
administrations and authorizations, namely return to the Moon
as necessary steps toward the ultimate goal of landing humans
on Mars. NASA needs to develop that plan and program now,
because there aren't unlimited resources, and we really can't
afford to pursue nice to have projects at the expense of
neglecting essential tasks.
To date the Committee has been--has seen--has not seen
such a plan for the Artemis initiative, and it's not because we
haven't asked for it. I am not blaming you, because you've just
settled in NASA, but what can we expect to see, and when can we
expect to see the plan of the program, and how do we get--how
are we going to get to Mars, as well as what specifically we
will need to accomplish getting to the Moon--on the Moon?
Mr. Nelson. August the 4th, Madam Chairwoman. Once we know
the direction legally as a result of GAO, I will have a plan to
announce, according to what their decision is, in order to try
to have us there as quickly, and as safely, and as efficiently
as possible.
Chairwoman Johnson. Anything else?
Mr. Nelson. Well, let's be realistic, a lot of people
don't know that, for example, what the Source Selection Board,
picking out of the existing competitors--NASA had asked for
$3.4 billion for that competition. The award of Appropriations
was 850 million, and so the Source Selection Board, back before
I came in, decided that they didn't have enough money, and that
they would award it to one of the three competitors. That
award--the concept is that NASA's vehicle, the SLS, with its
spacecraft on top, Orion, will take the crew to lunar orbit,
and then in lunar orbit there will be the transfer of the crew
into the landing vehicle, and that will go down to the surface,
they'll do their mission, they'll come back, and then Orion
will return with the crew to the Earth. That's one concept.
There are other concepts to put up a Gateway, which is a mini
space station in lunar orbit, and that is being planned as an
international station, that you will take the crew to that.
They will then transfer into a lunar landing vehicle. So there
are different plans.
What was awarded was just for one demonstration, but there
needs to be a landing each year for a dozen years, so there are
many more awards to come if you all decide that it's in the
interest of the United States to appropriate that money. And,
of course, the appropriation starts right here in this
Committee, with the authorizations. So that's about as succinct
as I can tell you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. My time is
expired. I now recognize Mr. Lucas.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chair. And continuing with the
Chair's line of questioning--and I acknowledge the Chinese are
making steady progress on their exploration goals. I think it's
very important we maintain our momentum. So, in that vein, I
ask you this, Director. Within the confines of what you've just
discussed, are you confident that the fiscal year (FY) 2022
budget request, which has proposed reductions in the HLS
Program, are you confident that that's capable of getting us
back to the lunar surface by 2024? And I'll go farther than
that to say part of our challenge here in Appropriations, even
if we're successful, there's still that little creature called
OMB (Office of Management and Budget), and there's still that
process of the administration pulling as we push. We need a
little more push too over there, but we're pulling on this
side. Do you believe the 2022 budget request is enough to do
what we need to get done? And, by the way, you can strike out
2024. Give me a number or a date.
Mr. Nelson. Mr. Ranking Member, in your State and my
State, we have an expression, there are more ways than one to
skin a cat. So I've talked directly to OMB about the additional
money for us to have the robust competition that we want to
have these sustained landings over a dozen years, and that's
going to cost some more money. So I've said to them, well, you
all are going to consider a jobs bill, an infrastructure bill--
and by the way, I haven't even talked about the desperate needs
of NASA on dilapidated infrastructure, which is also jobs. And
so if you all put together a jobs bill, that's another way of
funding. Otherwise, you look at the request, and that's your
question, is the President's request. It is a very robust NASA
request. It's over a 6 percent increase, and look at what's
happened in the increases in science and STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) education, in
aeronautics. By the way, we haven't even talked about the first
A in NASA, which is aeronautics. Lot of exciting things going
there. I'll be happy to answer your questions.
Mr. Lucas. Along that line, NASA has a very vast portfolio
of programs, and it's always challenging to keep all those
plates spinning at once. And I'm not sure the general public
appreciates you've got deep space exploration, you've got Low
Earth Orbit operations, you've got planetary science,
astronomy, astrophysics, Earth science, heliophysics, biology,
physical sciences, and aeronautics. Among many of those
components, how are you going to keep all those plates
balanced, Mr. Administrator? Now, I have faith in you. That's a
challenge with the dollars you have available.
Mr. Nelson. Well, I agree with you, but I'll tell you, why
is NASA consistently thought of by the American public as the
most popular government agency, and why does NASA have very
little turnover compared to other agencies? It's because the
people are so incredibly talented, and because of the mission.
They're fairly happy. And so, obviously, I'm not doing this.
It's--they are doing it.
Mr. Lucas. One last question, Mr. Administrator. In your
time in the Senate, you were an incredible champion of the
development of the space launch system and the Orion
spacecraft, part of a course enabling long term sustained
exploration of deep space, and you advocated for using existing
hardware facilities, workforces, smooth transition--all very
logical. Do you envision NASA using SLS and Orion past the
initial Artemis missions?
Mr. Nelson. In reality, yes, because Artemis is the
program to go back to the Moon, but that's just--the goal is
going to Mars. Because once we get there, we're going to dig
down into that regolith, and hopefully in the meantime have a
sample return mission. By the way, that's another thing that
the Chinese government is trying to do, and is planning to do.
And to see what happened to Mars, is there still--in that
water, is there any indication that there was life? So the goal
is Mars, so the answer specifically on the SLS is it's going to
be used as the workhouse, probably in lunar orbit, to then
fashion together whatever this new technology that we develop
to go to Mars is going to look like, hopefully faster than we
can go now, which is 8 to 10 months. By the time you get there,
you've got to be on the surface for a year or two, because of
the realignment of the planets, in order to get back. If you
can sprint there faster, you can stay on the surface weeks, a
month, and then sprint back. But all of those technologies we
still have to develop. So yes, the answer to your question is
the--yes, the SLS will be a workhorse for the future.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Administrator, and I'd simply
note we on this Committee, I think I can say in a bipartisan
way, are going to pull as hard as we can. You're our guy in the
administration to push as we pull. With that I yield back,
Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Beyer is now
recognized remotely.
Mr. Beyer. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair, very much. And
Senator, Administrator, I really appreciate your coming. I
apologize for the noise. I'm at the back of National Cathedral,
awaiting the John Warner service, but I'm really grateful to be
moved up a little bit.
Administrator, we're very supportive of the Deep Space
Exploration Program as--to Moon as a stepping stone to Mars,
and you actually asked--answered my first question already with
your promise after the GAO report on August 4 and your new
timeline, but I didn't actually ask the question, so let me at
least get that out on record, that, with the GAO report on the
NASA lunar programs, they noted several, several challenges,
that NASA has minimized the requirements for mission success
for some programs, that NASA lacks top level Artemis
requirements and associated risks, that NASA is relying on key
technologies that are still at very immature levels, that NASA
hasn't defined management roles and responsibilities, or
documented decisions on management practices, that NASA lacks
the rigorous systems engineering functions to manage the
systems integration across divisions. And then, in addition,
the Aerospace Safety Advisory Council has identified concerns
regarding systems engineering integration, a lack of clear
roles, responsibilities, accountability, especially for HLS. So
are you sure you want this job?
Mr. Nelson. Mr. Chairman, that report was written before
some of the changes that had occurred, so parts of that report
are dated. And yes, Mr. Chairman, I really am excited about
this job, and ready to tackle this challenge. And finally, let
me say that John Warner was a special mentor to me. He was our
Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and I grew to
love him, and so I'm glad you're there at his funeral at the
National Cathedral.
Mr. Beyer. And one more question in the few minutes--
seconds I have left, is one of the big concerns will be on
space traffic management and orbital debris. It even came up in
the President Biden/Putin conversations. We know that NASA has
all the data they're measuring, but that you're not a
regulatory agency. How do you see NASA fitting into the
ultimate solution on space traffic management?
Mr. Nelson. NASA has to be involved because it's our
astronauts that are at risk. You put up more junk like China
did 14 years ago, when they blew to smithereens a target
satellite when they were testing their ASAT (anti-satellite
weapons)--you put junk like that, tens of thousands of pieces,
then human life is definitely threatened in Low Earth Orbit,
which is where our International Space Station is. So, Mr.
Chairman, NASA's going to be involved one way or another. As a
matter of fact, we're working on technology that will help us
get those pieces of debris out, and get them slowed down enough
so that gravity will take over, bring them back in through the
fiery heat of re-entry that'll burn them up.
We work, of course, with the Space Force, used to be the
Air Force, that tracks all of the objects that are about that
big or bigger. What I worry about are objects that are smaller.
I remember we looked outside the window on our flight, this is
35 years ago, and there was a washer floating right along with
us as I looked out the window. If something even that small
were to hit at a different angle on a spacesuit in a spacewalk,
or even a window of the ISS, it could be catastrophe. So NASA's
got to be involved in space debris. Thank you----
Mr. Beyer. Madam--thank you, sir. I yield back, Madam
Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Mr. Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you for
holding this important hearing today about NASA's Fiscal Year
2022 budget proposal. Administrator Nelson, we'll help NASA
remain a leader in our Nation's future space endeavors,
including our Deep Space Exploration Program that will return
American astronauts to the Moon and beyond on American
hardware. I'm also delighted that Administrator Nelson
appointed NASA Kennedy Space Center's director Bob Cabana to be
the new Associate Administrator. And congratulations to you,
again, Administrator Nelson, on your unanimous confirmation to
your job.
As a former Senator from Florida, you're keenly aware of
the importance of NASA centers. In 2010 you were one of the
leading champions of using existing shuttle hardware,
workforce, and facilities to develop SLS after the cancellation
of the shuttle. Your rationale at the time was to prevent an
exodus of talent, and smooth the transition from one system to
another. While the Space Coast certainly experienced its share
of hardship during that period of time, we've seen significant
progress made at the Kennedy Space Center in many areas.
Exploration ground systems are preparing for the first launch
of SLS, and the Center has adopted a multi-user spaceport
approach to accommodate multiple commercial users, which many
people never imagined could possibly happen not that long ago.
Can you speak to what progress has been made, and what you see
for the future at the Kennedy Space Center and our Human Space
Flight Program?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, my home Congressman, representing
the Space Coast, and it's a place that I grew up. It's a place
that my grandparents, under the Homestead Act, in the early
part of the last century, actually homesteaded, worked the
land, and under the Homestead Act, if you worked the land for 4
years continuously, the government would deed you 160 acres. I
have a copy of that deed signed by Woodrow Wilson to my
grandmother, and that 160 acres today is at the north end of
the space shuttle runway at the Kennedy Space Center. So thank
you, Congressman, for your representation.
The Kennedy Space Center, and the Cape Canaveral Space
Force Station, has unlimited possibilities. The place is
throbbing with excitement. All those old abandoned launch pads
from the early days of Gemini, and Mercury, and Apollo, and all
the various other military missions, abandoned pads, they are
coming to life. They are launching new rockets. In addition, it
is, as you stated, a multi-use spaceport. And we are seeing the
blending of the commercial operations along with the government
operations, both military, intelligence, and civilian. And I'll
give you as much detail as you want, but it's an exciting
future. And that's happening at all the NASA centers and
facilities. Take, for example, Wallops Flight Facility in
Virginia. Most of the people live in Maryland. It is just
exciting, with all of the medium-weight launches that they are
doing from there. So there are unlimited possibilities all over
the United States.
Mr. Posey. With the recent achievement of getting a core
stage vertical and stacked between the solid rocket boosters
and the VAB, has NASA been able to use that as a major
milestone to help set a launch date for Artemis?
Mr. Nelson. Artemis is going to go in November. That's the
schedule.
Mr. Posey. OK.
Mr. Nelson. We know that space is hard, and you don't want
to do it not in a safe manner, so it's always possible there's
going to be delays, but--by the way, Madam Chair, I think you
all ought to have a--go down--to come down and see the most
powerful rocket ever. This rocket is as tall as the Saturn V,
but it puts a punch out of much greater liftoff thrust than
anything that's ever launched on Planet Earth.
Mr. Posey. Thank you for your leadership, Administrator
Nelson. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Ms. Bonamici?
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much, Chairwoman Johnson,
Ranking Member Lucas. Thank you, Administrator Nelson, for your
leadership. We have the opportunity and the imperative to
implement bold, comprehensive, science-based policies to
address the climate crisis, and NASA can play an important role
in that work. Earth science observations are essential for
mapping and monitoring hazards from the climate crisis,
including the drought conditions, extreme heat, and wildfires
we experience in the Pacific Northwest today.
I'm particularly alarmed with a recent study from NASA and
NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) that
found that the amount of heat the Earth traps has roughly
doubled since 2005. So, as co-Chair of the House Oceans Caucus,
I know that without bold action to address the climate crisis,
the ocean will continue to take the heat for us, and the
warming temperatures, as you know, Administrator Nelson, are
resulting in more frequent weather--extreme weather events,
ocean acidification, and the loss of biodiversity. So during
your time in--your tenure in the Senate, I'm grateful for your
work to expand scientific research, monitoring, and adaptation
measures for harmful algal blooms, HABs, and hypoxia. We've
seen this issue in the warm ``Blob'' off the Pacific Coast, in
Lake Okeechobee in Florida, and lakes and rivers across the
country. We need more accurate information to help predict and
mitigate HABs, so how can the PACE (Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud,
ocean Ecosystem) mission help accelerate our understanding of
harmful algal blooms, and how can these observations contribute
to the goals to the U.N. Decade of Ocean Science for
Sustainable Development?
Mr. Nelson. May I give you some additional information in
addition to answering PACE?
Ms. Bonamici. Yes, of course. I do have another question,
so I want to leave time for that. Thank you, Administrator.
Mr. Nelson. You want to ask your next question? I'll----
Ms. Bonamici. No, I'll wait until your----
Mr. Nelson. OK.
Ms. Bonamici [continuing]. First one----
Mr. Nelson. First of all, you cannot mitigate what's
happening to the climate unless you can measure it----
Ms. Bonamici. Correct.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. And we are uniquely situated--a
lot of people don't know that NASA--all of that--those assets
up there, NASA designs them, builds them, launches them, and
NOAA operates them. And, of course, look at the accuracy of
weather predictions now, and it's going to get a lot better,
because not only are we relying on the Earth sensing spacecraft
that are up there now, over the next 10 years we're putting up
five great observatories. It's a $2-1/2 billion project over a
decade. They're going to measure anything that is happening
with the land, the water, the ice, and the atmosphere, and
they're going to put together a 3D composite of all this
information, interrelated with all the other assets we have up
there, to help us fine tune our understanding of what is
happening to our planet.
Ms. Bonamici. Terrific. I look forward to working with
you, and Dr. Spinrad at NOAA, on that important issue. Thank
you, Administrator Nelson. And I know NASA recognizes the need
to invest in our next generation, and also the importance of a
diverse workforce, so this budget would strengthen the Office
of STEM Engagement, after the previous administration tried
multiple times to terminate the program. I'm the co-founder of
the STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and
mathematics) Caucus, and also a fan of Cady Coleman, the
astronaut who played a flute duet from the International Space
Station, so I want to recognize NASA for the recent partnership
with LEGO Education to distribute STEAM curriculum, because
integrating the arts into STEM curriculum has shown to improve
academic outcomes, and engagement, and boost creativity. I urge
the Office of STEAM--STEM Engagement to continue developing
similar initiatives, and I want to ask how--if you could please
talk about how that Office of STEM Engagement will foster a
future innovative workforce, and also improve diversity at
NASA?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you to the Congress that, when it was
zeroed out in previous budgets, you all always restored the
education for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. What is happening is this particular proposed
budget has a very robust increase in that. Every one of your
congressional districts has a university, or a community
college, that has got some STEM grants for students. It's
especially--now, NASA's not the only agency that does that, but
NASA is unique in our STEM projects because what gets kids
excited about those subjects? Space flight. And so we are
uniquely positioned, and that's why we utilize our astronauts
so much not just to fly in space, and do all of the critical
stuff, but to go out to colleges, universities, and high
schools to talk to kids, to get them excited. And so we are
really--between Pam, and Bob, and me, we are really going to
push STEM education. And I think you'll be pleased. And again,
thank you for restoring it every time it got zeroed out in the
past.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Administrator. My time has
expired. I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. That was good
news to hear. Mr. Babin?
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank
you, Senator Administrator Nelson. Appreciate you being here.
President Biden's first budget--you've already addressed some
of this, but I'd just kind of like to get it on the record. His
first budget request is 445 million lower than the Trump
Administration's last budget request, 2.39 billion below what
the Trump Administration proposed for fiscal year 2022, and
7.757 billion below the fiscal year 2022 to 2025 budget
proposed by the Trump Administration.
The proposed cuts from exploration are very staggering.
While the Biden Administration expressed support for continuing
the Artemis Program to return U.S. astronauts to the Moon by
2024, this year's request cuts 14.5 billion over the next 4
years from the Exploration, Research, and Development Account
that would fund the human landing system and necessary lunar
surface capabilities. Specifically, the budget request cuts
3.193 billion from the HLS budget proposed by President Trump
for fiscal year 2022, and a total of 10.05 billion from the
Trump Administration's fiscal year 2021 request for HLS for the
fiscal year 2022-2025. Now, I know what you said about the old
saying, and we have that same old saying in Texas too. There's
more than one way you can skin a cat, but just for the record,
are you saying there will be no cuts of any programs in the
program itself for Artemis because of these cuts?
Mr. Nelson. If we are the beneficiary of your generosity,
there definitely won't be. Remember what I said a few minutes
ago, it was a $3.4 billion request for human space flight for
the exploration part. The Congress appropriated 850 million.
And so you can only get so many pounds of potatoes out of a 5
pound sack.
Mr. Babin. Amen, yeah.
Mr. Nelson. And if you all are generous, whatever vehicle
you use, and--including the jobs bill, as an alternative, then
we're going to try to rev it up, Mr.----
Mr. Babin. All right.
Mr. Nelson. --Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Babin. All right, sir. Thank you. In the late 1990's
Congress passed the Commercial Space Act of 1992. This was
before my time here on the Committee, and a little after your
time. The law contained a provision called anchor tenancy, that
allowed NASA to enter into multi-year contracts for the
purchase of a good or a service if the administrator determines
that the good or service meets the agency mission requirements,
the commercially procured good or service is cost-effective,
the good or service is procured through a competitive process,
existing or potential customers for the good or service, other
than the United States Government, have been specifically
identified, the long-term viability of the venture is not
dependent upon a continued government market, or other non-
reimbursable government support, and private capital is at risk
in the venture. Has NASA specifically identified other
customers for our human landers or spacesuits that would make
these commercial ventures viable without NASA funding?
Mr. Nelson. We always value competition, because you get
the best product the most efficient way at the least cost. All
those other procurement things that you just talked about, I
don't know about those, but I'll find out.
Mr. Babin. OK.
Mr. Nelson. But I know what I just said is the goal.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. OK, No. 3, I think I've still got
time. I proudly represent the Johnson Space Center in Houston,
home to Mission Control, the ISS Program, and Astromaterials
Acquisition and Curation Facility, and where the world's
leading experts in spacesuits reside. You served as the
Chairman of the Space Subcommittee here in the House, and
represented the Kennedy Space Center in the Senate, so I am
assured that you understand how centers play a unique role in
your space enterprise. Can you give us assurance that NASA will
not attempt to relocate, outsource, or degrade any of these
world-class, irreplaceable capabilities?
Mr. Nelson. Remember, I looked at my role in the Senate
was I not only represented the Kennedy Space Center, I had to
represent all of NASA, and indeed have spent a good bit of time
training at the Johnson Space Center. And yes, I can give you
some information that'll reduce your heartburn. And, indeed,
the spacesuit program is intended to stay at Johnson.
Mr. Babin. Sounds good to me, Mr. Administrator. Thank you
very much, and I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Ms. Stevens is
recognized.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, Mr.
Administrator, for your just very lovely oral testimony. I also
very much enjoyed your written testimony. And just for the
record here, I want to quote the quote that you provided, which
was, in your conversation with our President on a phone call to
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the President said, ``We
can land a rover on Mars, we can beat a pandemic, and with
science, hope, and vision, there's not a damn thing we can't do
as a country.'' And here we sit, back in this room, with our
Proverbs quote, ``Where there is no vision, the people will
perish.'' And so, Mr. Administrator, we are so grateful and
blessed for your tremendous vision of NASA, and your
understanding of the assets, and the things that make it go
round, and that are going to continue to help our country to
lead into the future.
And even before the COVID-19 crisis, Mr. Administrator, a
2020 NASA and Inspector General report stated that the U.S.
industrial base is not as robust as it used to be, making it
difficult to find qualified technicians and suitable suppliers.
Could you tell me how serious of a problem this is for NASA and
NASA's supply chain, and if you've thought about coming to
Michigan to see our incredible supply chain assets, where we
brag not only do we put the world on wheels, we are helping to
send men, and eventually a woman, into outer space and the
Moon? Thank you.
Mr. Nelson. Ma'am, if you will invite me, I will be there.
Ms. Stevens. Sounds like a plan.
Mr. Nelson. And I'm looking forward to going to many of
your districts, because the strength of our country, indeed,
that is reflected in an organization like this is out there,
and your specific thing about suppliers, that's a huge
strength. Now, we've got to be careful, because some of our
supplies we are now dependent on of getting internationally,
and some rare metals and materials we are finding are in other
countries that may not be necessarily friendly to us. That's a
supply chain not only for NASA, for the whole of government.
But--let me just put it this way. If you think back, when we
were challenged before, and the Soviets took the high ground,
and they shocked us out of our wits with Sputnik, and then with
Gagarin first in orbit, and they even got Titov in before--and
we could only get Alan Shepard and Gus Grissom into sub-orbit.
And then that all changed with John Glenn, who knew that he had
a 20 percent chance of failure on that Atlas ICBM
(intercontinental ballistic missile), and it worked. And then
the Nation said, we've got a goal, evoked by a very young and
inspirational President, and we did it. And what happened to
the country was extraordinary, because--we talk about STEM
education, for generations the excitement of achieving that
goal not only rippled through our society in spinoffs, but also
in science, and technology, and engineering, and mathematics
that led to the technological revolution that we are now
beneficiaries of.
Ms. Stevens. Yeah.
Mr. Nelson. I suspect that what's going to happen, if we
can get people really excited about us going back to the Moon,
and on to Mars, that we're going to see a similar kindling of
that excitement that will produce an educational revolution
again.
Ms. Stevens. Sure. And we're certainly already seeing that
diversification in a place where I call home, where the
companies that produce the tubes that went into the auto
engines are now producing the tubes that go into our rocket
ships, so--I gave him extra time to answer because I like
listening to the Administrator talk so much, but I will get
back to you on questions for the record, and yield back the
remainder of my time. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Gonzalez?
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member, and
the Honorable Mr. Nelson, for being here. And I do want to
thank the Chair and Ranking Member for showing an example of
how Committees should operate. It's always a pleasure to be on
this Committee because we actually work together quite
productively, so I appreciate their leadership.
Administrator Nelson, I have the pleasure of representing
Northeast Ohio, and the Glenn Research Center is just outside
my district. I hope to host you there someday. And, as you
know, they've been working hard on the power and propulsion
element for Gateway with their technology, and development in
solar electric propulsion, which will be demonstrated on
Gateway, and will be critical for future Moon and Mars
missions. Gateway is also a key catalyst for bringing our
international partners to the Moon, much as the ISS has done
for Low Earth Orbit. With the recent announcement from China
and Russia on their active efforts to court international
partners for their lunar research station, I believe Gateway is
more important than ever. Can you please discuss the budget
request for Gateway, and how this request will keep Gateway on
schedule to remain a key part of Artemis, and how NASA will
continue to partner with both industry and our international
allies on Gateway?
Mr. Nelson. The budget request for Gateway is pretty good,
and why Gateway? Because when you put, in effect, a small space
station in lunar orbit, then you can do a whole bunch of things
in our preparation to go to Mars. No. 1, it becomes a way
station for us to go down to the Moon and do all the things
that we're doing down there, and all of that is necessary in
the preparation of making us able to sustain human life to go
all the way to Mars and come back. But on Gateway you can
continue research in addition to what, in the future, will be
commercial space stations in Low Earth Orbit that will
supersede the International Space Station, which I hope will go
on until 2030, and I request that of you, that you extend the
life of the ISS to 2030. But Gateway will have additional
research related to further deep space.
But then what it does also, it allows us to prepare to go
to Mars, because it is quite likely that we would then, outside
of the lunar space station, be the area where we would put
together the components of whatever is the new technology that
would take us as a spacecraft all the way to Mars, and land
with humans, and return. So it's going to have a number of
functions, and it's important.
Mr. Gonzalez. Excellent. I want to shift toward auditing
and China investments. I know this is a big priority, of yours
as you've shared repeatedly, your concern about the rapid
development of the Chinese space program, and the challenges
this will present to U.S. leadership. Some of this includes
China's efforts to work around our laws and leverage their
investments into companies to give them additional insight,
such as board observer seats into technology being developed in
partnership with the U.S. We've seen that across a number of
industries, but in particular here. My question is, as we
continue to invest more resources into NASA and other R&D
agencies, how is NASA ensuring that new startups to the space
market who are seeking government investment haven't already
received funding from the Chinese government?
Mr. Nelson. Well, I certainly hope that we have the
consultations with the Department of Defense and the
intelligence community. I have been surprised. I thought I knew
a lot about NASA coming in, but what I found out is we are much
more involved in understanding the--and participating in the
protection of our assets from foreign intrusion than I knew
about before, and it is certainly important that we continue
that. The threats from abroad now are so multiple, and
happening every day, not the least of which are the cyber
threats as well, and that is a daily concern.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes, sir, and I look forward to continuing
this conversation, hopefully, offline. I think we have to do
everything we can to make sure that whatever we are funding at
the Federal level, whether that's at the universities or at
NASA, is not being appropriated and moved over to our foreign
competitors. And with that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Bowman of New
York?
Mr. Bowman. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you,
Administrator Nelson, for your testimony today. As you just
discussed with Representative Bonamici, the work that NASA does
is so important in capturing the imaginations of our young
people. I saw it all the time as an educator, where I spent 20
years of my career before coming to Congress, and I continue to
see it in Congress. In fact, I just heard from a rising high
school senior in my district named Nathaniel, who talked about
how important it is for him--to him that NASA has an adequate
R&D budget. He wants to make sure we're staying on track to get
to Mars, and asked me to think of the students who may become
the next generation of aerospace engineers. Can you tell us a
little bit more about your approach to expanding NASA's STEM
engagement work? How do we make sure that we're reaching out to
students like Nathaniel in every community, including
marginalized communities, and nurturing their aspirations?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir, Congressman. Right off the bat, the
President's budget is a robust increase in STEM, and this
particular public servant, joined by Pam and Bob, have this as
one of our main drivers because of the value to our country.
It's the value to our agency as well. We have a very highly
educated agency. We are--in an extension of your question, we
are constantly out looking for diversity as well. I want to
commend to your attention a good example of that that occurred
in the past. As you came out of Mercury, and Gemini, and
Apollo, almost all those astronauts were White men test pilots.
But coming along with the space shuttle, you didn't need to
have test pilots for every astronaut position, and NASA
actually went with a lady who advised them how to go about and
recruit women and minorities. Her name is Nichelle Nichols, and
she was the actress that played Lieutenant Uhura on ``Star
Trek.'' And as a result, the African-American community had a
tremendous identification with her. And, as NASA was recruiting
astronauts for the space shuttle program, she reached out to
the minority institutions, the HBCUs (historically Black
colleges and universities), to women, and that first class of
space shuttle astronauts, 1978, was suddenly an astronaut class
that looked very diverse, especially compared to the previous
test pilots. And it was successful. And so we are now extending
that. And I can go into the detail on that further, if you'd
like.
Mr. Bowman. Well, not at this time, but I appreciate you
sharing that, and I really want to encourage you to think
younger. You know, we have kids who--African-Americans, and
Latinos, and people of color dreaming about being astronauts in
places in my district like the Bronx, and Mount Vernon, and
Yonkers, and if we begin to think of STEM through the lens of--
beginning in middle school, from grades six through 12, and
putting kids on the pathway beginning at that time, I think
that would be tremendous. And please target Title I schools,
and the communities that surround them. I think you would get a
great diversity there.
I have one quick--last question, Mr. Administrator. Can
you speak a little bit about NASA's work with private
contractors? We got to the Moon without private contractors, if
I'm not mistaken, and now it seems like a lot of things are
being contracted out to private institutions like SpaceX. Can
you talk about just--so the--the balance there, and reliance on
private contractors versus NASA continuing to serve as a public
good, if you will?
Mr. Nelson. In the Apollo program, Mr. Congressman, we got
to the Moon with American corporations. They did all the work.
NASA supervised. NASA had a reason to supervise, because NASA's
responsibility is to make sure that it is safe, particularly
when you put humans strapped in to all of that explosive
potential. And we're just continuing in a different way. Now,
why are it--why is it a different way? Well, back in 2010 I had
the privilege, in a bipartisan way, with Senator Kay Bailey
Hutchison, of--NASA was kind of at a dead still, not knowing
where it was going, and we said, we ought to have a NASA
program, a government program, but we also ought to have a
commercial program, and it ought to be dual track. And that was
the NASA bill of 2010 that was passed unanimously in the
Senate, and it was passed in the House by a 3/4 vote. And
that's the track that we're on. You see that already
implemented, that we now have commercial carriers of both cargo
and crew to the International Space Station. That has been
going on for years now. Now we're going to have a blending of
the government and the commercial as we go back to the Moon,
and eventually as we continue out into the cosmos.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Waltz?
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Administrator for being here today. Over here, sir.
Mr. Nelson. There you are.
Mr. Waltz. There we go.
Mr. Nelson. There you are.
Mr. Waltz. All right. I just want to talk to you for a
moment about the growing and very concerning Chinese dominance
in space. As I'm sure you know, the Chinese Communist Party is
openly talking about replacing the United States as a pre-
eminent space power. They've launched more rockets and
satellites into space last year than the rest of the world
combined, including the United States. They just manned its
space station, brand spanking new, and openly talking about
replacing the International Space Station. 10,000 satellite
constellation, are on track, an agreement with Russia to put a
research station on the Moon, growing anti-satellite
capabilities. Would you agree that we--the United States cannot
continue to be No. 1 on Earth if we're No. 2 in space?
Mr. Nelson. First of all, Congressman from Florida, thank
you. Thank you for your representation. The United States ought
to be pre-eminent in space. We----
Mr. Waltz. Just in the interest of time, I couldn't agree
more. That's what has me scratching my head why we have a half
billion cut in the President's proposed NASA budget, a three--
75 percent cut to the Human Lander Center--to the Human Landing
System, excuse me. Have you spoken with the Vice-President
about when her first meeting with the National Space Council
will occur? Do you know when that's going to occur?
Mr. Nelson. May I answer your former question----
Mr. Waltz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. First?
Mr. Waltz. Absolutely.
Mr. Nelson. We have a 6.4 percent increase in the overall
NASA budget, and the cut to which you refer is a result of the
Congress making the decision that the request was, for the
Artemis Program, $3.4 billion in last year's--in this current
year's budget, and you didn't give 3.4. The appropriation was
850 million. So, given the eggs that I'm presented in the
basket, I'm trying to get us there, and get us there quick. And
so I had said earlier in the hearing that there are more ways
to do it. If you're all considering a jobs bill, there's an R&D
component of the jobs bill, as well as infrastructure, and it
would be very, very helpful if you could consider those
increases.
Mr. Waltz. Absolutely. I think you'll see certainly
support from this foxhole. We have to put the first American
woman, and the next American man, on the Moon. And to do that,
we need a viable landing system, so I certainly think you'll
see the support in this Committee. Fight will be ongoing with
the appropriators, but I want to see NASA support for that as
well.
Mr. Nelson. And yes, Congressman, I have spoken to the
Vice-President, and I look forward to her leadership in the
council. I'll be meeting with her next week, and I expect that,
as the NASA administrator, that I will take a very active role
on the National Space Council.
Mr. Waltz. Mr. Administrator, do you support the Wolf
Amendment, which, as you know, prohibits bilateral cooperation
with the National Space Council, including NASA, with China,
Chinese-owned companies? Do you support sustaining the Wolf
Amendment, and if so, making it permanent?
Mr. Nelson. It is the law, and I support it.
Mr. Waltz. That is fantastic to hear. And, finally, do you
support making it permanent, Mr. Administrator?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir, and that doesn't mean that we can't
find areas of cooperation, and those areas are deconfliction of
space assets running into each other, trying to get them to
participate in getting rid of all that space junk. That's why I
was very--rather abrupt in my comments about when they had the
return of a whole big rocket, and it wasn't controlled, and it
threatened populations. Now, fortunately, it ended up falling
in the Indian Ocean, but it could've fallen in Europe or
somewhere in the Middle East, so I have been very harsh in my
commentary about the Chinese not doing those kind of things,
including the space debris.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield my time.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. The chair now
recognizes our newest Member, Ms. Stansbury
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you,
Ranking Member, and to all my colleagues. It's truly an honor
to be here to serve on this Committee with you all. Thank you
for allowing me to serve. And I'm especially excited and
honored to be able to be here today with our Administrator/
Senator, and also I wanted to say, as a former Federal
employee, thank you to NASA employees, staff, and researchers
for the important work that you do. We so appreciate you.
NASA's work is critical, of course, not only to taking us to
the far reaches of space, but also for understanding our planet
here at home, and particularly our understanding of our
planetary systems and climate change, and how that's
transforming our communities. And in New Mexico, my home State,
that of course is being manifest in terms of chronic drought,
extreme fires, and really an uncertain future, and so I am
tremendously excited to see the increases for the Earth
Sciences Program at NASA in this budget because I think they're
extremely important.
But NASA, Madam Chairwoman, is also extremely important as
an economic engine for all of our States, and particularly in
New Mexico, where we have a very large aerospace industry that
is growing daily, and that we are working hard to grow, and is
a powerhouse in its own right in aerospace. Also, of course,
NASA is a leader in advancing research, and innovation, and
American competitiveness in general, and in growing our STEM
workforce. And I believe, Madam Chairwoman, that we are at a
critical inflection point in our country, in our history, and
in our future in restoring science to its proper place in
informing our decisionmaking, and growing and diversifying our
STEM workforce and our economy, and in deploying science to
tackle our biggest challenges, especially in global climate
change.
And so, Madam Chair and Mr. Administrator, my question is
really focused on NASA's view of our home planet, and
particularly the role that NASA plays in climate change. Madam
Chair mentioned in her opening that I'm a former employee of
OMB, and one of my duties there was actually working on the
Landsat program, and one of the significant tensions that we
always found with NASA's budget was in balancing the space
missions and the Earth-based missions that NASA has. And so, as
I said, I was very pleased to see the increase in Earth
sciences. And so, Mr. Administrator, I'd like to hear more
about how you see NASA's role in the Earth sciences, and
advancing our understanding of climate change, and how that
fits into the Biden Administration's overall climate science
agenda.
Mr. Nelson. There is a $300 million increase in science in
this NASA budget. Earth science is a major part of that. That,
in addition to the present unbelievable instruments that we
have up in orbit, measuring very precisely what is happening to
the Earth's climate. It was just announced that we are going to
put up a series of five great observatories over the course of
the next decade. The first is a joint one with India that will
occur in January of next year. And these five great
observatories are all going to collate their information, and
talk to each other, in a 3D dimension of what's happening to
our Earth by looking at land, water, ice, and the atmosphere.
That is going to bring us a new dimension of information in
addition to our very precise instruments that are remotely
sensing what's happening on the Earth. So the scientific world
is quite excited about not only what's happening in planetary
science, as we project out, but what we are doing with regard
to understanding what is happening here, our own planet.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And, Madam Chairwoman, and Mr.
Administrator, in the interest of time, I would just like to
also echo many of the words that we heard today about
diversifying our STEM workforce and our aerospace workforce. A
recent study issued by this Committee showed that--the ratio of
men to women in aerospace, and that NASA is still three to one,
and persons of color are still outnumbered three to one in our
Federal workforce in this space as well, and I think it's
critical that we get more women and people of color serving in
our Federal agencies and in the industry. And with that, thank
you, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much.
Mr. Nelson. Madam Chair, may I just point out that the
next two Senate confirmed positions in NASA, the deputy, Pam
Melroy, and the CFO (Chief Financial Officer), Margaret Vo
Schaus, are both female.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Baird?
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Madam Chair, and good morning to
everyone, and thank you, Ranking Member Lucas, as well as
Administrator Nelson. We really appreciate you being here and
participating in this meeting.
You know, I'm fortunate enough to have Purdue University
in my district. It has a strong history of educating
astronauts, and producing scientists and engineers that work at
NASA, so it is--as you mentioned earlier, it is extremely
important that the United States remain a leader in science and
innovation, particularly in space. As China and Russia team up
and build their space programs, the necessity to remain
competitive has also become a point of national security, so
I'd like to go to Russia first.
They've indicated that they may withdraw from the
International Space Station partnership if sanctions are not
lifted against that Nation. You recently had a conversation
with Dmitry Rogozin, the Director of the General of Roscosmos
and the Russian Space Agency. So my questions are do you merely
believe--or do you feel that Russia will remain in the
International Space Station if these sanctions are not lifted?
Second question, do you have any idea what the cost to operate
the International Space Station might be? And then, in the
final years of the Russian Mir Station, efforts were made to
privatize the platform. What would prevent Russia from
privatizing their segment of the International Space Station?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, thank you for that question. I
want to address it comprehensively. First of all, you said you
represent Purdue. Purdue, back in my day, produced almost as
many astronauts as did the U.S. Naval Academy, and I wouldn't
be surprised if it hadn't surpassed all other universities.
Mr. Baird. We appreciate that recognition. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Nelson. I have had three conversations with Dmitry
Rogozin last week. I was quite concerned, as you have expressed
in your question. Was there--because of these comments that
were coming out of Russia, were they going to about-face and
break the partnership that we've had with Russia when it was
the Soviet Union in 1975, when an American spacecraft and a
Soviet spacecraft rendezvoused and docked, and they lived
together for 9 days in space. And we've had that cooperation
ever since, and it's very evident on the International Space
Station because there's always a Russian crew, there's always
an American crew on board.
So the first indication was actually in the NBC (National
Broadcasting Company) interview of President Putin, when he
spoke glowingly about--and that came a day after I had my first
conversation with Rogoz, and Putin spoke glowingly about the
cooperation in space, particularly on the space station. So, in
the second conversation with Rogozin, he confirmed that. And in
the third conversation, we had actually participated, I
virtually, on a panel--international panel, but they were
having the conference in St. Petersburg, Russia. And we had
additional information from that conference that confirmed what
we were seeing. And then the final thing is they're getting
ready, in just a couple of months, to put up a major--another
major Russian component to the space station. So why would they
be doing that, and just a few years going to abandon it? It
didn't make sense. And so I have a much changed attitude
about--I think we are going to see the continued cooperation.
However, your question is further. What about Russia and
China teaming up? And I think we've got to watch that. I think,
as I said in my opening comments, China is very aggressive in
its Chinese government space program. And, as a result, we've
got to be concerned about that. And if Russia is giving them a
lot of their technology on rockets, that's something we've got
to be concerned about. And they're talking about going to the
south pole of the Moon, and that's where the water is, the
water ice. So--indeed. Thank you for raising that, Congressman.
Mr. Baird. Thank you for your response, appreciate it very
much, and I yield back.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Madam Chair. Mr. Administrator,
good to see you.
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Perlmutter. I don't want you to forget about the
University of Colorado that has produced a lot of astronauts as
well. I----
Mr. Nelson. Very true.
Mr. Perlmutter. So, obviously, you've been involved with a
lot more appropriations than I have over the years, but I think
the challenge--the competition with China, potentially Russia,
offers us some opportunities not to really mix civilian and
military, but to find some other pockets that might want to
support our space program, and all the phases of it. So, you
know, for me, I don't want to see this as a zero sum game, that
human exploration takes from Earth science, and Earth science
takes from planetary science, and everything takes away from
heliophysics. And I do think the fact that there is some
serious competition now will give you a lot of opportunities,
and I just want to raise my hand. I'd be willing to work with
Armed Services, or anybody else, to help you have the budgets
that will allow us to be pre-eminent--continue to be pre-
eminent in the space program, because--I already gave you one
of these bumper stickers, and this Committee, I drive them
crazy, because I talk about getting our astronauts, our----
Mr. Babin. Amen.
Mr. Perlmutter. Amen. Getting our astronauts to Mars by
2033, and as you said, the orbital mechanics make that a very
good time to do it, saves a lot of travel time. So can you
explain to us how you see the Artemis Program helping
facilitate us getting to Mars by 2033, or in that timeframe?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, I don't think the United States
wants to be second in anything. And although we were on the
surface of the Moon about 52 years ago, we said we're going
back, and it is part of a greater mission to go further, and
that's to Mars. But mindful that we are seeing competitors that
are being very aggressive. That, I think, is going to create
the juices flowing, and I believe competition is always good.
And that means we better be trained, and disciplined, and
ready.
Mr. Perlmutter. So you've mentioned, and I think you've
answered in a couple questions, having NASA, in effect,
participate in the infrastructure bill, that it be part of the
jobs plan, or something. How do you see--and I agree with you,
by the way. How do you see NASA fitting into, say, an
infrastructure plan?
Mr. Nelson. NASA, at a minimum, has $5.4 billion of
desperate infrastructure needs. The building down at Michoud,
which is a part of the Marshall Space Flight Center, but this,
located in New Orleans, that's where we're assembling the first
stage of the SLS rocket. The building has holes in the roof,
and so it's emblematic of infrastructure that has--and it's not
just NASA, it's everything. Look at the roads and the bridges.
NASA has a need for that. And if you all do a jobs bill, I hope
you would consider NASA in that jobs bill.
Mr. Perlmutter. And I think you're going to find this
Committee, despite them--you know, me making them all crazy
with some of the things I have to say, we work very well
together, and I think you're going to get a lot of support from
us, both sides of the aisle, in--whether it's an infrastructure
issue, or, you know, putting the building blocks into place to
get to Mars. Let me ask you one last question, heliophysics. So
we passed a space weather bill signed by President Trump last
year. I was a little bit disappointed to see sort of the
heliophysics part of the budget reduced in this year just as
we're getting this new legislation in place, and would like to
see that plussed up in some fashion or another. Any comment?
Mr. Nelson. But that heliophysics is part of a budget that
was increased by 300 million. That's the science part of the
budget. And planetary science is a big part of that, and we've
got to understand a lot of the stuff on heliophysics, because
when we send astronauts back to the Moon, you have a solar
explosion, and all that radiation's coming, we've got to have a
way to know in advance, well in advance, to save our astronauts
so that they don't get fried. Same thing on the long trip to
Mars. We've got to be able to understand what's coming. And, on
Earth climate science, we need to better understand the effects
of the Sun with regard to delicate measurements of our climate
in order to be better stewards of our planet.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you, Mr. Administrator. Thanks,
Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Sessions?
Mr. Sessions. Chairwoman, thank you very much.
Administrator, thank you for taking time to be with this
important Committee. I want to thank the leadership of this
Committee, not only the gentlewoman from Dallas, but also Mr.
Lucas, for their leadership.
Sir, there is a big discussion about jobs, a big
discussion about need of jobs. Pending the final decision by
GAO, is there a document or something that's going to be
released from you that will lay out perhaps--I don't know about
a visionary statement, but the thinking of NASA about moving
forward?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir. I don't know that I can pinpoint it
to how many jobs it's going to be. We can look into the past of
NASA, we can tell you how much money has rippled through the
economy as a result of the space program, how much money on a
specific part of the space program has rippled through the
money, and give you an estimate in the past of the jobs that
were created. We----
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir.
Mr. Nelson. We clearly know that that's the case,
particularly when you're doing cutting edge technology, and
you're developing new things, and suddenly you've got a whole
new line of employment. And that's going to occur as we develop
the technology to go to the Moon and Mars.
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir. Let me move away from perhaps the
word ``jobs,'' and go to the word ``document.'' Is there a
document that you're waiting to produce to release that, in
essence, I think would provide some specificity toward NASA's
thinking about what they're talking about of not just
competition, but actually what would be on the Moon, how they
might move forward? Is there a document which you're preparing
that would be available soon after the GAO decision?
Mr. Nelson. We'll prepare that document once we know what
the path is forward as a result of the GAO decision.
Mr. Sessions. OK. And that's where it then comes to the
word jobs. You and I both know we have Blue Origin, we have
Boeing, we have Lockheed-Martin, we have, back in the district
that I represent in Central Texas, McGregor, Texas, SpaceX.
There are a lot of people in this area. I would say to you that
I find intriguing, and really essential, the thinking of this
administration, through your service, sir, about what that
future looks like, because I think that the development of jobs
has a lot to do with the ability that a company has to know not
just of the funding, but of the strength of these mission to
have long term employment, to have long term decisions about
what kind of people they have employed.
I spent a few years at an old organization that changed
names a number of times, but essentially it was Bell Labs. And
Bell Labs needed to know about where they were headed to to
where they could make longer term decisions, and I would say to
you that I think that your mark on that vision statement about
what would be competition, where we're going to land, whether
we're going to put a space station up, whether we're going to
put something on the surface, and playing that out, I think
you've indicated you've got a pretty good handle on that. NASA
has an idea about where they want to go, and the specificity of
that, when available, will enable these companies, like SpaceX
and others, to then make a determination about where they're
going to head not just with jobs, but how they're going to
recruit, how they're going to retain. And, as you know, there's
a very aggressive schedule of flights, and moving forward, and
I think that is part of the vision statement.
It's a joint exercise that you're doing, public/private
partnership, so to speak, but with the vision of NASA, so I
really want to thank you. I remember back to Dan Golden very
well, and Mary Ellen Weber, who was one of his favorite
astronauts. Jim Bridenstine I think did a great job, as Dan
Golden did, and I think you stand at that doorway of being able
to give a great vision and statement, but I would say back to
you, these companies that have these leading edge scientists
need that viewpoint, and so last question, what do you think
about timeframes of that release?
Mr. Nelson. Shortly after the GAO decision. And,
Congressman, further, I would say that the past is prologue.
Look what happened to the jobs in this country in the field of
STEM as a result of the Apollo Program, where a major goal was
set, and the Nation decided collectively, the whole of
government, the whole of American free enterprise, that we were
going to accomplish that goal, and look at the jobs that came
out of that that then revolutionized that. Look at the
microtechnology that came when you had to develop small in
size, low in weight, and highly reliable instruments for the
Apollo Program, and look what that did. Everything from watches
to computers, and we're seeing that today, and we'll see more
of that as we get on down the road on--going back to the Moon,
and on to Mars, as well as all these other things in science
that we've been talking about.
Mr. Sessions. Administrator, thank you. Everyone else has
had a chance to put in a plug. I too would like to have you
come to Waco, Texas, and visit McGregor, Texas, where SpaceX
is. I think you'll be, once again, reinvigorated by the free
enterprise system of bright people, and I want to thank you for
your service, not just in the U.S. House and the Senate, but
also your service now, and good luck, and Godspeed. I think we
will salute to a great plan, and thank you. I yield back my
time, Madam Chairman.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. His invitation to
Waco will only follow one to Dallas. Ms. Moore? Mr. Foster?
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Madam Chair. Well, first thank you,
Ranking Member Lucas, Administrator Nelson, for joining us here
today. I believe the documents that my Republican colleague Mr.
Sessions was requesting are known as the technical design
report, and a resource loaded schedule and budget, will--which
will be required for the Artemis mission, the Gateway project,
and the mission to Mars. When can we in Congress expect a
preliminary version of these documents?
Mr. Nelson. After the GAO report.
Mr. Foster. So within the year? By the end of the year?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Foster. OK. Thank you. You know, you also mentioned in
your remarks the importance of developing new technology as
part of the realistic ways of getting to Mars. You know, also
you mentioned the very difficult problem of radiation
shielding, for which, you know, it's--for both the mission to
Mars and the Gateway Project, which I believe there aren't
really satisfactory solutions yet, a part of which is to make
very high performance propulsion systems so you can get to Mars
and back quickly.
Now, the National Academies recently released a report, I
think in February of this year, entitled ``Space Nuclear
Propulsion for Human Mars Exploration'', which looks at a lot
of the technical details for really, you know, getting a higher
performance mission to Mars--propulsion system for the mission
to Mars, and it recommended that if you're--in order to support
human missions to Mars as soon as--well, they were planning on
the late 2030's, that NASA needed to invest money now in a very
aggressive technology development program for the propulsion
that addresses the fundamental challenges both for thermal
nuclear and electric nuclear propulsion. Congress has
maintained an interest in space nuclear power and propulsion
through both the authorization and appropriation language,
including $110 million in the FY 2021 appropriation. Could you
comment on why NASA's FY 2022 budget does not propose any
funding for either nuclear electric propulsion or nuclear
thermal propulsion technology development and demonstration
activities?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, it's going to have to in the near
future, because the alternative is to go to Mars with
conventional technology, which is going to take us 8 to 10
months to get there, and then you're going to have to be on the
surface for 2 years before you would bring the crew back for
another 8 to 10 months, and that's because of the alignment of
the planets, so that you could get back in that short a period
of time. So is it realistic that you could send a crew all the
way to Mars and sustain them on that distance of millions and
millions of miles? I think--my personal opinion is--now, I am
not a scientist, so we're going to have to listen to the
propulsion folks, but my country boy understanding of this is
that we are going to have to speed up one way or another, try
at least to get it down to a year on the surface.
Mr. Foster. Um-hum.
Mr. Nelson. And you can do that with one of those
nuclear--I think it's nuclear thermal.
Mr. Foster. Yeah, nuclear thermal. That--my physicist
understanding is that it's nuclear thermal, and that the solar
options will be mainly useful for getting cargo there with low
mass into Low Earth Orbit. But I'm really--you know, I would've
expected a more aggressive budget proposal if that's going to
be a serious option. You know, one of the very positive things
that's happened is that there seems to be a convergence on the
use of low enriched uranium for these missions, because there
had been previous discussion both for surface power reactors
and propulsion reactors using ion enriched uranium. This is, to
my mind, a very dangerous future, where multiple countries will
have large amounts of weapons-usable uranium as part of their
propulsion reactors because of the ease at which they could be
converted to nuclear weapons, and the world, and space, will be
much safer if we standardize on that. It's been a real step
forward, I think for the world that we're focusing on the low
enriched uranium designs for both the surface and the
propulsion reactors. But I urge you to really, you know, give
that program a healthy kick, because it's going to be essential
to get the performance we need for a Mars mission on the
schedule we hope to see it happen.
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, you obviously are skilled in this
very technical area, and I might say, I think you're correct
that we're not going to be handling a lot of highly enriched
uranium, because it's very important in another part of our
government that that doesn't get out of our control, and into
somebody's hands who can use it to build a bomb.
Mr. Foster. No. Absolutely. And the advanced nuclear
reactor concepts for--that are looked--being looked at for
commercialization are also moving toward high enriched--well,
low enriched, high assay material, which is much safer. And so
I think the convergence of NASA and the commercial reactor
world is a very positive trend that we should encourage. My
time is up----
Mr. Nelson. And nuclear electric, Congressman, offers new
possibilities. We're just not there yet. You could develop a
rocket, like one that's being experimented on VASIMR (Variable
Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket), it'd get us there in 39
days. It'd go--accelerate halfway, and decelerate the remaining
half. Once you're there in 39 days, the planets don't get out
of alignment, and you can stay a week or two, a month, and you
can sprint back 39 days. But the technologies are not there.
These are the things that we're going to have to develop before
we end up with the technology we're going with in the 2030's to
Mars with humans.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. And I'm over time, and I'll yield
back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Garcia?
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ranking Member
Lucas, for both of your leadership and partnership on this.
Administrator, it's good to see you again, sir.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you.
Mr. Garcia. When we last spoke--well, first of all, let me
commend the achievements from last year. I mean, to be able to
send the Mars missions up, launch Americans from American soil,
in American-made hardware, and to have SpaceX recover safely 26
flights in 1 year, which is about three times what the space
shuttle was able to do in 1 year during its best years, is a
massive achievement in any year, but especially during a
pandemic. I think we have proven out the government and
commercial partnership aspects, and the model works. I think we
need to figure out how to continue to accelerate that,
incentivize industry, keep industry interested in these
programs, and not grind them to a halt on contracting issues.
To that point, you know, I hope that is something that NASA's
looking at, is how do we get folks on contract quicker, how do
we maintain the fixed price incentive fee contracting, rather
than cost-plus incentive fee type contracts. There's a lot of
ways to skin a cat, but, as you know, there's a lot of ways to
kill programs, and these are the barriers to entry that we
sometimes see on the defense side.
I want to just put a bow real quick on the HLS
conversation. There's been a lot of discussion. The problem
that we have with the August 4 decision is that, between now
and then, we're actually going through markups within the
Appropriations Committee that I sit on as well, so I just want
to put a bow on the acquisition strategy. You mentioned in the
Approps conversations a couple weeks ago that this first HLS
award was effectively a one-off demonstrator for the first
mission. You used the word demonstrator again today. The
inference of that would be that there are follow-on
competitions, and that represents, effectively, your
acquisition strategy, but that's not reflected either in the
fiscal year 2022 budget request, nor the 5 year plan. And so,
just to make sure we're all on the same page--because there
really is only two scenarios coming out of August 4, either the
protest is upheld or it's not. If it's upheld, we still have a
massive funding gap, to the tune of 5.4 billion. That--your
plan is to use the JOBS Act to get healthy enough, either
directly or indirectly through other programs, to pay for the
follow-on HLS programs?
Mr. Nelson. Well, that's up to you. That's up to you, if
you decide to appropriate the money in order to have these
follow-on competitions, and many landings, one a year over a
decade. And, by the way, they will be fixed price.
Mr. Garcia. Good. OK.
Mr. Nelson. Fixed price contracts.
Mr. Garcia. Good. I just want to make sure that that ask
is on the table, and that, not only the authorizers, but the
appropriators are aware that that is the plan to get whole on
this overarching acquisition strategy, and if that's the case,
that we need to codify that as we move through the next couple
of weeks before August 4.
I resonate with the--competition is good. We need to keep
pushing in that direction, and I think NASA's doing a good job
of that. More horses in the race is always good. I want to dive
down into a couple specific programs as well, if you don't
mind, Administrator? The Mars Sample Recovery, you mentioned
early on that that was still something we were chasing. We have
the rover now on the planet. We have it collecting samples
here, but we don't have necessarily the program of record or
the funding to bring back the samples. That could be a large
bill. Where is that captured in the strategic plan or in the
budget request?
Mr. Nelson. It's being designed right now----
Mr. Garcia. OK.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. And as soon as we have--I've seen
one concept. It's a very complicated concept. They want to make
sure that the material is not contaminated once it comes back.
All of this is done in a very elaborate instrument that they
land on----
Mr. Garcia. Um-hum.
Mr. Nelson. --Mars----
Mr. Garcia. Um-hum.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. Taking the sample that will be
collected by this rover, Perseverance, transferring it to the
other, preparing it, and then putting it, in effect, in a
capsule that then launches from the surface of Mars, and comes
back, and then comes back through, with a heat shield, through
the entry of the atmosphere.
Mr. Garcia. OK. So we're still characterizing the price
footprint of that design, and----
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garcia [continuing]. It's going through design
reviews? OK.
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garcia. Last, in the remaining 10 seconds, we have a
program in my district called SOFIA. This is a 747-based
infrared instrument, just upgraded with a new instrumentation
system recently, partnership with Germany, lots of money being
spent on that, that's set to be terminated within this budget
request. I would request that you look at that, at least wait
for the senior review in fiscal year 2022 before we make any
decisions, and happy to support you in those conversations, and
host you in our district for that as well. Thank you, Mr.
Administrator.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you, Congressman.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Ms. Moore? You're
muted.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so very, very much, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Mr. Administrator, for your patience during this
very long hearing. Mr. Bowman raised a point, and you didn't
get a chance really to respond. You're putting 20 million extra
dollars into STEM education, and he proposed that it ought to
start like, at K-6, and I'm thinking maybe that's too old. And
I just want to know specifically what you're doing to--in the
K-12 space in particular in regards to education. I don't think
that you give somebody their first slide rule when they're a
freshman in college that you're going to do very much in terms
of that space.
Mr. Nelson. I understand your concern, Congresswoman. I'm
going to try to affect that, because education doesn't start
once you enter the university. It starts----
Ms. Moore. Exactly.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. A lot earlier. And I think you
will see that, in addition to the STEM grants which go to
universities, I think you will see us try to expand the efforts
of educating kids. We can only do with STEM grants what the law
allows, however, we have other ways of getting this word in to
even elementary and secondary schools.
Ms. Moore. That's where they need to be. Mr.
Administrator, you have--you've spent a lot of time talking
about equity, and gender equity, and what we've noticed on this
Committee is that not only were women in low level jobs, like
restaurants, suffering through this pandemic with a loss of
job, but we noticed that women published less papers than
before the pandemic. And I just want to know if there--can you
tell us what the pandemic has done to NASA in--personnel?
Mr. Nelson. Well, fortunately, our personnel were the
first to be able, of any government agency, to adapt quickly by
remotely being able to work.
Ms. Moore. Good.
Mr. Nelson. We are governed, on a return to the offices,
by the decision of the White House, and we will be governed
accordingly. But I can tell you, I'm tired of roaming around in
an empty headquarters building basically by myself, now joined
with Pam and Bob, so I'm looking forward for everybody getting
back.
Ms. Moore. Absolutely. Mr. Administrator, I just want to
point out that I'm from Wisconsin, so this is a long way from
Florida. I know how much you admire Florida. But a great
example of the partnership with NASA is the partnership that
they have--the University of Wisconsin and Boeing partnered
under the University Leadership Initiative, and students got to
study robotics, advanced aviation manufacturing, which I know
you're interested in, and there's a lot of scientific inquiries
regarding the Great Lakes system, on the climate of the eastern
United States, and even the science behind the formation of
tornadoes. Do you anticipate having a bigger footprint in
places like Wisconsin during your tenure?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, ma'am, and I've been to Wisconsin. I went
there with Tammy Baldwin, not for NASA, but for the U.S. Coast
Guard. You've got a station there just south of Milwaukee. And
I--if you'll invite me, I'll be happy to come back.
Ms. Moore. Consider yourself invited. At--because we
there--our--there's a great nexus between what we're doing and
NASA, so we'd be happy to have you, so consider yourself
invited. We'll follow up. And, Madam Chair, I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Feenstra?
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, and Ranking
Member Lucas. Administrator Nelson, I appreciate you taking the
time today to speak to our Committee on NASA and the
Administration's Fiscal Year 2022 budget proposal. As you know,
China is a significant competitor in space exploration and
efforts to militarize space. Last week I introduced an
amendment to the NSF for the Future Act, along with Congressman
Waltz. It was added with bipartisan Committee support during
the markup. The amendment related to prohibiting participation
in maligned foreign talent recruitment programs, such as
China's Thousand Talents Program. The question is, does NASA
have an active program in place to assess employees from
foreign influence, or prohibit their participation in maligned
foreign talent recruitment programs?
Mr. Nelson. If we don't, we will.
Mr. Feenstra. That's good. It's so important. I think it's
critical to our country that we focus on those around the
communist world that have concerns about our country. Another
question I have, moving on to the issue of agriculture, the
future of sustainable aviation fuel may provide a new market
for biofuels produced in Iowa. Looking at your budget, how does
biofuels play out in sustainable aviation fuel, and related
research and development, in your budget for fiscal year 2022?
Mr. Nelson. The first A in NASA is aeronautics, and we're
looking at all kinds of fuels. Basically, NASA aviation has got
to do our part in lessening the pollution of putting CO
2

and methane up into the upper atmosphere. So we are getting
ready to fly a demonstrator on an all-electric aircraft coming
up this year, and that's just one trying to look at alternative
fuels. Now, how the biofuels work into this, I can't tell you
off the top of my head. I know before we've seen biofuels into
the American automobile industry, because most of us are at
least getting 10 percent ethanol when we pump at the gas pump.
I know the Air Force in the past had had a program that was
going to be directed at mostly biofuels. When you launch
rockets, you've generally got to have something that's really
got a kick, and usually that's something like kerosene, or
hydrogen, or methane. So--but getting back to aeronautics, we
are doing that, and doing it aggressively.
Mr. Feenstra. That's great to hear. Relating to
agriculture, NASA's applied sciences and NASA's Harvest Program
work to advance the use of satellite observations to benefit
agriculture and food security. Can you talk about NASA's
budgeting to develop applications to assist precision
agriculture, and provide data in support of agriculture and
land use issues, such as drought forecasting, or flood plain
mapping control?
Mr. Nelson. So--I'm an old country boy, so--as a matter of
fact, I can even remember my grandfather plowing a mule, but
think about today. The farmer gets in an air-conditioned
tractor, and he's got a GPS (Global Positioning System) system,
and it's telling him exactly how to furrow that row. Now, what
about all the scientific instruments that we have now that can
examine the crops from space and see what's diseased, or what
about the ones that are going to be able to predict drought in
the future to help the farmer? Or what about the desert
community that suddenly, under the soil of the desert, we can
locate deposits of water? All of those things are bound to be
helping agriculture and country folks. And I think it's
exciting.
Mr. Feenstra. I do too, and, Administrator Nelson, I
greatly appreciate listening to you today. It's an honor and a
privilege for a farm kid in Iowa to listen to you. And, with
that, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. LaTurner?
Mr. LaTurner. Thank you, Chairwoman Johnson, and Ranking
Member Lucas. Administrator Nelson, it's a pleasure to get to
interact with you today. Of your many accomplishments, my
favorite is that you're a fellow former State Treasurer, so
it's great to see you here today.
Now that the Commercial Crew Program is fully underway,
NASA will have the ability to add additional crew members to
the ISS, how will NASA and international partners' crew time be
impacted by the private astronaut mission?
Mr. Nelson. Well, I think that's a concern, and I think we
constantly have to monitor that. And what I have suggested, as
a newbie, but one who is responsible, is that they have the
same training that our professional astronauts have, they go
through the same medical checks, the same kind of psychological
checks, and that you have an experienced astronaut with them.
Thus you see that the company that's going to do the first
private astronauts to the space station has Michael Lopez-
Alegria, one of our very experienced astronauts, that is
conducting the training. They're even going out in the desert
for, like, a week in order to create the bonding of a crew. And
they have also named Peggy Whitson, who has spent more time in
space than anybody else, at some 800 plus days, is going to be
the astronaut that will accompany the second group that's much
further on out. So you raise a very valid concern, and I have
been trying to address that.
Mr. LaTurner. I appreciate that. NASA continues to propose
transferring specific space communication efforts over to the
private sector. What progress has NASA made on this front?
Mr. Nelson. On which front?
Mr. LaTurner. On transferring specific space communication
efforts over to the private sector. I'm curious about the
progress you made, and also the response that you've received
from the private sector.
Mr. Nelson. Well, everything that, really, NASA does is
the private sector. The private sector that you're referring to
is the commercial part of space flight, where we give a request
for a proposal, and companies come back and bid, as we have
done so successfully, on commercial crew to the space station,
as well as commercial cargo. Those are fixed price contracts.
But, when it's involving humans, including the docking of cargo
missions to the space station, NASA's going to be all over it
to make sure that it's meeting the safety standards that we
have to have on anything having to do with humans in space.
Does that answer your question?
Mr. LaTurner. It does. I appreciate it, and I appreciate
your time, and I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Ms. Ross? Is----
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I hope you can hear
me. This is a wonderful hearing, Chairwoman Johnson, and thank
you to Administrator Nelson for joining us today. I met you a
couple times before, including in my home State of North
Carolina, and, as you know, North Carolina has contributed to
NASA for decades. Christine Darden, one of NASA's hidden
figures, broke barriers in the STEM industry, and in gender and
racial equality, and she's from North Carolina. She was the
first African-American woman to be promoted into the Senior
Executive Service at NASA's Langley Research Center. We also
have Christina Koch, a three-time graduate of NC State, in my
district, who served as a flight engineer on the International
Space Station for three expeditions, and set a record for the
longest single spaceflight by a woman, with a total of 328 days
in space, and she was a participant in an--in the all-woman
spacewalk. And the 62 astronauts, including those on the Apollo
11 mission, trained at the University of North Carolina's
Morehead Planetarium.
I believe that inspiring the next generation to reach for
the stars well before they earn advanced degrees, and qualify
to join NASA, is a crucial, crucial mission both for Congress
and for your agency. And in North Carolina, in Research
Triangle Park in particular, we're a major STEM education hub,
and we've grown our STEM education at a higher rate than the
national average. I'm thrilled to see that, for the first time
in many years, NASA's budget request includes funding for its
Office of STEM Engagement, and so I'd like to know how the STEM
engagement activities are building stronger ties with NASA's
mission, including its flight programs.
Mr. Nelson. And Mike Smith, who gave his life for the
country in the terrible tragedy of Challenger, was from North
Carolina as well, and thank you for the contributions from your
State. STEM is--we've had some discussion here already,
extensively, about the importance of STEM. You can't be a
society that wants to do all of these gee-whiz technological
achievements that are giant leaps if you don't have the
educated populace. And what better to stimulate the interest of
kids in science, and technology, and engineering, and
mathematics than the space program? And so we're really going
to try to rev up STEM education. It got a big boost in the
President's budget, and we're going to try to manage it in a
way that it really does have an effect. STEM grants are not the
province just of NASA. They're every agency of government. And
you will have an opportunity, as you go through these
authorization bills and appropriations bills coming on, to
affect STEM throughout the whole of government, but we're going
to try to do our part.
Ms. Ross. Well, thank you so, so much. One of the other
things that we do well in the Research Triangle is have a very
innovative Cleantech Cluster, and advancing clean energy. And
can you elaborate on how your agencies work on--research and
work on climate change and innovation, can contribute to our
domestic clean energy sector, including manufacturing and
supply chains?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, ma'am, and we've had considerable
discussion on that issue as well. Climate science in NASA is
getting a major emphasis. Not only with the very delicate
instruments that are on orbit right now measuring all kinds of
things, and you have seen the result, for example, in the
National Weather Service. Well, NASA's the one that designs
those instruments, their satellites, those spacecraft, builds
them, and launches them, and NOAA then operates them. But we've
got a future that is very exciting. Over the next decade we are
going to put up five great observatories, and they are going to
give us measurements of what's happening on land, on water, on
ice, in the atmosphere in a way that we never had, and then
collate all that into a three-dimensional understanding of the
subtle changes that are occurring, and what we need to do about
that, as well as advise us on a daily basis of what we ought to
be looking out for. All of that is around the corner. That's a
$2-1/2 billion project over 10 years. Five missions, the first
of which will be January of next year. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Ross. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Administrator.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Madam Chair, and Ranking Member
Lucas. Senator, Administrator, good to see you again.
Mr. Nelson. Mr. Mayor, good to see you.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. Senator, Administrator, do you
think that China is in a race to the Moon with us?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir, Congressman.
Mr. Gimenez. Why?
Mr. Nelson. Because of what they've already done, and what
they've announced they're going to do. And, by the way, if you
look back on the history of the Chinese program, they announce
what they're going to do, and then they do it. And so--we've
already seen they've been on the Moon successfully. We clearly
saw what they've done, as only the second Nation to ever be
able to land a rover on Mars. We did so back in the 1970's, and
have had several since, but they're the second Nation to be
able to pull this off, and it's no minor feat. They are
preparing a sample return mission from Mars, so this is
demonstrating extreme capability.
They've announced that they're going to send about three
missions to the south pole of the Moon. We're sending three
commercial probes, overseen by NASA, all looking at water ice,
because from that you can get fuel----
Mr. Gimenez. Correct.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. And oxygen.
Mr. Gimenez. Right. So--I hate to interrupt you, I only
have about 3 minutes. I have a couple other questions for you.
Do we know that there's water ice on the south pole?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. Do we know how much there is on the south
pole?
Mr. Nelson. That's why we're going.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. And so if you have water ice on the south
pole, then you can create fuel, which then you can take off
from the Moon a lot more efficiently than taking off from the
Earth, and that's why you want to get there. What happens if
the United States and China arrive--or somebody's there at the
south pole already, and somebody else comes there, who owns,
who gets that water ice?
Mr. Nelson. Well, I think you raise a good question, and
that's why have something known as the Artemis Accords, which
we are getting other nations to sign, Brazil being the most
recent. And what the Artemis Accords say is that our
exploration of the Moon is going to be transparent, it's going
to be peaceful. Nations are going to cooperate together, and
there's nobody who's going to be exclusive.
Mr. Gimenez. Has China signed that?
Mr. Nelson. No. Neither has Russia.
Mr. Gimenez. That's interesting.
Mr. Nelson. It's a data point.
Mr. Gimenez. Look, I raise those questions--I knew the
answers, but we are in a race with the Chinese to get to the
Moon, and it's a matter of national security that we win that
race. It's also a matter of national pride that we win that
race, just like it was back in the 1960's when we beat the
Russians to the Moon. It's a demonstration to the world of who
is the pre-eminent power in the world. People don't understand
that, but that's exactly what's going on. And so, you know,
you'll find in me somebody who will fund, or try to fund, NASA
to the greatest extent possible to make sure that we're the
first ones back on the Moon.
Related to that, the lander that we just awarded the
contract to, when do you expect delivery of the first lander?
Mr. Nelson. Well, that depends on what GAO says on August
the 4th.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, if they say that there's going to be
competition, then there's a $10 billion shortfall in your
budget, right?
Mr. Nelson. And that's up to you, then. We'll see, and
I've suggested here, before you arrived, that there are more
ways to skin a cat than one, and you're going to have a jobs
bill in front of you that's got an R&D component, and that
would be a good place.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, I agree with you that, with all the
trillions that are being bannered about, that we should spend
some of that on NASA, and assuring that the United States
remains, and will always remain, the pre-eminent force in
space. You go back in history, it was the countries that were
exploring that were always the dominant countries, and so we
need to keep on exploring, and we need to be the first, and we
need to be the first out there. I know my time is up, and I
yield back, but again, thank you for being here, and, again,
pleasure seeing you again, sir.
Mr. Nelson. America never wants to give up its DNA as
explorers, adventurers, because always we've had a frontier,
and we've been successful in capturing that frontier. Now our
frontier is up.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Kildee?
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Madam Chair, and good morning, or
afternoon, I guess, now, Administrator Nelson. Thank you for
being here, and let me just say this, thank you for the various
forms that your service to this country have taken. It's very
much appreciated, and I'm thrilled that you're in the position
that you're in right now.
I'd like to talk to you a bit about NASA's Earth Sciences
Division, specifically the Earth Applied Sciences Develop
program. I understand the program has worked with the Great
Lakes and St. Lawrence Cities Initiative for a number of years
on projects designed to protect the Great Lakes. I come from
Michigan. The Great Lakes are our lifeblood. It literally
outlines our boundaries, it defines who we are as a State. The
lakes are also critical to our livelihood. According to the
Great Lakes Seaway Partnership, shipping on the Great Lakes and
St. Lawrence Seaway supported $35 billion in economic activity
in 2017.
So, in my time in Congress, I've been working on this.
I've introduced and passed legislation that prioritizes and
updates Federal mapping of the Great Lakes. We talked--you
know, you were just mentioning how we have such an explorer
character in our DNA. We continue to need to do more research
and exploration even here at home, and the Great Lakes is one
area where we can do that. I have asked, in past legislation,
to prioritize the mapping of the Great Lakes, introduced
resolutions to oppose building nuclear waste repositories in
the Great Lakes Basin, introduced legislation to prevent Asian
carp from reaching the lakes, continued robust funding for the
Great Lakes Restoration Initiative. As you can see, this has
been a priority. But the pressure on the Great Lakes as a
result of climate change only raises the importance of research
and work in preserving what is really an international
treasure. So I wonder if you might comment or discuss how the
FY 2022 budget would continue the work that your agency is
involved in preserving the Great Lakes?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, I had the privilege of serving
with your dad, and it was a great privilege to know him as a
colleague. When you have these Earth observations satellites or
spacecraft, they give us all kinds of measurements to address a
number of the things that we also address terrestrially here.
For example, the invasive species in the Great Lakes, that is
just a terrible bane to the existence of marine industry in the
Great Lakes, that kind of muscle that clogs up all the drains,
that comes in in the ballast water. You know, that's one thing,
but what about the algal blooms, or other invasive species, or
stormwater runoff, or the coastal flood risk, the wetlands? All
of those things we can help the dangerous--the dangers that are
facing your constituents by the observations we are making from
space. And--then that goes into what I had explained before
about these five great observatories that are going to just
refine that data, and make it so much more comprehensive. So
I'm with you, Congressman.
Mr. Kildee. I very much appreciate that. I mean, the
agency obviously has a lot on its plate, and I will say that I
do support your goal of us continuing to lead in this space,
literally and figuratively, but to not forget that the agency
does have a robust agenda as it relates to life right here on
this planet, and I do appreciate your effort, and particularly
your continued support for research related to the Great Lakes.
It's a critical asset, and it's one that I'm happy to hear that
you also appreciate and support. So, with that, thank you again
for your service to our country. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Ms. Kim?
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Chairwoman, and Ranking Member. Thank
you for holding this hearing. And, Administrator Nelson,
welcome. Thank you so much for being with us to discuss the
budget request for NASA.
Back in February I had the opportunity to go to JPL to
witness the launching and the landing of Perseverance rover,
and that was quite an experience, and I was honored to be one
of the few Members that were able to do that.
Mr. Nelson. Did you meet Mimi? She is the lady that
handled the little helicopter.
Mrs. Kim. I don't think I personally had the opportunity
to meet her. But, you know, that was, like, oh, my goodness, it
was after 292 million miles and 7 months preparation, right? So
it was really, truly, an amazing experience. During that visit
what I did was, as soon as I knew I was invited, I reached out
to the school districts in my district, and Rowland Unified
School District, invited the eighth graders to join me
virtually, so I was able to take my laptop, and turn it around,
and show the scale model of the rover, and that was quite an
experience for the students. And I think that's exactly what we
need to do to encourage our young students to take an interest
in STEM-related education, and provide the opportunities for
them to be encouraged to perhaps dream about being the next
engineers, next scientists. And perhaps one of these days they
may be the ones taking on that human lander, and go back and
retrieve the samples that our astronauts are currently working
on to bring back.
And so I'm really excited about that opportunity, and in
my view, and I know you share this, we need to keep our
students engaged from an early age, and some of my colleagues
on both sides before me talked about the importance of
providing the educational opportunities from early on, not when
they are ready to go to college, from pre-K to eighth grades.
Which is why I'm so excited--and I want to give a plug in for
my legislation that I introduced, Innovations in Informal STEM
Learning Act, and this will create a grant opportunity, and
also allow nonprofit organizations to give, you know, STEM
related programs before, after, and even out of school
programs. So, you know, it's a good plug in for my colleagues,
if they're not aware of it, to please sign on and become a co-
sponsor of that bill.
So can you please elaborate on how the additional $4
million the budget provides for the next generation STEM
project will be utilized? And, obviously, we can talk about the
importance of NASA supporting the type of programming that my
legislation will call for for our pipeline of scientists,
engineers, and astronauts, and so forth.
Mr. Nelson. First of all, thank you, Congresswoman. You
have sat here the entire time, so thank you very much. Thank
you for your interest. There's a $4 million increase that you--
--
Mrs. Kim. Um-hum.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. Talked about, and it is for the
emphasis on learning opportunities in K through 12.
Mrs. Kim. Awesome. I think we agree that we need to ensure
that today's students have the skills needed to join the STEM
workforce, because this is the pathway for job creation, which
affects our American economy, and we are going to be ready to
boost the Nation's challenges to, I mean to boost the Nation's
competitiveness abroad. Thank you so much for that. And I've
heard from many small contractors located in my district, which
is California's 39th Congressional District, about the
importance of space exploration for the region that I
represent, so I look forward to working with you, with the
Committee, to ensure that our space programs are appropriately
funded. With that--obviously we understand. So it's not a
question, I look forward to working with you, and I will yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Sherman?
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. My first question I'm sure has not
arisen, in that--because it relates to my district. The Santa
Susana Field Lab was used during the Cold War, in the early
parts of the Cold War. Various contaminants, chiefly nuclear,
remain. The facility--or the acreage is immediately adjacent to
the city limits of Los Angeles, surrounded by populated
suburbs. Some 451 acres of this is the responsibility of NASA.
The adjoining property is subject to the responsibility of the
Department of Energy and the Boeing Corporation. So the
contamination affects hundreds of thousands of people. There
are 700,000 people who have signed a signature demanding a full
cleanup of the site. The prior Secretary of the--of Energy,
Governor Perry, at my request, made at a Science Committee
hearing, visited the site, and yet we still don't have any
significant cleanup. A few old structures were removed. I'd
like to bring to your attention a documentary, and arrange to
get it to you, called ``Dark of the Valley'', about how
hundreds of thousands of people are affected by this
contamination. I want to know whether I can count on NASA to
work to comply with the consent decree, and actually start
cleaning up the facility relatively soon?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, we take the environment very
seriously. As to making a commitment to you, I've got to know
the details, and I just simply don't have those. But I can say
this, you can tell a lot about a fellow, where he's going, by
where he's been, and look at my environmental record over a
lifetime of public service, and I think that'll give you some
degree of comfort.
Mr. Sherman. We will get you fully briefed, and then we
will get you a copy of this documentary, which should be
available soon. You've noted that the SLS could be used for
multiple missions besides sending humans to deep space. Can you
discuss your plan to keep a regular cadence for the SLS
mission? And you had spoke to my colleagues on the national
security of space using SLS, using the Delta IV Heavy, which is
being retired. Can you comment on that?
Mr. Nelson. Well, basically, on the Delta IV, you're
having the Atlas V and the Delta IV, which have been the
mainstay workhorses of getting a lot of commercial, but
especially national defense payloads, over time, into orbit,
into protection of our country, and those are being replaced as
we develop new rockets. And there is a specific timetable. I
don't have that on the top of my head.
With regard to the regular cadence of landing on the Moon
with Artemis, that is what I hope is going to occur. If we can
get a robust competition, and have a decision on what the
lander should be, and to have those landings once a year, so
thus the cadence that you talk about, have them once a year
over about a dozen year period, all of which is for the purpose
of getting ready to go to Mars. Learning what we can, the
preparation, the systems, the new technology, and dealing in an
environment on a surface of a celestial body that is 1/6 the
gravity, and we're getting ready to go to a celestial body
that's 1/3 the gravity of Earth.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I hope the Chairwoman will allow
me to sneak in one more question. Can you share your
perspective on how the Gateway is a critical element of our
effort to further explore not only the Moon, but ultimately
expand our space exploration to Mars?
Mr. Nelson. I won't go into the detail that I did before
to spare the Committee, but----
Mr. Sherman. Um-hum.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. The Gateway, in essence, is a
small space station in lunar orbit that will do many things.
It'll be a way station for us to go down and back from the
lunar surface. It will be a research station. It's
international. We've already got a number of partners. And it
will be the place that is likely to be the embarkation point
where we will assemble a spacecraft, technology to be
developed, that will go to Mars.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Mr. Webster?
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Chair. Senator, good to see you.
Mr. Nelson. I think you all have more Florida Members on
this Committee than any other State, maybe outpaced by
California.
Mr. Webster. We had a big interest. I've been listening--I
heard, and it kind of expanded as we went along, all of the
amount of information that you're gathering just from being in
space, collecting data. And that certainly is useful data. I
was wondering how does NASA partner with other government
agencies, even local and State agencies, to utilize that from
hurricanes in our area, but also there's wildfires, floods, and
all kinds of other natural disasters.Just tell me, what's going
on right now with that?
Mr. Nelson. The extensive sharing of data among U.S.
Government agencies with NASA is just unbelievable. I didn't
realize, until I got into this position, how extensive it is.
Now, I'll give you a good example. We in Florida, of course,
are concerned about the direction and the ferocity of an
inbound hurricane. All right. You've got all these assets up
there that are measuring all kinds of different items that
affect the intensity and the direction of that hurricane. These
are all, in large part, assets that are in space. We have the
buoys on the ocean that help us, and we have airplanes that fly
through and above the hurricane, but we've also got these
assets in space that are giving us all kinds of new
measurements. And that's just one example on the sharing of
data.
Mr. Webster. I was thinking about in Florida we have,
speaking of hurricanes, these emergency operation centers all
over, and there's police and fire, and everybody has a--a lot
of people have a seat at the table, and I'm sure you've been to
one before. And they're all moving, and working pieces as let's
say hurricane or some other disaster's coming. Are those pieces
of information shared there, or can they be, or should they be?
Mr. Nelson. The data of----
Mr. Webster. Yeah, the data that they have--it's in
action, it's happening, it's a live storm, and these people are
reacting locally to--there's going to be a local flood, or
there's going to be a local windstorm problem of some kind. Is
that information shared even with those local EOCs (Emergency
Operations Centers)?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir, and let me give you another example.
Some of the spacecraft that we have, for example, will measure
the amount of moisture content in the atmosphere, and this is
going to be even more evident in these great observatories that
we're going to put up. Because measuring what's happening in
the atmosphere--now, moisture content of the atmosphere is a
major component when we're trying to figure out what that
hurricane is going to do in the future, and the direction, and
the intensity, and the temperature of that atmosphere, and the
temperature of the surface of the ocean, and even the
temperature underneath the surface of the ocean. And a lot of
that is coming from the very instruments that NASA has
designed, built, and launched, and then turned over to NOAA to
operate.
Mr. Webster. I could see that. Even the moisture content,
when it comes to flooding and other things, because that's also
a problem, an aftermath, a lot of times the wind's already
gone, the news story's already gone, and then our rivers filled
up, and later on, even sometimes a week, 2 weeks, 3 weeks later
is the surge of what happens. That's probably pretty awesome--
well, I've learned something today. That's a lot more
information than I even knew about, so thank you for coming.
Congratulations on your new position. I know you do a fantastic
job. We really appreciate you coming today. Good to----
Mr. Nelson. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Webster [continuing]. See you again.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much. Ms. Bice?
Mrs. Bice. Administrator Nelson, I have good news for you.
I think I may be the last questioner of the afternoon.
Mr. Nelson. Well, you have been, ma'am, very, very
patient.
Mrs. Bice. Well, thank you for joining us today, and thank
you to the Chair and Ranking Member for allowing us the
opportunity to speak with you about the budget. First, I hail
from the great State of Oklahoma, and there are some great NASA
ties, including your predecessor, who was from Oklahoma, as
well as General Thomas Stafford, who has a museum in Ranking
Member Lucas's district.
Mr. Nelson. Who I saw yesterday, Tom Stafford, a personal
friend, who lives in Satellite Beach, Congressman, and I will
see Jim Bridenstine for supper tonight.
Mrs. Bice. Well, tell him I said hello.
Mr. Nelson. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Bice. First, you mentioned earlier in the hearing
that you were concerned about supply chain, and I am honored to
be a member of the Supply Chain Task Force, which is looking at
the critical infrastructure that has been impacted specifically
over the last 18 months because of COVID-19, but also as it
relates to the Department of Defense, and what we can do as a
country to ensure that we don't have any supply chain
disruptions moving forward. And you specifically mentioned rare
Earth minerals, and those come from foreign entities, and I
think that we have to be mindful, as we look to the future, to
figure out how do we prohibit the possibility of not having
access to those, which is incredibly important to many of the
things that we're doing at NASA, as well as within the
Department of Defense. That is something that I know the
administration is also focused on, given their 100 day Supply
Chain Task Force memo that was put out a couple weeks ago.
In addition, Congressman Waltz made the comment that he's
concerned about China, and, as a Member of the House Armed
Services Committee, I echo those concerns as well. I think
hearing and seeing some of the things that we have seen over
the last couple of months particularly, with the landing of a
rover on Mars, it's very clear that China is looking to outpace
the United States, and it is imperative that we do everything
we can to invest in research and development, in exploration,
to ensure that that doesn't happen.
In your budget you ask for 101 million for commercial Low
Earth Orbit development, and I very much appreciate the
collaboration with the private sector and NASA to do that. My
concern is how do we prevent another situation like we have
seen with HLS? Because currently we are on hold with that
particular program until the decision in August comes, and
we're on a timeframe here. And so my fear is that we're doing a
great job at investing in LEO (low-Earth orbit), partnering
with the private sector, but we cannot have delays. It is not
in our best interest as a country. How do you prevent that from
happening in the future?
Mr. Nelson. Remember, there were delays on the Commercial
Crew Program. That was contested as well. As it turns out, it's
been a very successful program. It's a fixed price contract,
and the second commercial provider for commercial crew is just
getting ready to launch their vehicle at the end of next month,
and then a crew on that vehicle at the end of the year. So the
law provides that someone can contest an award, and we're not
going to be able to avoid that. And we have, indeed, had to go
into neutral for the past 100 days because of the big protest,
but this is our system. This is the rule of law. And once we
get a result, we will move out as quickly as we can.
Mrs. Bice. And thank you for that answer. I appreciate the
fact that we do live under the rule of law in this country. The
concern I have is that our adversaries don't pay attention to
the laws of this country, and they're willing to sacrifice to
be able to move forward and advance at a very quick pace, so I
think we, as a country, need to be mindful of how we navigate
these waters in signing these contracts, and putting these
private sector companies--creating these partnerships with NASA
so that we're not behind the eight ball. At the end of the day,
that's the most important thing, is to ensure the
competitiveness of the United States.
Mr. Nelson. Well, remember, you're a big part of this, and
all you have to do is look back at Apollo. And--we were way
behind, and the American people and the Congress supported a
young President's vision of going to the Moon and back
successfully within the decade, and it happened. And it was
because everybody in the whole of government came together,
supported by the American people. So, as we are looking into
this adventure that we are all joining in, you are very much a
part of that.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Administrator, and, Madam Chair,
I yield back.
Chairwoman Johnson. Thank you very much, and thank you,
Administrator Nelson, for being with us, and spending this time
answering all of the questions. The record will remain open for
2 weeks for additional statements from Members, and for any
additional questions the Committee may have or ask the witness.
The witness is now excused, and the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:46 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by the Honorable Bill Nelson

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Question submitted by Representative Brian Babin

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
