- BIOENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FOR THE FUELS AND CHEMICALS OF TOMORROW

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BIOENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
FOR THE FUELS AND CHEMICALS
OF TOMORROW

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 16, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-48

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-058PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas, Chairwoman
ZOE LOFGREN, California              FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma,
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon                 Ranking Member
AMI BERA, California                 MO BROOKS, Alabama
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,             BILL POSEY, Florida
Vice Chair                       RANDY WEBER, Texas
MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey           BRIAN BABIN, Texas
JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
BRAD SHERMAN, California             JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
PAUL TONKO, New York                 STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                YOUNG KIM, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
DON BEYER, Virginia                  JAKE LaTURNER, Kansas
CHARLIE CRIST, Florida               CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JAY OBERNOLTE, California
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAKE ELLZEY, TEXAS
GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin                MIKE CAREY, OHIO
DAN KILDEE, Michigan
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
LIZZIE FLETCHER, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Energy

HON. JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York, Chairman
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             RANDY WEBER, Texas,
HALEY STEVENS, Michigan                  Ranking Member
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, New Mexico     JIM BAIRD, Indiana
JERRY McNERNEY, California           MIKE GARCIA, California
DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey          MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             PETER MEIJER, Michigan
DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina         JAY OBERNOLTE, California
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 16, 2022

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Sean Casten, Presiding Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Randy Weber, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    14

Written statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Chairwoman, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    15

Witnesses:

Dr. Jonathan Male, Chief Scientist, Energy Processes and
Materials, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    19

Dr. Andrew Leakey, Director, Center for Advanced Bioenergy and
Bioproducts Innovation, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    29

Dr. Laurel Harmon, Vice President, Government Affairs, LanzaTech
Oral Statement...............................................    58
Written Statement............................................    60

Dr. Eric Hegg, Professor, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Michigan State University
Oral Statement...............................................    66
Written Statement............................................    68

Discussion.......................................................    75

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Jonathan Male, Chief Scientist, Energy Processes and
Materials, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)........    88

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Sean Casten, Presiding
Chairman, Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
Sarah Gallo, Vice President, Agriculture and Environment,
Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO)................    92

BIOENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

FOR THE FUELS AND CHEMICALS

OF TOMORROW

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 16, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building and via Zoom,
Hon. Sean Casten presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Casten. The hearing will come to order. Without
objection, the Chairman is authorized to declare recess at any
time.
Before I deliver my opening remarks, I wanted to note that,
today, the Committee is meeting both in person and virtually. I
want to announce a couple reminders to the Members about the
conduct of this hearing. First, Members and staff who are
attending in person and are unvaccinated against COVID-19 must
stay masked throughout the hearing. Unvaccinated Members may
remove their masks only during their questioning under the 5-
minute rule. Members who are attending virtually should keep
their video feed on as long as they are present in the hearing,
and Members are responsible for their own microphones. Please
also keep your microphones muted unless you're speaking.
Finally, if Members have any documents they wish to submit for
the record, please email them to the Committee Clerk, whose
email address was circulated prior to the hearing.
I'd like to thank all the witnesses for joining us today to
discuss the future of the bioenergy research enterprise. As
some of you know, I spent 20 years in the energy industry
before I came to Congress, but I'm sure all of you have read
that 1998 New York Times bestseller Advanced Processes for
Ethanol and Electricity Coproduction from Lignocellulosic
Biomass. As I don't need to tell you, that was of course the
title of my master's thesis, which caused me to spend 3 years
building, operating, and modeling biofuel fermentation and
energy recovery systems. And I think it's for the good of our
planet and for my sanity that the technology has come a long
way since then.
In fact, in December of last year I was on the first
passenger flight powered by 100 percent sustainable aviation
fuel (SAF) flying from the greatest city of Chicago to
Washington, D.C. Although that was a historic moment, we still
have some significant barriers to overcome. Cost of course
remains high with sustainable aviation fuels costing about four
times as much as traditional jet fuel. But in addition to that,
we simply don't have enough supply. Ninety-five billion gallons
of jet fuel was consumed in 2019. In that same year, less than
2 million gallons of sustainable aviation fuels was produced.
I'm encouraged by President Biden's Sustainable Aviation
Grand Challenge that aims to reduce the cost, and hence the
sustainability, and expand production of these fuels, which I
understand LanzaJet is taking part in by pledging production of
a billion gallons of these fuels per year by 2030. So I'm
really looking forward to Dr. Harmon's testimony and not just
because LanzaTech is headquartered in my backyard. I also
really look forward to learning about the status of the
technologies to create these fuels and where there are
constraints and opportunities in the upstream feedstock supply.
I'm also pleased that the Department of Energy (DOE) sees
this urgent need and is focusing its bioenergy research on the
fuels of tomorrow. Sustainable, cost-effective feedstocks that
can scale down and move refinement closer to the feedstock
sources would enable a distributive model that revives local
economies. As an example, the Center for Advanced Bioenergy and
Bioproducts Innovation (CABBI), which also happens to be
located in Illinois, works to create ecologically and
economically sustainable feedstocks by using a plants-as-
factories approach that prioritizes efficient land use, soil
health, water health, clean air, and of course emissions
reductions.
As we saw in the recent IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change) report, the science is overwhelmingly clear
that we have to get to zero greenhouse gas emissions as quickly
as possible. Sadly, as we all know in this Committee too well,
what is scientifically necessary vastly exceeds what is
politically on the table at the moment. And it's why I'm so
proud to be on the Science Committee where we get stuff done. I
hope that in convening this hearing we can ensure that our R&D
(research and development) dollars are spent wisely and that we
prioritize some of the less-sexy, hard-to-decarbonize
industries.
Now more than ever we have to figure out how to decarbonize
these hard-to-abate sectors, cement, steel, aviation, and
shipping. These are sectors that use carbon and fossil fuels
often not as an energy source but as a chemical reducing agent
and/or they depend on liquid fuels that have the kind of mass
and energy density that's very difficult to replace with other
sustainable fuel stocks. Bioenergy is the unique renewable fuel
source that can serve both of those needs, and I'm excited to
hear from our witnesses where we can best target our research
and development in this space.
The IPCC report also concluded that bioenergy has
significant potential to mitigate greenhouse gases if resources
are sustainably developed and efficient technologies are
thoughtfully applied. If we do this right, we can pinpoint how
biofuels and biobased chemicals can be utilized where they
would be most effective in enabling a transition to a 100-
percent clean economy.
Finally, I don't think we can emphasize enough the impacts
that most Americans and indeed all of the world right now is
experiencing due to our overreliance on a globally traded,
geographically limited, environmentally detrimental, and
ultimately finite commodity under the control of some genuinely
crazy people. This is not a problem that we can drill our way
out of. No amount of oil that we extract from within our shores
can make a meaningful dent in the massive price spikes that
always follow the kinds of geopolitical volatility that people
like Mr. Putin have created. We absolutely must pursue ways to
produce more sustainable and domestically grown solutions to
meet our energy needs.
By doubling down on our innovation enterprise, we can
electrify the bulk of many sectors and create sustainable fuels
to power those otherwise hard-to-abate sectors. Knowing what we
know today, we just can't keep doing more of the same and
expecting a different outcome.
I want to again thank our excellent panel of witnesses
assembled today, and I look forward to hear your testimony.
With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Casten follows:]

Thank you to all of the witnesses for joining us today to
discuss the future of our bioenergy research enterprise. As
some of you know I spent 20 years in the energy industry before
I came to Congress. And I'm sure all of you have read the 1998
New York Times Bestseller ``Advanced Process for Ethanol and
Electricity Coproduction from Lignocellulosic Biomass.'' That,
of course, was my Masters' thesis, which caused me to spend
three years building, operating, and modelling biofuel
fermentation and every recovery system. I'm thrilled to say we
have come a long way since then. In December of last year, I
was on the first passenger flight powered by 100% sustainable
aviation fuel, flying from the great city of Chicago to
Washington, DC. Although that was a historic moment, we still
have some significant barriers to overcome. Not only is cost a
prohibitive factor, with sustainable aviation fuels costing
four times as much as traditional jet fuel, but we simply don't
have enough supply. 95 billion gallons of jet fuel was consumed
in 2019, and that same year less than 2 million gallons of
sustainable aviation fuels was produced. I am encouraged by
President Biden's Sustainable Aviation Grand Challenge that
aims to reduce cost, enhance sustainability, and expand
production of these fuels, which I understand Lanzajet is
taking part in by pledging production of a billion gallons of
these fuels per year by 2030. So I am really looking forward to
Dr. Harmon's testimony, and not just because Lanzatech is
headquartered in my back yard. But because we need to address
and discuss sustainable feedstocks, and how to best increase
the global supply of alternative fuels.
I am also pleased that the Department of Energy sees this
urgent need, and is focusing its bioenergy research on the
fuels of tomorrow. Sustainable, cost-effective feedstocks that
can scale down and move refinement closer to the feedstock
sources would enable a distributive model that revives local
economies. For example, the Center for Advanced Bioenergy and
Bioproducts Innovation - which also happens to be located in
Illinois - works to create ecologically and economically
sustainable feedstocks by using a ``plants as factories''
approach that prioritizes efficient land use, soil health,
water health, clean air, and of course, emission reductions.
As we saw in the recent IPCC report, the science is clear
that we must achieve zero emissions as soon as possible. What
is scientifically necessary vastly exceeds what is politically
on the table at the moment, which is why I'm proud to be on the
Science Committee where we Get. Stuff. Done. I hope that in
convening this hearing, we ensure that our R&D dollars are
spent wisely, and that we prioritize these less sexy, hard to
decarbonize industries. Now more than ever we must work to
decarbonize hard to abate sectors, such as cement, steel
aviation, and shipping. These sectors currently use the carbon
in fossil fuels not as an energy source, but as a chemical
reducing agent and/or depend on energy sources with the mass -
and energy-density only found in liquid fuels. Bioenergy is the
unique renewable fuel source that can serve both needs. I'm
excited to hear from our witnesses where we can best target our
research and development in this space.
The IPCC report concluded that bioenergy has significant
potential to mitigate greenhouse gases if resources are
sustainably developed, and efficient technologies are
thoughtfully applied. If we do this right, we can pinpoint how
biofuels and biobased chemicals can be utilized where they
would be most effective in enabling a successful transition to
a 100% clean economy.
Lastly, I don't think we can emphasize enough the impacts
that most Americans, and much of the world, are now
experiencing due to our over-reliance on a globally traded,
geographically limited, environmentally detrimental, and
ultimately finite commodity. This is not a problem that we can
drill our way out of. No amount of oil that we extract from
within our shores can make a meaningful dent in the massive
price spikes that would always follow a world event that
disrupts the global oil supply chain. This is yet another
critical reason that we absolutely must pursue ways to produce
more sustainable solutions, domestically-grown, to meet our
energy needs. By doubling down on our innovation enterprise, we
can electrify the bulk of many more sectors and create
sustainable fuels to power those otherwise hard-to-abate
sectors. Knowing what we know today, we just can't keep doing
more of the same and expect a different outcome anymore.
I want to again thank our excellent panel of witnesses
assembled today, and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
With that, I yield back.

Mr. Casten. And the Chair now recognizes Mr. Weber for an
opening statement.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Mr. Casten, for filling in for
Chairman Bowman and for running what is our first hybrid
hearing in about a year, I think. I'm glad--I, like you, am
glad to see some faces here in person, although it's hard to
recognize y'all without your masks.
Today, we will examine a promising clean energy technology
area that should play a role in all of our above--our all-of-
the-above energy strategy. Bioenergy is a broad term that
refers to the use of biomass and waste resources to produce
energy and related products like biofuels and biogas. The
applications of bioenergy seem almost endless from sustainable
aviation fuel that you talked about to recycling and waste-to-
energy technologies, bioenergy has the potential to benefit not
just the U.S. energy sector but a variety of industries,
including manufacturing and agriculture.
The Department of Energy has led the way in driving U.S.
innovation in bioenergy technologies, but, like most
technologies we talk about here at the Science Committee, there
is still work to be done and progress to be made. While some
biofuels like ethanol are mature energy sources, we have just
scratched the surface of what is possible when it comes to new,
more efficient, advanced biofuels and bioproducts. That is what
today's hearing is about, the next generation of bioenergy R&D.
Along with Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and
Chairman Bowman, I was proud to lead the DOE Science for the
Future Act and see it pass on an overwhelmingly bipartisan vote
on the House floor last summer. This bill contained a
comprehensive reauthorization of DOE's Biological and
Environmental Research (BER) program which conducts early stage
research to advance our ability to use biological systems for
energy technology. This reauthorization is absolutely necessary
for the success and commercialization of next-generation
bioenergy technologies. Without support and updates to BER's
basic research mission and facilities like the Bioenergy
Research Centers (BRCs), we could be stuck with the same
conventional biofuels and bioproducts that may never be cost-
effective, much less widely adopted. The updated language in
our bill provides guidance to DOE's activities and modernizes
their research focus to align with current capabilities, needs,
and demands.
DOE also conducts bioenergy research, development, and
demonstration (RD&D) activities through its Bioenergy
Technology Offices--Office (BETO) I should say, which is housed
with the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, EERE, office.
While this office is focused more on mature technologies and
their commercialization, it plays a valuable role in the full
research and development cycle. BER in the Office of Science
target the most fundamental industry-shifting breakthroughs
with basic research, but BETO and EERE then help to take those
breakthroughs and apply them to a technology suitable for
widespread deployment. But as my colleagues have heard me say
often, applied energy research on the government's dime has its
limits. That's my 10 cents' worth at least. There are times
when help for demonstration and commercial application makes
sense, but the Federal Government has no business picking the
winners and losers of the energy market.
Therefore, there comes a time when every technology,
bioenergy included--pardon me--should be taken off government
support and allowed to either flourish or flounder in the free
market. So while I support much of the work of BETO and EERE, I
don't want my words to be misconstrued as an open invitation to
expand these programs irresponsibly. I believe we should start
with robust funding and support for the Office of Science and
then allow EERE to capitalize on their most promising
breakthroughs in partnership with the private sector.
I look forward to today's hearing, too, Mr. Chairman, and
learning how this basic research to commercialization cycle for
bioenergy can be streamlined and improved. We have a diverse
panel here with witnesses from national labs, a DOE Bioenergy
Research Center, academia, as well as the private sector.
Between all of those witnesses, I'm sure we'll hear about a
bright future with bioenergy. So I want to thank each of them
for testifying today.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weber follows:]

Thank you, Mr. Casten, for filling in for Chairman Bowman
and running what is our first hybrid hearing in about a year.
I'm glad to see some faces here in person!
Today we will examine a promising clean energy technology
area that should play a role in our all-of-the-above energy
strategy. Bioenergy is a broad term that refers to the use of
biomass and waste resources to produce energy and related
products like biofuels and biogas.
The applications of bioenergy seem almost endless. From
sustainable aviation fuel to recycling and waste-to energy
technologies, bioenergy has the potential to benefit not just
the U.S energy sector but a variety of industries including
manufacturing and agriculture.
The Department of Energy (DOE) has led the way in driving
U.S. innovation in bioenergy technologies, but, like most
technologies we talk about here at the Science Committee, there
is still work to be done and progress to be made. While some
biofuels like ethanol are mature energy sources, we have just
scratched the surface of what is possible when it comes to new,
more efficient, advanced biofuels and bio-products.
That is what today's hearing is about: the next generation
of bioenergy R&D.
Along with Chairwoman Johnson, Ranking Member Lucas, and
Chairman Bowman, I was proud to lead the DOE Science for the
Future Act and see it pass on an overwhelming bipartisan vote
on the House Floor last summer. This bill contained a
comprehensive reauthorization of DOE's Biological and
Environmental Research program, which conducts early-stage
research to advance our ability to use biological systems for
energy technology.
This reauthorization is absolutely necessary for the
success and commercialization of next-generation bioenergy
technologies. Without support and updates to BER's basic
research mission, and facilities like the Bioenergy Research
Centers, we could be stuck with the same conventional biofuels
and bioproducts that may never be cost effective or widely
adopted. The updated language in our bill provides guidance to
DOE's activities and modernizes their research focus to align
with current capabilities, needs, and demands.
DOE also conducts bioenergy research, development, and
demonstration activities through its Bioenergy Technologies
Office (BETO), which is housed within the Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy (EERE) Office. While this office is focused
more on mature technologies and their commercialization, it
plays a valuable role in the full research and development
cycle.
BER and the Office of Science target the most fundamental,
industry-shifting breakthroughs with basic research, but BETO
and EERE can then help to take those breakthroughs and apply
them to a technology suitable for widespread deployment. But as
my colleagues have heard me say often, applied energy research
on the government's dime has its limits.
There are times when help for demonstration and commercial
application makes sense, but the federal government has no
business picking the winners and losers of the energy market.
Therefore, there comes a time when every technology, bioenergy
included, should be taken off government support and allowed to
either flourish or flounder through the free market.
So while I support much of the work of BETO and EERE, I
don't want my words to be misconstrued as an open invitation to
expand these programs irresponsibly. I believe we should start
with robust funding and support for the Office of Science and
then allow EERE to capitalize on their most promising
breakthroughs in partnership with the private sector.
I look forward to today's hearing and learning how this
basic research to commercialization cycle for bioenergy can be
streamlined and improved. We have a diverse panel here with
witnesses from a National Lab, a DOE Bioenergy Research Center,
academia, and the private sector. Between all of them, I'm sure
we will hear about a bright future with bioenergy.
I want to thank each of them for testifying today. And I
yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Casten. I believe our Chairwoman is not present, so the
Chair will now recognize the Ranking Member of the Full
Committee, Mr. Lucas, for his opening statement.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Casten. And I'd like to express
my appreciation to Chairwoman Johnson and the entire majority
staff for their work to hold this hearing in hybrid format.
This is an exciting step toward transitioning back to in-person
hearings, and I look forward to seeing the rest of my
colleagues and future witnesses in our hearing room sometime
soon.
Even before serving as Ranking Member of the Science
Committee, I've been an advocate for an all-of-the-above
approach to our energy security. Bioenergy, which is one
component of that mix, carries tremendous potential as an
energy resource for our country, especially given our Nation's
strong agricultural capacity. However, additional research and
development, particularly fundamental research and cross-sector
collaboration, is needed to unlock its full potential. But that
must be done in a responsible, targeted manner.
To that end, I was proud to help lead the Science
Committee's bipartisan efforts to support the Department of
Energy's Office of Science's Biological and Environmental
Research, or BER, program by passing the DOE Science for the
Future Act in the House last year. Among many things, this
legislation modernizes the BER program and provides additional
guidance for our Bioenergy Research Centers. It helps them
address cutting-edge challenges for the expansion of the
biofuel and biobased materials industry. We still don't have
certainty on the path ahead for the DOE Science for the Future
Act. It's been 4 months since Leader Schumer and Speaker Pelosi
announced that we would go to a conference on a competitiveness
legislation, and we're still waiting. The BER program is just
one among many strategic and bipartisan initiatives that we in
this Committee room worked on carefully together. I'd like to
move it forward soon. So I look forward to working with my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle and in both chambers to
find a way to get this legislation across the finish line.
I want to thank our witnesses for sharing their expertise
and discussing strategies to address the most critical
bioenergy R&D needs. Thank you, Mr. Casten. I yield back the
balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Mr. Casten.
I would like to express my appreciation to Chairwoman
Johnson and the entire majority staff for their work to hold
this hearing in hybrid format. This is an exciting step towards
transitioning back to in-person hearings, and I look forward to
seeing the rest of my colleagues and future witnesses in our
hearing room sometime soon.
Even before serving as Ranking Member of the Science
Committee, I've been an advocate for an all-of-the-above
approach to our energy security. Bioenergy, which is one
component of that mix, carries tremendous potential as an
energy resource for our country, especially given our nation's
strong agricultural capacity. However, additional research and
development, particularly fundamental research and cross-sector
collaboration, is needed to unlock its full potential. But that
must be done in a responsible, targeted manner.
To that end, I was proud to help lead the Science
Committee's bipartisan efforts to support the Department of
Energy's Office of Science's Biological and Environmental
Research, or ``BER'' program, by passing the DOE Science for
the Future Act in the House last year. Among many things, this
legislation modernizes the BER program and provides additional
guidance to our Bioenergy Research Centers. It helps them
address cutting-edge challenges for the expansion of the
biofuel and bio-based materials industry.
We still don't have certainty on the path ahead for the DOE
Science for the Future Act. It's been four months since Leader
Schumer and Speaker Pelosi announced we would go to conference
on competitiveness legislation. And we're still waiting.
The BER program is just one among many strategic and
bipartisan initiatives that we in this Committee room worked on
carefully together. I'd like to move it forward soon. So I look
forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle and in both chambers to find a way to get this
legislation across the finish line.
I want to thank our witnesses for sharing their expertise
and discussing strategies to address the most critical
bioenergy R&D needs. Thank you, Mr. Casten, I yield back the
balance of my time.

Mr. Casten. If there are Members who wish to submit
additional opening statements, your statements will be added to
the record at this point.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Johnson follows:]

Good morning and thank you Mr. Casten for chairing today's
hearing, and for convening this excellent panel of witnesses to
examine the role of bioenergy in our nation's clean energy
transition.
Bioenergy is one of the world's oldest energy sources and
continues to play a large and growing role in the global energy
system. Today, the Department of Energy is advancing research
breakthroughs in bioengineering that will significantly improve
the sustainability of bio-based products, including materials,
chemicals, and fuels.
Bio-based products currently displace approximately 9.4
million barrels of oil annually, and they have the potential to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by an estimated 12.7 million
metric tons per year. So DOE's research in these areas will
likely be critical to achieving our future climate goals.
I must also mention that my district in Dallas is a hub for
domestic and international air travel, and there too, bioenergy
has the potential to enable sustainable aviation. I have a
vested interest in overcoming barriers to the wider adoption of
these fuels, as this sector is particularly challenging to
decarbonize.
Lastly, I want to again highlight our Committee's
important, bipartisan work that was included in the DOE Science
for the Future Act, the Bioeconomy Research and Development
Act, and the America COMPETES Act. Amongst the many impactful
science and innovation provisions in the bill, you'll find
bioenergy R&D provisions that aim to ensure that the U.S. leads
the bioeconomy in the 21st century. These provisions, built
from the ground up with input from the stakeholder community as
reflected by today's witness panel, authorize R&D in biological
system science and further authorize up to six bioenergy
research centers focused on research in plant and microbial
systems biology, biological imaging and analysis, and genomics
to accelerate the research, development, and commercial
application of bioenergy sources and biobased products.
I hope today's discussion will examine how these provisions
and any future legislation will help advance bioenergy's
sustainability as a resource to meet the challenges of
mitigating climate change while also addressing our growing
energy needs. Moreover, I must note that the recent tragic
events and their rippling effects across the globe have
underscored the necessity for us to diversify our nation's
energy supplies, not that this was a lesson that any of us
would have wanted or should have needed at this point.
I thank our witnesses for being here and I look forward to
your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

Mr. Casten. At this time, I would like to introduce our
witnesses. Dr. Jonathan Male is the Chief Scientist in the
Energy Processes and Materials division at Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, or PNNL. He's also an adjunct faculty
member in the Biological Systems Engineering Department of
Washington State University or WSU and the Co-Director of the
WSU PNNL Bioproducts Institute. Previously, Dr. Male served as
the Director of Bioenergy Technologies Office at the Department
of Energy for over 6 years.
Dr. Andrew Leakey is the Director of the Center for
Advanced Bioenergy and Bioproducts Innovation and the head of
the Department of Plant Biology at the University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign. He joined the university as a Fulbright
Scholar in 2002. He has received the Calvin-Benson Prize for
Excellence in early career research and has been elected as a
Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science.
Dr. Laurel Harmon is the Vice President of Government
Affairs at LanzaTech. She has over 30 years of experience in
policy and technology development. In her current role, Dr.
Harmon provides policy direction on legislative and regulatory
matters and develops public-private partnerships to support
research and demonstration projects. She also serves on the
board of LanzaJet and is the Vice Chair of the Board of the
Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Meijer for the introduction of
our final witness.
Mr. Meijer. Thank you, Mr. Casten. And it's my pleasure to
introduce a fellow Michigander, Dr. Eric Hegg, the Associate
Dean for Budget, Planning, Research, and Administration in the
College of Natural Science at Michigan State University (MSU).
Although not located directly in my district, Michigan State's
research, students, and faculty all have a tremendous impact
across the State when it comes to the Science Committee and
national research priorities. It's always great to have
Michigan and its unique skills and needs represented.
Dr. Hegg is an expert in biochemistry and molecular
biology. Specifically, his research looks at how structural
components of the plant cell wall can be used to form biofuels
and bioproducts. And relevant to today's hearing, Dr. Hegg has
served in a variety of roles within the Great Lakes Bioenergy
Research Center (GLBRC) since it was first established in 2007.
Most recently, he served as the MSU subcontract lead for the
GLBRC before transitioning to his current role as Associate
Dean. Dr. Hegg has been a Big Ten Academic Alliance Leadership
Program Fellow and an Academic Advancement Network Leadership
Fellow. And in 2019 he was elected a Fellow of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science. His knowledge in
the field of bioenergy and history with DOE's Bioenergy
Research Centers are invaluable to today's discussion, and I
look forward to hearing more in his testimony. Thank you, Dr.
Hegg, for being with us today, for being a voice for all of
Michigan. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Casten. Thank you all for joining us today. As our
witnesses are no doubt aware, you will each have 5 minutes for
your spoken testimony. Your written testimony will be included
in the record for the hearing. When you've all completed your
spoken testimony, we will begin with questions. Each Member
will have 5 minutes to question the panel. We will start with
Dr. Male. Dr. Male, please begin.

TESTIMONY OF DR. JONATHAN MALE,

CHIEF SCIENTIST, ENERGY PROCESSES AND MATERIALS,

PACIFIC NORTHWEST NATIONAL LABORATORY (PNNL)

Dr. Male. Thank you. Good morning, and thank you, Chairman
Casten, Ranking Member Weber, and Full Committee Ranking Member
Lucas and Members of the Subcommittee, for the opportunity to
participate in this important hearing on bioenergy research and
developing fuels and chemicals of tomorrow.
As you've heard, my name is Jonathan Male. I am a Chief
Scientist for the Energy Processes and Materials at the Pacific
Northwest National Lab. That's in Richland, Washington. I'm
also an Adjunct Professor at Washington State University and
serve as the Co-Director of the PNNL WSU Bioproducts Institute,
which advances science to reduce environmental impacts of fuels
and products. Previously, I served as the Director of the
Bioenergy Technologies Office in the Office of Energy
Renewable--Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy.
In my testimony today I will focus on three main points
about the state of bioenergy research and development and its
importance to our clean energy future. First, we must expand
our understanding of real-life biomass feedstocks. Second, we
have a great opportunity to turn today's waste carbon streams
into tomorrow's carbon resources. And third, bioenergy and
bioproducts will be most important for reducing emissions in
segments of our economy that are difficult to electrify such as
aviation, marine, and industry.
Decades of investment in fundamental chemistry, biology,
catalysis, computational modeling, and other science
disciplines have positioned us to convert biomass and waste to
useful fuels and products. Much of this work has depended on
DOE's world-class scientific user facilities like the
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL) at PNNL and
the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) at Lawrence Berkeley National
Lab.
To take the insights of fundamental science to scale and
realize commercial impact, we must look to real biomass with
all its variability and imperfections. Producing bioenergy and
bioproducts at scales required to meet carbon reduction goals,
bioenergy technologies must work not only for the optimal
feedstocks we use in the laboratory but must be robust against
variations during industrial processing.
Consider corn stover as an example feedstock. Real bales of
corn stover sit out in the elements and will contain everything
from soil to twine to farming tools. Bioenergy and bioproducts
facilities must have resilient processes to still efficiently
produce fuels and products. In demonstration and commercial
scale facilities, feedstock variability has led to undesirable
outcomes. DOE created the Feedstock Conversion Interface
Consortium, or FCIC, to begin to scientifically understand and
address critical feedstock variability issues. FCIC researchers
across nine DOE national labs provided critical insights of
potential methods for detailed characterization of feedstock
variability and understanding key properties of feedstocks that
impact facilities' performances.
To the second point, we can turn today's waste into
tomorrow's carbon resources if we invest in the RD&D to
characterize wastes and further develop conversion processes.
DOE researchers estimate there is a potential for 1 billion dry
tons of biomass to be converted to approximately 62 billion
gallons of fuel annually, enough to supply all of aviation,
marine, rail, and significant portion of the heavy-duty
trucking. However, these analyses have assumed approximately 23
percent of those billion dry tons would be derived from woody
and herbaceous energy crops, which have been slow to scale up.
If we expanded our view of renewable carbon feedstocks, we
find significant additional carbon in our waste streams from
municipal solid waste to food waste and waste gases to name
just three. By developing science and technology to utilize
these wastes, we can increase feedstock supplies, reduce
landfill volumes, disposable costs, and reduce land-use
impacts.
One exciting potential conversion process for waste streams
is hydrogen liquefaction. It combines heat and pressure to
create a biocrude. A recent analysis by PNNL and National
Renewable Energy Lab showed that wet waste have potential to
produce 4.5 billion gallons per year of renewable diesel.
Finally, bioenergy and bioproducts have the biggest
potential to impact hard-to-electrify segments of our economy
such as aviation, marine, and industry. The aviation segment
remains far from viable for electrification of wide-body jets
due to fuel energy density demands. There are commercially
viable technologies today for converting fats, oils, and
greases (FOGs) to sustainable aviation fuels, or SAFs, but 3
million gallons was made in 2019. However, the U.S. aviation
sector used 26 billion gallons of jet fuel in the same year.
There are not enough FOGs available as feedstocks to meet that
need. Recent research has started to use waste such as carbon
monoxide, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide that LanzaTech will talk
about in the collaboration with PNNL have developed
technologies to efficiently ferment this mixture to alcohols,
which can then be taken to SAFs. The technology will help meet
the DOE, DOT (Department of Transportation), and USDA's (United
States Department of Agriculture's) sustainable aviation fuel
grand challenge of producing 3 billion gallons to the U.S. by
2030.
In conclusion, by looking at an array of biomass and waste
feedstocks, better characterizing their real-world properties,
we increase potential to bring bioenergy and bioproducts to
bear. We can reduce the carbon intensity of critical but hard-
to-electrify segments of the economy and meet our goals for
dramatic global emissions. Thank you for your time today, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Male follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Casten. Thank you, Dr. Male. Next, we will have Dr.
Leakey.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ANDREW LEAKEY, DIRECTOR,

CENTER FOR ADVANCED BIOENERGY

AND BIOPRODUCTS INNOVATION,

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS URBANA-CHAMPAIGN

Dr. Leakey. Acting Chairman Casten, Ranking Member Weber,
and other distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to participate today. I am a Professor and
head of the Department of Plant Biology at the University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Originally from Great Britain, I
came to the United States in 2002 as a Fulbright Scholar. Since
2020, I have directed the Center for Advanced Bioenergy and
Bioproducts Innovation, or CABBI, which is the newest of four
Bioenergy Research Centers, or BRCs, that the Department of
Energy is funding. CABBI is comprised of over 300 scientists
from 23 institutions in 17 States.
Today, I was asked to discuss bioenergy and bioproducts
research. Based on my personal experience, I aim to convey to
you the need for next-generation renewable bioenergy and
bioproducts, the scientific goals and progress of the BRCs, and
the opportunities to train a diverse work force that can
positively impact every corner of the country. I represent
myself at today's hearing, and the views I express are my own.
The transportation fuels and petrochemicals sector is a
global, multitrillion-dollar-per-year industry, has enormous
potential to produce abundant renewable bioenergy and
bioproducts from plant biomass. And this would, one, reduce
reliance on foreign sources of energy and improve resiliency to
international conflicts or natural disasters; two, support
farming communities in developing a more sustainable and
resilient agricultural system; three, develop a more just
economy in which additional individuals and communities receive
economic benefit from the production of fuels and chemicals,
including in rural areas; and four, to reduce the greenhouse
gas emissions from fossil fuels that are driving climate
change.
Liquid biofuels have special potential to replace fossil
fuels for modes of transportation where batteries are too heavy
to store sufficient power and where charging infrastructure is
not easily connected to sources of clean electricity.
Sustainable biofuels for aviation, marine freight, and heavy-
duty long-distance trucking are notable examples. Decarbonizing
the transportation sector of the economy is important because
it currently accounts for the largest fraction of U.S. CO
2

emissions. However, further research and innovation is needed
for biofuels and bioproducts to meet their full potential.
The BRCs aim to provide the scientific discoveries and
technologies needed to develop economically and ecologically
sustainable domestic biofuels and bioproducts. This requires
improved cropping systems that produce more and greater value
biomass per acre while achieving sustainable greenhouse gas
balances. It also includes more efficient technologies to
deconstruct biomass and convert it into valuable fuels and
chemicals that decarbonize our energy systems and products.
In my written testimony, I detail scientific discoveries
and cutting-edge tools made by CABBI. A few highlights from the
last 4 years include engineering bioenergy grasses to produce
substantial amounts of oil, which can be processed into a drop-
in biofuel, engineering microbes to greatly enhance conversion
of plant-derived sugars into a platform chemical that can be
used to make decarbonized detergents and lubricants, leveraging
satellite imaging and computer simulation models to identify
land that is best suited to produce bioenergy crops,
accelerating research and innovation through advances in
robotics and artificial intelligence (AI), as well as the
sequencing and editing of plant and microbial genomes, and
development of software for conducting techno-economic analysis
and lifecycle assessment.
More broadly, since 2007, thousands of BRC researchers have
made discoveries leading to more than 4,000 scientific
publications, 670 patent applications, 280 of which have been
licensed, and 15 startup companies. A focus on technology
transfer and commercialization is a notable feature of the
BRCs. CABBI currently has partnerships with 11 companies,
allowing us to learn the challenges faced by industry and
provide solutions to them. BRC work of this type is greatly
aided by sustained funding for research that spans the entire
value chain, thereby forming the basis of the U.S. bio economy
of the future. Additional benefits come from collaboration
among the BRCs and DOE's national labs, Joint Genome Institute,
and Environmental and Molecular Science Laboratory.
Along with the other BRCs, CABBI is committed to training a
diverse bioenergy work force. Our scientists contribute to this
effort through many outreach and educational activities. I'm
especially excited about our new internship program for
undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented
groups.
In conclusion, I came to America because I believe we
created the greatest opportunity for scientists to help tackle
clean energy, climate change, and sustainable agriculture.
Twenty years later, my experiences working at a top land-grant
university have greatly bolstered that belief. We all have
reason to be proud of this country's bioenergy research
enterprise and to be optimistic about what it can do to deliver
many benefits for our society.
Thank you, and I look forward to addressing your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Leakey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Casten. Thank you, Dr. Leakey.
Dr. Harmon, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. LAUREL HARMON,

VICE PRESIDENT, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, LANZATECH

Dr. Harmon. Thank you, Acting Chairman Mr. Casten, Ranking
Member Mr. Weber, and Members of the Subcommittee. I really
appreciate this opportunity to share LanzaTech's experience and
our perspectives here today.
LanzaTech is a carbon capture and transformation company
headquartered in Illinois with offices around the world. Our
goal is to replace virgin fossil carbon with carbon from
wastes, creating what we call a circular carbon economy.
Because even in a decarbonized world, most of the products in
our daily lives from clothes to jet fuel need carbon.
Our technology uses a biocatalyst, a bacteria or microbe,
like beermaking except we use bacteria and waste carbon instead
of yeast and sugar. With this biocatalyst, we can turn all
kinds of carbon-rich waste streams into products from the
industrial emissions you heard earlier like steel mill off-gas
to solid waste, including biomass residues and municipal waste.
This technology is operating commercially in two plants
today, producing ethanol from industrial emissions, and several
other plants are in design and construction around the world.
We have created custom microbes using technologies as you've
just heard described, which are capable of producing over 100
different molecules.
Taking a step back, to advance bioenergy, we need a robust
bioeconomy, which includes biological processes like ours, the
use of biobased feedstocks, and hybrid pathways such as Mr.--
Dr. Male described that combine biochemistry and
thermochemistry to maximize carbon efficiency. The bioeconomy
can free us from virgin fossil carbon and also from the
massive, centralized refinery model on which we rely today.
Production facilities that are matched to the scale of
waste feedstocks can be located throughout the country. This
means they could be located in heavy manufacturing centers that
can be located in rural communities or in urban centers. These
improve the local environment, as well as creating high-quality
jobs.
LanzaTech has partnered with the Department of Energy in
projects from basic research from BER, for example, through
process optimization and scale up in BETO and the Advanced
Manufacturing Office. I provided many examples in my written
testimony, but here, I want to highlight DOE's role in
developing collaborations. You've heard that touched on
already.
DOE has allowed LanzaTech to collaborate with world-class
universities and with the national labs, and these
collaborations are developing new basic insights. They're
developing new computational and experimental tools that
accelerate discovery. They're expanding feedstocks to new
materials like waste CO
2
or waste plastics. They are
also intensifying the conversion processes themselves to
increase energy and carbon efficiency and scaling them up to
enable commercial implementation.
One example is the alcohol-to-jet or ATJ technology that
Dr. Male referenced, developed initially at PNNL, converts
ethanol into sustainable aviation fuel and renewable diesel.
After initial proof of concept, BETO funded a project for a
pathway to show that sustainable aviation fuel could be
produced from biomass using our gas fermentation and the ATJ
process. BETO also supported PNNL to produce fundamental data
that catalyzed additional investments by LanzaTech and industry
partners to scale up the process and produce thousands of
gallons of fuel. Some of that fuel, made using ethanol that
came directly from steel mill emissions, was used in a
transatlantic commercial passenger flight with Virgin Atlantic,
a 747 flying across the ocean on steel mill emissions, a great
demonstration of the circular carbon economy.
The DOE partnership continues in a project to support a 10
million gallon-per-year facility in Georgia, and in 2020, we
formed a spinout company--LanzaJet--to commercialize this
technology with support from Mitsui, Shell, LanzaTech, Suncor,
and British Airways. This is a great example of DOE engagement
throughout all stages of technology development and deployment.
In closing, I'd like to emphasize three main points. DOE's
RD&D programs must be technology and feedstock agnostic to
advance all technically, economically, and sustainably viable
pathways. DOE funding is, as I've emphasized before, needed not
just for R&D but also for demonstration and deployment to
ensure plants get built and are built where they are needed.
And the expansion--the bioenergy concept needs to be expanded
to chemicals and materials that require carbon and are made
from petroleum today.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the DOE needs
support also for the staff and the systems that it--will enable
the Department to accelerate the selection and execution of
these projects.
Thank you again. I look forward to responding to the
Members' questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Harmon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Casten. Thank you, Dr. Harmon.
And finally, we have Dr. Hegg. You are recognized for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ERIC HEGG, PROFESSOR,

BIOCHEMISTRY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY,

MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Hegg. Acting Chairman Casten and Ranking Member Weber,
thank you. Thanks also to Representative Meijer for your
introduction and to Representative Stevens for giving me my
first opportunity to testify back in 2019. It is my honor to be
here today. I am representing myself, and the views I express
are my own.
I am a Professor at Michigan State University and Associate
Dean for Research in the College of Natural Science.
Previously, I was the MSU Subcontract Lead for the Great Lakes
Bioenergy Research Center. In all of these roles, I have
experienced the critical partnerships that exist between the
Federal Government and universities.
Several Federal agencies have funded my research, including
NIH (National Institutes of Health), NSF (National Science
Foundation), USDA, and three different agencies within the DOE,
BES (Basic Energy Sciences), BER, and BETO. My research focuses
primarily on bioenergy and environmental research, and I am an
inventor of bioenergy and bioproducts technology. It is within
this context that I provide today's testimony.
Federal support for interdisciplinary centers is critical
to addressing society's grand challenges. Centers bring
together researchers from disparate fields, stimulate
innovation, and tackle complex problems in ways not possible
with smaller projects. For bioenergy, this includes bringing
together scientists from agronomy, genetics, and plant
biochemistry to develop dedicated bioenergy crops;
biogeochemistry and microbial ecology to understand nutrient
flow; and microbiology, chemistry, and engineering to convert
the biomass into biofuels and bioproducts. Overarching is the
work of computational scientists who ensure that the strategies
identified are economically and environmentally sustainable.
Without large centers, new technologies developed in one area
might not integrate across the entire pipeline. Centers are
therefore essential to identifying sustainable and holistic
solutions.
At the same time, however, it is critical to maintain and
even increase funding for creative individual research
projects, hallmarks of U.S. innovation. Smaller projects often
adapt more quickly to unexpected results, thereby opening new
avenues of inquiry. These individual breakthroughs can
themselves become the basis for integrated research. Single
investigative projects are therefore vital to the success of
large centers, as well as to the entire scientific enterprise.
Examples relevant to bioenergy are found across the entire
pipeline.
In addition, discoveries made in one field can unexpectedly
benefit other research areas, often years later. It is
therefore nearly impossible to overestimate or predict the full
impact of basic research. Once promising technologies are shown
to be compatible in an integrated system, they must then be
scaled. Technologies established at the bench, however, often
encounter unanticipated challenges as they move to the
industrial scale. Demonstrating they can be overcome is key to
obtaining industrial investment.
BETO has been important to my own research, enabling us to
optimize our technology and begin the scaling process. The work
has led to a new patent and an additional patent application
and a potential industrial partner. To take full advantage of
Federal investments in basic research, BETO and similar
programs should be continued.
Critical to the bioenergy research process is developing
the work force needed for scientific breakthroughs to maintain
U.S. leadership. Large integrated centers are ideal
environments for educational development. They provide cutting-
edge research experiences while exposing students to
multidisciplinary teams vital to industrial research. Authentic
laboratory experiences also reinforce concepts learned in the
classroom, teach critical thinking, and encourage creativity.
Because many undergraduates must work to afford tuition, paid
research programs improve diversity, equity, and inclusion,
thereby significantly impacting the quality, quantity, and
diversity of the future work force. Opportunities such as NSF's
REU (research experiences for undergraduates) program and the
DOE's internship program are hugely successful. Competition for
these and related programs is often intense, and additional
funding to expand them would significantly--would have a
significant impact on the future work force pipeline.
In the coming decades, there are opportunities for growth
that will increase the impact of Federal investment in
bioenergy research ranging from expanding long-term studies to
increasing coordination among the agency--under the agencies
under the purview of this Committee, including the DOE and NSF.
This coordination would be especially powerful if expanded to
include other agencies supporting bioenergy research, including
the USDA. These proposed steps would ensure highly integrative
and synergistic research that avoids duplication and promotes
coordination in tackling society's complex grand challenges.
Thank you for inviting me to testify and address any
questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hegg follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Casten. Thank you to all of our witnesses. At this
point, we will begin our first round of questions. And I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Harmon, the recent report entitled ``Sustainable
Aviation Fuel: A Review of Technical Pathways'' funded by the
Department of Energy finds that the United States' refinery
production of renewable diesel exceeds 300 million gallons, but
only 2 million gallons of sustainable aviation fuels made with
the same technology were produced. The report does say that
there's sometimes that is a difference in production costs, but
it says that the difference in renewable diesel production and
sustainable aviation fuels is primarily driven by policy. Can
you give us a little understanding of what those policies are
and what policies we would need to get greater sustainable
aviation fuel production?
Dr. Harmon. Thank you for that important question. The
first priority I think is to recognize that road transport has
benefited from a long history of incentives to which
sustainable aviation or SAF has not really been privy. Even
when the California low-carbon fuel standard (LCFS) was
developed, aviation fuel was not a compliance mechanism. And
what that meant is that even though most technologies to
produce SAF also produce diesel, industry focused on production
of diesel, and much of that was provided to the California
market. When the LCFS was opened up to SAF, then SAF production
increased, including the attraction of imports.
What I would also like to add is that what we do not have
today are policies that selectively promote aviation fuel, and
an example which is on the table would be the SAF blenders tax
credit. And that's something that I would be happy to follow up
or my colleagues would be happy to follow up with the Committee
on.
Finally, I would note that there are fuel policies which
don't selectively discriminate against SAF but the RFS
(renewable fuel standard), for example, is quite limited in the
pathways that are acceptable. And so many waste feedstocks are
actually not acceptable under the RFS and that expanding the
RFS to include waste such as industrial emissions, waste
CO
2
, would also have the benefit of accelerating
production of SAF.
Mr. Casten. So I'd love to follow up on that feedstock
question. We've got this 95 billion gallons a year of jet fuel
production and 2 million--with an M--gallons of SAF. With
current production technologies that you have, how much could
you ramp up before you would be completely maxed out on current
feedstocks? And what technologies would you need to develop or
they already exist--I know Dr. Male had talked about carbon
monoxide, but I'm assuming that's produced from something else
upstream. What does the technology look like, and what does the
feedstock look like in a feedstock-unconstrained world?
Dr. Harmon. All right. So I'll speak to alcohol-to-jet
because the intermediate use by alcohol-to-jet is ethanol.
Ethanol could be produced using many different technologies
from a huge array of feedstocks. Very specifically, for
example, using our technology, we can take carbon monoxide-rich
steel mill emissions, making ethanol, turn that into SAF. That
production of that ethanol is immediately commercial today and
operating. We've produced--I'm not going to quantify, but we've
produced millions of gallons of ethanol from steel mill
emissions.
Municipal waste is another example. Gasification of
municipal waste can feed into our process and then produce
ethanol, which goes into SAF. As we look farther out,
CO
2
, coupled with the hydrogen produced from
renewable energy, is also a SAF feedstock, again, by production
of ethanol and then transformation into SAF using the alcohol-
to-jet pathway. So there's almost no limit to the feedstocks
that can be applied to the SAF market using existing
technology.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Dr. Harmon. With the time I got
left, I want to just pivot to Dr. Hegg. And I have tremendous
appreciation for what BETO does and the pain of that valley of
death that you have talked about, you know, getting from lab
scale to industrial scale. I wonder if you could speculate a
little bit. Some of those projects get all through that, they
get scaled up, all the bugs are ironed out and they still
aren't economic. I'm a market guy, and I also serve on the
Climate Committee. And one of the things we keep coming back to
on that Committee is this International Monetary Fund report
that says that the United States subsidizes the fossil fuel
industry by $650 billion a year. I don't like picking winners
and losers, but my goodness, if we keep subsidizing an industry
that needs $650 billion a year to stay competitive doesn't
sound like we're picking the winners.
Do you have some sense, Dr. Hegg, of how many of the
technologies that come out that we deem to be economically
uncompetitive we only deem because the other technology is so
heavily subsidized? How much would come forward if we took off
those subsidies? Can you even guess at that?
Dr. Hegg. That's a great question, and unfortunately, no. I
mean, I simply don't have the data available to me to be able
to speculate. But I think one of the other critical issues here
is not only sort of the subsidizing that may occur but also
this issue of ensuring that technologies fit through the entire
pipeline. And so not just, you know, solving one--not just
solving one problem while forgetting how that solution
integrates into the entire system. But related directly to your
question, I'm sorry, I simply don't have those numbers
available.
Mr. Casten. Well, maybe we could follow up off-line. I'm
out of my time. I will now recognize Mr. Weber for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, sir. We had a hearing many years ago
in 2017 that was focused specifically on biofuels. One of our
witnesses was from the University of Michigan. So, Dr. Hegg,
let's see if you agree or want to stoke up the rivalry with
your institution. When talking about the billions of dollars
spent on DOE's bioenergy research, development, and deployment
efforts, he said, quote, ``None of the promised cellulosic
fuels have become commercially viable even with subsidies
amplified by mandates,'' end quote.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I think the Office
of Science and the discoveries that originate there played a
large role in the ultimate success of EERE. So, Dr. Hegg, can
you give us an updated opinion on DOE's bioenergy research
efforts and how the BER and the Office of Science can
accelerate the overall development of biotechnologies? And, as
part of that update--no pressure here. As part of that update,
could you provide an example or a success story from your days
at Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center or a project you were
part of that started at the basic research level and is working
toward being commercially viable? Dr. Hegg?
Dr. Hegg. Sure. So I think one excellent example is when
you think about designing dedicated bioenergy crops. And so at
the basic research level, you can begin to design them for
specific traits that make them specifically available--
especially appropriate for bioenergy. In one classic example,
researchers in the Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, not
myself, worked out a system to make lignin, which is a
structural component of the plant cell wall, degrade more
easily. All right. So they were able to do that on the plant
side. And then, again, thinking about this idea of the
pipeline, though, you have to think not just about the plants
but about the deconstruction.
And so I was involved with a team sort of analyzing the
impact of this new plant technology for how that it--how it
might degrade more easily. And by performing this research, we
were able to identify that in fact we could use lower chemical
inputs to degrade the biomass into the structural components,
specifically the sugars, so that they could be used downstream,
and then of course, again, thinking of this pipeline, having a
group of people that can then take that--the structural
components that have been separated and turn them into biofuels
and bioproducts.
Overlaid on all of this and one of the challenges for a
long time has been what to do with the lignin, again, this
important structural component, which can be approximately 20
percent of the total biomass but upwards of sometimes 40
percent of the energy content and figuring out how you can turn
that into useful fuels and/or chemicals.
And so I would say that a decade ago the technology simply
wasn't there to be able to effectively use that lignin. It was
the old adage the only thing good to do with lignin was to burn
it. But we know that's not true, and we know that given the
right sorts of scientific breakthroughs, we can in fact turn
that lignin into useful fuels and chemicals. And in fact we're
working to do that across all of the centers. And we are in
fact making great strides. So I think you'll see a big change
once we stop throwing away an important component of that plant
biomass.
Mr. Weber. All right. Well, thank you. I appreciate that,
Dr. Hegg. I want to move to Dr. Male now.
Dr. Male, this Committee is a big supporter of the national
labs, including PNNL. We've heard a lot about the Bioenergy
Research Centers, but let's not forget there are so many
different centers and projects and things going on at the
national labs, the Environmental Molecular Science Laboratory,
EMSL, the Joint Genome Institute, and Energy Frontier Research
Centers (EFRC) all come to mind. So I want to give you a
chance, Dr. Male, to talk about the end-to-end research
collaboration. How does PNNL try to shape some of the
activities that might not seem directly connected to bioenergy,
especially those at EMSL to assist the BRCs. Or, alternatively,
how does PNNL work with the JGI and EFRCs to identify shared
goals and mutual benefits? You got about 30 seconds, no
pressure.
Dr. Male. So an example would be Joint Bioenergy Institute,
JBEI, which is a BRC. They've done some phenomenal work on
driving synthetic biology. And this is directly fed into BETO,
which is doing the Agile BioFoundry, looking at synthetic
biology for specific targets. JBEI has also had successes that
have been gone on to the advanced biofuels, bioproducts process
development unit, which is a pre-pilot process development
unit, and so that has been a real stimulant in the bay area for
new startup companies coming in with their ideas and ideas
germinating at JBEI and beginning to get them from microliters
up to 100 liters. So you can start to go----
Mr. Weber. I hate to cut you off, but I appreciate you.
You're pretty knowledgeable on that and thank you. I yield
back.
Mr. Casten. Ms. Stevens, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Well, thank you, Mr. Acting Chair. What a
treat to have you chair today's hearing. And as a Michigan
native, of course it is a real pleasure again to welcome Dr.
Eric Hegg from Michigan State University. I'm wearing my green
for you today, sir, as--and that's for the Committee for us
here today.
And so, Dr. Hegg, you discussed the importance of advancing
technology beyond the lab bench. I'll just tease at that a
little bit more. How does this work effectively within the
Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center? What have been your own
experiences?
Dr. Hegg. That's a great question. So at the Great Lakes
Bioenergy Research Center, individual researchers work directly
with their respective technologies office at their respective
universities. And so once we have a nice technology at the lab
scale that we think might be scaled up, we put out an invention
disclosure. It is reviewed by the technology office, and if
it's deemed to be interesting, important, and promising, then
it moves on to file patent application and hopefully,
obviously, then ultimately, a patent.
Now, once we have a patent, it's important to note that all
of the technologies offices within the various universities at
the Great Lakes Bioenergy Center work together. And the
importance of that is that an industry can come in and they
don't have to deal with multiple technology offices. They can
work it with one center basically and then pass the
technologies that perhaps were developed at individual
universities back and forth or sometimes----
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Dr. Hegg [continuing]. Jointly between universities.
Ms. Stevens. Yes. And so let me try and get both of you in
here, too, because obviously, you know, we want to kind of talk
about how critical it is that researchers from multiple fields
tackle the R&D, the bioenergy enterprise. And so anything you
can say on that would be important. And then tucked in that,
I'd like to add that, you know, Department of Energy has
significantly grown its footprint in the area of artificial
intelligence. And this Committee, the Science Committee, has
been highly supportive of that expansion. And, for example, we
led on the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act,
which was enacted in late 2020--this was last term--to
authorize the DOE to support efforts in artificial intelligence
that cut across multiple missions. So anything that you could
also speak to on the Bioenergy Research Centers as a platform
for exploring how artificial intelligence can be used to
advance DOE's goals in bioscience would be much appreciated. So
I sort of started with a macro question and then tucked in a
micro one there, too.
Dr. Hegg. OK. So getting to the first question, I think
it's really critical to understand the interdisciplinary nature
of course of bioenergy research. And I think all of the centers
do a great job. I mentioned just some of the fields that come--
have to come together within the Great Lakes Bioenergy Research
Center. And in fact at MSU there's almost 30 different faculty
involved in the Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, which
together they constitute about 12 different departments and
five different colleges. So it's really a huge group of people
that is bringing--that is being brought together to ensure that
you have this integrated process. Solving--you know, finding a
solution in one area can in fact translate across the entire
pipeline.
So getting to your second question about the importance of
computational work and especially artificial intelligence, it's
outside my direct area of research----
Ms. Stevens. OK.
Dr. Hegg [continuing]. By actually a long way, but I would
echo what you said, which is the absolute importance of this
type of research, really any--or I should say this type of
capability in really any sort of research project which deals
with large and complex data sets, which in fact bioenergy
research does. Being able to make sense out of this very
complex, rich source of data, which comes from land management
or genomics or looking at product analysis or looking at
microbial pathways is really invaluable. And taking all the
data sets which are available throughout the literature and
somehow combining them in a meaningful way is absolutely
critical.
But I can--if you're interested in more, I can sort of work
with my colleagues----
Ms. Stevens. Yes, I mean, this is something we're going to
continue to kind of tease out, too, on this Committee, and
we're obviously running on the short of my 5 minutes of time,
but that was a really helpful start. And with that, Mr. Chair,
I'll yield back.
Mr. Casten. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Indiana, Dr. Baird, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that, and
I appreciate this Subcommittee hearing on energy. And, you
know, I have in my district one of the laboratories for
renewable resource engineering, as well as the Center for
Direct Catalytic Conversion of Biomass to Biofuels. And so it's
an exciting time in my opinion to be looking for some of these
alternative energy sources.
And so, Dr. Hegg, you mentioned lignin. Would you care to
elaborate on that a little bit? Because I think the forestry
industries, which is a real carbon sink, the trees I'm talking
about, and so I would really appreciate if you could elaborate
just for another moment on the lignin if we can use that for a
source of energy. What is the--what stage is that in, and how
far along are we or----
Dr. Hegg. So I think exactly the state of it depends on
sort of what direction you'd like to take it. So one direction
you can take the lignin, which, again, is this complex
biopolymer that's an important structural component of the
plant cell wall, and you can sort of extract it and you can use
it I'll say more or less directly as a polyol replacement. In
other words, it's got a lot of alcohols on it, which can make
it useful in certain applications such as various types of
polyurethanes. And so that is a market which actually already
has a lot of industrial interest and in fact one of my
colleagues in the forestry department here at Michigan State
University, Mojgan Nejad, collaborate quite a bit with a number
of industries all over the Nation. And so that is--I wouldn't
call it a mature technology, but it is already sort of on that
road to being able to make an important contribution to the
overall bioeconomy.
Now, another thing that you can do with that lignin is
depolymerize it into its constituent monomers and then use
those monomers either as a fuel directly or to be built up into
other types of useful bioproducts. That technology is coming
along. It is still much more nascent. It's challenging. It's
challenging to break apart lignin into monomers and to keep
those and to then separate those monomers and stop them from
reacting with each other in a sort of uncontrolled way. And so
that's the challenge. Chemists are learning to do that, and
they've made great strides over the last, you know, I would say
5 years. There's a long way to go, but they are really making
great, great progress. So I think that's--you know, I think
that will get to the same technology level in the next 5 to 10
years. At least I'm hopeful it will.
Mr. Baird. Super. I'm glad to hear that. So would you have
any further comments about the Centers for Direct Catalytic
Conversion of Biomass just to give you the opportunity to make
a comment about those centers--those C3Bios?
Dr. Hegg. Yes, unfortunately, I don't have enough of
experience with them to be able to speak with a great degree of
authority.
Mr. Baird. Dr. Leakey, do you have any comments on either
one of the questions that I asked?
Dr. Leakey. So the CABBI research portfolio focuses heavily
on a----
Mr. Baird. Yes.
Dr. Leakey [continuing]. Complementary approach----
Mr. Baird. Yes.
Dr. Leakey [continuing]. To the work that Dr. Hegg
described on lignin, and so we focus largely on producing oils
within the plant that can be easily extracted as a drop in
biofuel that increases the value of the biomass per acre. So
that would complement the approaches that you described.
Mr. Baird. Well, the advances we've made in biotechnology
in recent decades are tremendous, and it really enhances our
ability to provide food and fiber and mitigate some of this
climate change. So anyone else have a comment? If not, I thank
you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Casten. We are going to continue with the Ph.D. caucus.
And Dr. McNerney from California is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the Chairman for that recognition and
the hearing, and I thank the witnesses. This is really
interesting and important, and I'm glad to be a part of it.
Dr. Leakey, you discussed how artificial intelligence can
be used to increase efficiencies in the traditionally laborious
RD&D processes, so I'm going to follow up on Ms. Stevens'
question. How is AI beneficial to bioenergy research and
development and how can the government support further use of
this technology?
Dr. Leakey. Sure, thank you very much. Yes, so scientists
within CABBI are using machine learning to help address a very
broad range of questions and accelerate our research progress.
To give you some flavor for it, this includes designing new
enzymes and metabolic pathways, automating normally laborious
and inefficient steps in genome editing, as well as
automatically analyzing images from microscopes, drones, and
satellites to much more rapidly identify which crops and
locations bioenergy would be--would perform best for bioenergy
production.
I will say that there are some--this is a good example of
there being some valuable interactions with Federal funding
agencies beyond DOE, so the University of Illinois, for
instance, leads two artificial intelligence research
institutes, one funded by USDA, one funded by the National
Science Foundation. And I'm pleased to say that even though
those are just over a year old, we have got significant overlap
in scientists between this project and CABBI and real valuable
relationships building there. And we have some examples of AI
accelerating progress particularly on our microbial platforms
by up to an order of magnitude. So I think it's a really----
Mr. McNerney. It sounds like it's not only a research tool,
but it's a collaboration tool, so I'm glad to hear that.
Dr. Leakey. Yes.
Mr. McNerney. Dr. Male, the climate benefits of bioenergy
are still widely debated with different conclusions about the
carbon intensity of biomass feedstocks. Do you think there are
gaps in the lifecycle assessments of biomass feedstocks?
Dr. Male. The lifecycle assessment modeling is still an
evolving field. I'll give you an example. Particularly where
products are perhaps used multiple times, we have not seen that
really come to the fore. And there's a real opportunity to
actually be more transparent and have discussions about what
are the assumptions in anyone's models, the boundary conditions
in the models, and how it leads to a certain conclusion. And
it's OK to have discourse. That stimulates overall for the
entire community of lifecycle assessment modeling and land-use
change modeling to actually move forward.
Mr. McNerney. Well, what barriers are remaining for
conducting the kind of research--for creating partnerships for
commercial development projects?
Dr. Male. Barriers for commercial--oh, with regard to the
lifecycle assessments or with regard----
Mr. McNerney. Right.
Dr. Male [continuing]. Or just to commercialization in
general?
Mr. McNerney. Well, let's talk about the lifecycle
assessments.
Dr. Male. With regard to lifecycle assessments, looking at
it more holistically, that is, not just about greenhouse gas
emissions, it's a myriad of other metrics of sustainability or
sustainability indicators such as water, the quality of the
soil, how that is treated, just to give you two examples. And
so it is a multifaceted challenge, and you are doing tradeoffs
across these numerous facets or success metrics.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Dr. Male. So having a program where you can put forth in a
transparent manner how you assessed what your crop did in the
field and the water usage and the energy usage in your process
and engage people like the Roundtable for Sustainable
Biomaterials is an excellent way to go forward.
Mr. McNerney. OK, thank you. I believe I'm about out of
time, so I'm going to yield back to the Chair.
Mr. Casten. I'm looking for Mr. Meijer, and I don't see
him, so the Chair will now recognize Mr. Obernolte from
California.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the witnesses for a very fascinating hearing.
I'd like to ask a couple questions about the need to
increase feedstock supplies because that's been kind of a
recurrent theme in our hearing today. And as a Representative
from California, as I note that the Chairman is, it's no
surprise that we've had a couple of worst years of wildfires in
the entire State's history. And one of the things that's been
discovered is that our traditional approach to forest
management is insufficient and we're going to have to pay a lot
further attention to things like fuels reduction in the future
if we hope to tame this activity.
So, you know, I'm interested in the fact that when we do
fuel reduction in the forests, we come up with a lot of biomass
but we really don't have anything to do with them. You know, we
try and create energy from them, but that creates a lot of
soot. It's very inefficient. That process requires government
controls.
I'm wondering if that can't have--that biomass supply can't
have a role to play in maybe the production of aviation fuel
through the processes that we've been talking about? So let me
start with Dr. Male since you had mentioned, you know, the need
for expansion of the feedstock supply. Is there some kind of
process that this forest-based fuels reduction biomass can be
used for that purpose?
Dr. Male. There is, and particularly if you look at managed
forests. And a key aspect, though, is you always have to bear
in mind the accessibility to that particular resource. So if
you're doing thinning or putting in fire corridors, getting
that resource from that site has traditionally been--if you
have logging roads, that's fine. If you don't, it's a
challenge. And so that has pushed the research on can we have
systems that are modular and can be distributed to those
locations to make an intermediate that can then subsequently be
taken from there that doesn't create the soot that you
mentioned?
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Yes. I mean, obviously, that's going
to be a recurrent theme no matter what use you put that biomass
to, but, you know, given the fact that that's a problem we have
to solve anyway, I'm kind of optimistic that maybe, you know, a
pathway can be found there.
And Dr. Leakey, you also brought this up in your testimony.
Do you think that that--that the use of this forest-based
biomass might be kind of a substitute for actual food stock
crops?
Dr. Leakey. So the work within CABBI focuses specifically
on the use of grasses as our feedstock, and so I can't testify
directly to the use of woody feedstocks.
Mr. Obernolte. OK. Dr. Male, going back to you, you were
talking about how difficult it is to create an industrial
process to make a feedstock-based fuel that allows for
variability in the feedstock. And obviously, if we're talking,
you know, with fuels that have been reduced from forests,
there's a lot of variability there. What do you think we can do
to overcome that particular problem?
Dr. Male. I think what we can do is recognize the issue
that there is clearly--if you think about Gaussian
distributions, take any parameter of a feedstock like particle
size. There is a particle size distribution. And it's not good
enough just to sit on top of the mean particle size. It shows
you a technical feasibility of the process. But really you want
to go out--perhaps if you want to be 95 percent sure you can
deal with all the variability in that wood, you can go out two
sigma either side of that mean to look at the tails of that
distribution where the quality varies greatly and show that
your process is both resilient and robust. And then that will
allow your process to transition to industry with a greater
certainty.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. OK. Well, thank you. You know, it's--
I'm really happy that we're having this discussion because we
have a big problem with fuels reduction in the Western United
States and what to do with that biomass because if we--I mean,
we can burn it, which will just the de-sequester the carbon
that's stored in it. We can let it decompose, but that over a
longer amount of time also de-sequesters the carbon. Or we can
figure out some way of making productive use of that carbon
that is--results in avoided carbon through other channels. And
I think that turning that into a feedstock for an organic-based
fuel is a really good solution, so I'd love to see more
attention paid to that. I'd love to see some more research. And
I'm very happy that this Committee is taking a leadership role
in that.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. And not seeing Mr. Lamb, the
gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ross, is now recognized for
5 minutes. Oh, and before I introduce her, I apologize for not
recognizing the other Member of our Ph.D. caucus, Dr.
Obernolte. So apologies for the missed--Ms. Ross, you're now
recognized.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I'm a member of the
lawyer caucus. I want to thank Chairman Bowman for holding this
meeting. And as a member of the lawyer caucus, I represented
several different bioenergy clients in North Carolina,
including those who used wood waste, those who turned hog poop
into power, and I also represented people who dealt with
municipal waste and turned that into energy.
And I'm very interested to hear the insights from our
panelists and the status and the pace of DOE bioenergy
research. And obviously, more research and development coupled
with environmental justice and economic considerations are
needed to ensure that we can maximize the use of bioenergy to
our benefit.
And as I said, I did represent a client that dealt with
wood waste. And wood waste has been both a positive and a
controversial issue in North Carolina. And the production
particularly of wood pellets has created some environmental
justice concerns that need to be considered as we move forward.
Specifically, some of the wood pellet plants in North Carolina
and across the United States are located in rural and low-
income and predominantly minority areas. And the plants can
produce fine particle pollution, carbon monoxide, and can
degrade the local air quality. These effects disproportionately
harm minority and disadvantaged communities given their
proximity to the plants, putting them at higher risk of
suffering from health consequences.
And so to all of our panelists, are there best practices
that can prevent environmental injustices such as these, and
are there immediate steps we can take to reduce the increased
health risks associated with these plants? Anybody?
Dr. Male. You should be able to readily address the
particulate matter if you have any particulate matter coming
off, and there are regulations on volatile organic compounds
coming off from the production of, say, a roasting, like in
torrefaction or in the production of pellets, that those
volatile organic compounds should be combusted prior to going
up a stack. And the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) has
guidelines on both to help all communities.
Ms. Ross. OK. Does anybody else have anything to add? I
have a second question.
Also, the selling or moving of bioenergy in existing
pipelines, so I'm talking about what is referred to as
renewable natural gas, requires negotiation with pipeline
owners, and this requires coordination and careful attention to
the movement of other gases in order to avoid dangers in
combustion. And the North Carolina Utilities Commission is
dealing with this right now and has several pilot programs for
bioenergy moving through natural gas pipelines.
Dr. Harmon, how do we ensure that the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, PHMSA's regulation
of these transactions balance the safety risks without being
over-restrictive on something that can be a positive industry?
Dr. Harmon. So, first, I have to acknowledge I have no
expertise in natural gas pipelines or the complexity that you
describe. What I would say is that if we think about renewable
natural gas as something that can be used closer to its source
in conversion facilities that make, for example, sustainable
aviation fuel or make chemicals from that resource, in that way
we would obviate the need for some of the complexity that you
describe.
Ms. Ross. Yes. Yes, that is a great point, and actually
those projects are moving forward much more seamlessly.
Interestingly in North Carolina our utilities get credit--get
credits for using renewable natural gas, and so that's raised
this issue with the pipelines. But hopefully, we can submit
some other questions and get answers to those. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Mr. Casten. It appears that we have no more Republicans on
the panel, so we will now turn to Dr. Foster from Illinois for
5 minutes. To our distinguished panel, we've got you tied.
We've got four doctors to your doctors. We'll see if you raise
us on the next round. Dr. Foster, you're recognized.
Mr. Foster. Well, I think that probably the thing that
trumps this is the Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin that
Dr. Hegg has, and so as a graduate of Wisconsin myself, I think
that we can all acknowledge that that probably trumps
everything.
But one of the big knocks against biofuels in the early
days had to do with the fact that it was unclear that things
like corn ethanol were even carbon neutral. And there at the
time were very large fossil fuel inputs to making, well, corn
ethanol, for example. And so the two big things that have been
talked about to eliminate those are the ability to eliminate
ammonia fertilizer, and there are various biological approaches
to that. I think Pivot Bio and some other companies are
actually--and so I was wondering if you could sort of give a
quick status report on that.
The other thing that seemed promising is there's a company
called ClearFlame I think that apparently has cracked the code
on how to make diesel engines work with full thermodynamic
efficiency and very low soot emissions using, for example, corn
ethanol, methanol, or a variety of other. So apparently that,
you know, required some bright new ideas from a startup that's
just gotten a lot of follow-on funding. They're driving trucks
around with corn ethanol at full thermodynamic efficiency.
And so I was wondering what you think the promising ways
are--you know, how far along are we, and what is the promising
road ahead for further reducing the carbon footprint used to
produce biofuels? Dr. Male, do you want to have a shot at that?
Dr. Male. Yes. Thank you for bringing up that topic. There
has been a lot of progress in introducing sustainable practices
or best land management practices and utilization of lignin and
other practice and going toward extracting corn oils and
extracting fiber that have driven down--or, sorry, increased
the greenhouse gas reductions. You've seen them march from a 20
percent reduction initially for corn ethanol to when you have
other processes on the site going to around 45 percent.
You're right about there are different ways of utilizing
organic fertilizer. There's a terrific opportunity that DOE and
USDA are looking at, and there's a lot of science that is
needed to look at the interaction of fertilizer, the soil
bacteria communities, the root system of plants, and the
interaction between those and the species and the transports
and keeping it on the field. Farmers pay for their fertilizer.
They do not want it leaving the field, and so there are
opportunities where you can use energy crops or perennials with
a deeper root system perhaps on the drainage from your field or
the edge of your field so that you keep your fertilizer in the
field while preventing your fertilizer from going into streams
that can then go downstream and effect, well, organisms like
microalgae to give you a harmful algal bloom.
Mr. Foster. Yes. Dr. Leakey, did you have any comments on--
--
Dr. Leakey. Yes, I could certainly contribute to that
conversation. So within CABBI, reducing the greenhouse gas
emissions in the form of nitrous oxide and maximizing the
efficiency with which plants use nitrogen in the soil is of
strong interest. As with a number of other aspects of this
problem, I think it's best addressed with next-generation
bioenergy feedstocks. And our team is working on that in a
variety of ways.
Actually having feedstocks which are perennial themselves
is exceedingly valuable because they recycle the nutrients from
1 year to the next. And similar to what Dr. Male just
mentioned, our theme is also really actively working on
understanding how microbial partners in the soil and in some
cases the chemicals released from the roots of these crops
influence that cycling of nitrogen and how we can manage them
optimally to retain most of that nitrogen in the plant.
And then last but not least we can actually engineer the
plants themselves to try to use the nitrogen more efficiently.
So there's a number of strands of research on the topic.
Mr. Foster. Now, do you anticipate that within a small
number of decades we'll be able to essentially eliminate the
need for ammonia-based fertilizer? Is that a realistic hope?
Dr. Leakey. I think we can realistically hope to
substantially reduce its use. Whether we get to a total
elimination or not is hard to say.
Mr. Foster. All right. Thank you. My time is up and yield
back.
Mr. Casten. Thank you to all of our witnesses. Before I
bring the hearing to a close, well, I'd like to thank all of
our witnesses for testifying today. I have a statement for the
record from the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, which I
would move to be incorporated into the record. So ordered.
The record will remain open for 2 weeks for additional
statements from the Members and for any additional questions
that the Committee may ask of the witnesses. The witnesses are
excused, and the hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Jonathan Male

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Sean Casten

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
