- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-85] OUTSIDE VIEWS ON BIODEFENSE FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-85]

OUTSIDE VIEWS ON BIODEFENSE FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

FEBRUARY 3, 2016

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

98-913                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

JOE WILSON, South Carolina, Chairman

JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona, Vice Chair    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   PETE AGUILAR, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
Katie Sutton, Professional Staff Member
Lindsay Kavanaugh, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Wilson, Hon. Joe, a Representative from South Carolina, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities..............     1

WITNESSES

Parker, Dr. Gerald W., Jr., D.V.M., Ph.D., Blue Ribbon Study
Panel on Biodefense Panel Ex Officio Member....................     3
Wainstein, Hon. Kenneth L., Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense
Panel Member...................................................     2

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Wainstein, Hon. Kenneth L., joint with Dr. Gerald W. Parker,
Jr.........................................................    20
Wilson, Hon. Joe.............................................    19

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Wilson...................................................    39

OUTSIDE VIEWS ON BIODEFENSE FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, February 3, 2016.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:31 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Wilson
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE WILSON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
SOUTH CAROLINA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES

Mr. Wilson. Ladies and gentlemen, I call this hearing of
the Emerging Threats and Capabilities Subcommittee of the House
Armed Services Committee to order. I am pleased to welcome
everyone here today for today's hearing on outside views of
biodefense for the Department of Defense [DOD]. This hearing
will provide an overview of the findings and recommendations
from the recent bipartisan report of the Blue Ribbon Study
Panel on Biodefense.
It is critical that the United States maintain a dynamic
national defense against the growing threat posed by biological
weapons and naturally occurring diseases. The Department of
Defense plays a large role in the U.S. biodefense enterprise,
contributing biodetection tools, medical countermeasures and
protection, and decontamination technologies. The recent
response to the Ebola outbreak illustrates the importance of
the Department of Defense's biodefense contributions to broader
government and global efforts.
This hearing is especially timely in preparing for our
subcommittee hearing next week with the Department of Defense
on countering weapons of mass destruction policy and programs
for the fiscal year 2017. The findings and recommendations
discussed today will be important aspects of our review of the
fiscal year 2017 Department of Defense biodefense enterprise.
Our witnesses before us today are the Honorable Ken
Wainstein. He is the Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense
panel member. Additionally, Dr. Gerald Parker, the Blue Ribbon
Study Panel on Biodefense Panel ex officio member.
I would like now to turn, but he is not here, to Mr. Jim
Langevin, but Lindsay has assured us that he will be here soon,
and we will proceed. And so we would like to begin right this
moment. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson can be found in the
Appendix on page 19.]

STATEMENT OF HON. KENNETH L. WAINSTEIN, BLUE RIBBON STUDY PANEL
ON BIODEFENSE PANEL MEMBER

Mr. Wainstein. Thank you very much, Chairman Wilson. It is
a real pleasure to be here today on behalf of the Blue Ribbon
Study Panel on Biodefense and to represent our co-chairs,
Governor Tom Ridge and Senator Joe Lieberman, as well as the
rest of our colleagues who worked with us on the Study Panel.
As you mentioned, last October we released our bipartisan
report in which we provided an assessment of our national
biodefense, and offered 33 recommendations that we believe will
improve our ability to defend against biological threats of all
types--against those that are intentionally and maliciously
introduced, against those that are naturally occurring, and
also against those that result from accidental release.
Before highlighting a couple of these recommendations, I
would like to briefly discuss the biological threat that we
currently face. I will start with the anthrax attacks of 2001.
We don't need to remind you up here on Capitol Hill about
those attacks and about how they were a tragic wakeup call to
the Nation about the possible consequences of deadly biological
agents falling into the wrong hands.
As tragic as those attacks were, however, there is good
reason to believe that future attacks could be much more
devastating. For one, we know that are there are stockpiles of
biological weapons throughout the world that may now be or may
become accessible to our enemies. When the U.S. discontinued
its offensive biological weapons program in 1969, other
nations, including the former Soviet Union, continued to
produce stockpiles of biological agents, stockpiles that
represent an appealing opportunity for rogue nations and those
terrorist groups, like ISIS [Islamic State in Iraq and Syria],
that are intent on inflicting the maximum possible damage
against our Nation and against our people.
As we on the panel heard from a number of experts who
appeared before us, including former Senator Jim Talent, former
Representative Mike Rogers, and others, our enemies are
currently taking specific steps to develop, or to procure,
biological weapons for use against us. Intelligence indicates
that they are actively trying to recruit scientific experts;
they are seeking control of laboratory, manufacturing, and
other infrastructure for biological weapon production and
development; they are talking about how best to deploy
biological weapons; and they are making concrete plans for the
use of these weapons.
In light of this information, we believe that it is not a
matter of if, but rather when and how soon a biological attack
will be launched against our Nation, our people, or our allies;
and the fundamental question is whether we are equipped and
prepared to handle this imminent threat. And sadly, our panel
found that the answer to that question is no. Despite a number
of important strides taken in the past 14 years since the
anthrax attacks, we have failed to develop the coordinated and
comprehensive biodefense that is necessary to meet and defeat
this threat.
To address this failing, our panel made 33 recommendations
that we believe will improve our Nation's overall ability to
prevent, deter, detect, respond to, recover from, and mitigate
biological threats. And if I may, I would like to highlight
just a couple of those recommendations.
First, recognizing that leadership is the key to success
for any such effort, our initial recommendation is that the
White House take point in coordinating the national biodefense,
and specifically that the Vice President take charge of that
effort; that he establish and operate through a Biodefense
Coordination Council comprised of representatives of the
responsible agencies, and that as a first step he and the
Coordination Council jointly develop a national biodefense
strategy to replace the current piecemeal strategies,
directives, and policies with a comprehensive strategy that
contains both the overarching vision and the specific policy
and operational objectives that are necessary to drive the
construction of a viable national biodefense.
In conjunction with this and the other recommendations that
are directed primarily to the executive branch and its State,
local, tribal, and corporate partners, we also recommend that
Congress take steps to contribute to this effort. Specifically,
we recommend that Congress follow the lead of this committee
and enhance the level and the intensity of its oversight in the
biodefense area.
Progress in this biodefense area will require strong
encouragement and strong oversight from Congress. And while we
applaud this committee for taking the step of having this
hearing, we recognize that it is only a first step; a first
step of what will be a long-term national effort to build an
effective and enduring defense system to protect against the
biological threat.
It is important to remember that after the terrorist
attacks of
9/11, 2001, we succeeded in doing exactly that, and we built a
defense system that has largely protected us against the more
general traditional terrorist threat. With commitment and with
support from both the executive and legislative branches, I am
confident that we can do that again, that we can build a
defense system that will protect us against the specific threat
of biological attack and infection.
I want to thank you, sir, for holding this very important
hearing and for having me here today, and I look forward to any
questions that you may have.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Wainstein and Dr.
Parker can be found in the Appendix on page 20.]
Mr. Wilson. And, Mr. Wainstein, thank you very much. And it
is ironic that you would reference anthrax. I was elected in a
special election right at that time, December 2001. What an
introduction to Washington.
Dr. Parker.

STATEMENT OF DR. GERALD W. PARKER, JR., D.V.M., PH.D., BLUE
RIBBON STUDY PANEL ON BIODEFENSE PANEL EX OFFICIO MEMBER

Dr. Parker. Good afternoon, Chairman Wilson, Ranking Member
Langevin, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
invitation to appear before you today. It is an honor to be
here with Honorable Ken Wainstein representing the Biodefense
Blue Ribbon Panel.
Mr. Wainstein covered the threat and the need for a
biodefense strategy. For my part, I would like to bring a few
programmatic issues to your attention.
As a retired member of the Armed Forces, I spent many years
working to protect the Nation, our soldiers, and their
families. I am proud to tell you that the Department of Defense
institutions, such as USAMRID [U.S. Army Medical Research
Institute of Infectious Diseases], which I once commanded,
contribute significantly to U.S. biodefense alone and in
concert with our civilian and international partners. These
organizations have dedicated scientists, they conduct cutting-
edge research, they discover new countermeasures, and they
provide science-based knowledge to operations. In summary, they
are the go-to scientists to counter biothreats for the DOD.
While this is commendable, it does not mean that these
human institutions are infallible, as has been recently seen in
both military and civilian labs in the DOD and HHS [U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services]. They have made
mistakes, and if left uncorrected will contribute to the
Nation's biological risk.
The recent laboratory safety and security breaches at
Dugway illustrate this point. As you know, despite following
protocols, viable anthrax spores were inadvertently sent to
other labs over an extended period of time. As it turns out,
there is an incomplete scientific understanding of the
inactivation process, there are no standardized protocols for
inactivation, and the checks that Dugway had in place were
insufficient.
It is important to note that DOD's risk assessment
concluded that this incident posed little risk to public
health; but we must assume that without continued focus on
smart improvements in biosecurity and biosafety, this will
happen again somewhere in the Nation's laboratory network with
a worse outcome. We cannot afford institutional failures.
One of the basic tenets of DOD is that we must protect the
warfighter. No other agency can do that for DOD. This is a top
priority. In the case of biodefense, it means addressing a
number of vulnerabilities.
Military personnel are the most likely to be exposed to
infectious disease threats, some which the world has never seen
before, and some which do not have any treatments. Ebola is a
good example of this, but there are worse examples. This means
that we have to protect our soldiers. We need trained and
equipped medical teams with logistical support ready to respond
to outbreaks or bioterror attack. We have to have rapid
diagnostics, effective biodetection, as well as global
biosituational awareness.
These and other issues drive a number of DOD programs, to
include the Chemical and Biological Defense Program, the
Military Infectious Disease Program, the Cooperative Bio
Engagement Program, GEIS [Global Emerging Infections
Surveillance and Response System], DARPA [Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency], and others, who have broadly
followed either AT&L [Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics],
Health Affairs, and OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense].
I want to emphasize there are many hardworking, dedicated
professionals working in these programs, but we need to better
prepare for the eventual use of biological weapons. We believe
that DOD needs to clarify parameters for military support to
civilian authorities in response to a domestic biological
attack, update and implement military biodefense doctrine,
hopefully tiered to a new national strategy as recommended by
the panel.
Let me provide one programmatic example of the need to
include military-civilian collaboration. There is a
longstanding need for effective biodetectors on and off the
battlefield. Mr. Langevin and others that serve on the House
Committee on Homeland Security are well aware of the DHS
[Department of Homeland Security] experience with BioWatch, a
biodetection system that a number of experts believe is
insufficient to the needs of the Nation. DOD also has a
separate biodetection program and it's had one for years. And
although DOD and DHS are communicating better than ever on
these programs, this is just an example where we need an
integrated program, in this case biodetection, driven by strong
centralized leadership, guided by a national biodefense
strategy, that we can field effective and affordable solutions
in a timely manner for our soldiers and citizens.
DOD and the interagency face a number of other challenges.
These include the need to establish effective BW [biological
weapons] intelligence, authoritative microbial forensics and
attribution, and decontamination and remediation.
I can go into detail about these later, but before closing
I would like to add that the lines between BW and infectious
diseases have blurred, and DOD's positive contributions to
global health security through our OCONUS [outside the
contiguous United States] laboratories, our global
biosurveillance programs, and cooperative bioengagement cannot
be overstated.
In closing, I would like to thank the members of the
subcommittee again for this opportunity to appear before you
today. Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Dr. Parker and Mr.
Wainstein can be found in the Appendix on page 20.]
Mr. Wilson. I thank both of you. And we are going to begin
now. And Katie Sutton is going to maintain a strict 5-minute
rule for all persons, including me, on questions.
And so right away, one of the recommendations, Mr.
Wainstein, of the report is to improve the intelligence
community efforts to address the biological threat. Can you
further elaborate on the specific measures that could be taken
to indeed achieve better estimates of biological threats?
And then, specifically, you had indicated that scientists
were recruited, that their facilities could be used. A concern
that I have had is a major city in Iraq, being Mosul, that with
the capture by ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant],
that there would be hospitals, there would be medical
facilities, there would be universities that might have the
facilities that could facilitate the development of weapons to
attack the American people.
Mr. Wainstein. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I think you have put your
finger on one of the big risks here.
Look, the bio threat has always been one that has caused
people in the government to lie awake and worry about at night,
and especially since the anthrax attacks.
But I think what is new now is what you just identified,
which is the primary adversary, it used to be Al Qaeda, we were
concerned about Al Qaeda generating weaponized anthrax,
probably in caves or in pretty primitive facilities. We now
have ISIS that is infinitely better funded, infinitely better
resourced, more people of all types, not just fighters, but
people of educational backgrounds, scientists and the like.
And, as you indicated, they have facilities, they have the
footprint where they can put together a program like this and
have the continuity and the protection to do that, but they
also have hospitals and labs and that kind of thing right there
in their territory.
So the threat, I think, has always been there, and we have
heard about it from a number of different commissions and
panels. But this, I think, it is a new threat, a newly enhanced
threat.
In terms of the intelligence and what the intelligence
community can do, look, this was an unclassified exercise, we
didn't get a classified briefing from the intelligence
community, but we did learn about sort of the general state of
intelligence. And it is clear to us that the intelligence
community would be doing a much better job if they were linked
in with a more centralized, coordinated, all-of-government
effort. Then their requirements and their intelligence
collection can be more focused in order to enhance the overall
effort to identify the bio threat, think of best ways of
dealing with it, and then taking those steps.
So I think that the intelligence community is going to be a
major player in this, what we present as a potential overhaul
of the biodefense bureaucracy, and it is going to require some
direction from the top.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you again for your efforts bringing
this to the attention of the American people, both of you.
In the report, the panel noted that work dealing with cyber
threats to pathogen security is nascent and that the United
States is not yet well positioned to address cyber threats that
affect the biological science and technology sectors. Could you
further describe the cyber threat identified by the panel? What
role could the Department of Defense play in responding to this
biological security cyber threat?
Dr. Parker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will try to address
that for you.
We are in the age of biology, and biology is all about
information, from the genetics, the proteomics, and so forth,
as well as our medical records. And so it is all about
information. And much of our information now, it is all
digital. And we are also in the era of synthetic biology where
in the not too distant future new and dangerous pathogens can
actually be synthesized.
So the ability to protect this information and make sure
the information does not get misused is actually a very
critical step. And I believe there are things being put in
place to help protect that information, but I think this is an
area that is going to require increasing focus as we move
forward so that this information doesn't get hacked and
misused.
Mr. Wilson. And has there been proper public-private
cooperation, including universities, with the government to
address this?
Dr. Parker. I think it is still, I would say, a work in
progress to begin to address how we make sure and protect. And
it is a dual-edged sword. On the one hand, we have to be able
to share information to collaborate for solutions, but on the
other hand, we have to make sure that we can protect the
information so it is not being used for nefarious purposes by
bad people.
So we do have to be able to work it both ways, but it is a
work in progress. And I think more attention will need to be
put in place here so that we can have the appropriate security,
but also be able to share in the scientific discoveries and
work that needs to take place in collaboration across that
space that you mentioned.
Mr. Wilson. Well, with both of you, we look forward to
working with you in the future.
I now shift to Congressman Pete Aguilar of California.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, gentlemen. I appreciate the report
and the work that you are doing.
Dr. Parker, you touched on this a little bit, and the
chairman mentioned it, the coordination between DHS and DOD.
Can you talk a little bit about that and the role within the
biomedical advanced research groups and DOD as well, what more
we can do to foster that? The chairman mentioned obviously the
potential to have events abroad and here nationally as well. I
represent the city of San Bernardino where the incident was
last month, and obviously it could have gone a different way.
And so making sure that the coordination between local law
enforcement agencies also exists within a DHS interface or DOD
interface is something that I think our communities also want
to see us take serious.
Dr. Parker. Thanks for the question, and absolutely. I
think you know I spent a lot of my career in government and was
a major proponent, cheerleader, whatever word, for interagency
coordination. And there are a lot of people working very hard
at trying to drive interagency collaboration and communication,
and I would say they are doing a good job. But on the other
hand, we can do better.
And it really comes back to the central tenet of the
findings of the report that the need for having strong
centralized leadership, driven by a solid strategy, and then
tied to the budget, and department, agency accountability, with
clear leads and supporting roles identified, timelines,
metrics, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. It really comes down
to that leadership and strategy is going to be necessary to
improve our collaborative interactions across the departments
and agencies.
People are working, they are trying to work very closely
together, but sometimes process can be more important than the
outcome. And the only way to get above that, again, strong
leadership, strategy, accountability, tied to the budget, and
somebody willing to make some hard decisions. But I do not want
to give you the impression that people aren't working hard to
collaborate and communicate, because they are.
Mr. Aguilar. No, no, absolutely, and we wouldn't indicate
that. But areas, specific ways that we can use the committee
and use the work that we are doing to highlight those positive
examples as well as areas of deficiency where we can continue
to improve, I think is important.
Dr. Parker. And I think this is also critical too, because
in the report we are not recommending increases in the budget,
but it really comes down to how can we best use the budget
available.
Mr. Aguilar. Sure.
Dr. Parker. And it comes down, again, to that leadership,
accountability, and the strategy to enhance that collaboration
across the interagency space.
Mr. Aguilar. Mr. Wainstein, anything to add?
Mr. Wainstein. No, thank you.
Mr. Aguilar. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman.
We now proceed to Congresswoman Elise Stefanik of New York.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Dr.
Parker, for your testimony. Mr. Wainstein, good to see you
again. You and I served in the White House together.
Mr. Wainstein. Great to see you.
Ms. Stefanik. I am excited to be able to connect with you.
I wanted to talk about the report's comments on the rapid
development and employment of developmental Ebola vaccines,
which was, quote, ``a remarkable achievement.'' But the report
also noted that the general medical countermeasurement
development is very risk averse and is not focused on
innovation. Can you talk about what some of the lessons learned
from the development of the Ebola vaccination and how we can
improve how our MCM [medical countermeasures] development, how
we can improve that?
Dr. Parker. Yes. First, like the report says, medical
countermeasures development, acquisition, procurement, it is
really hard. There is risk for everybody involved. It is hard
for the government, it is hard for industry.
I will say, echo as it was reported, it was an amazing
achievement, how the Federal Government, industry surged to try
to produce an Ebola vaccine very quickly. But we still don't
have an Ebola vaccine.
What is really critical is what we do between outbreaks,
between attacks. If we don't have something available in the
stockpile or soon to be licensed, it is going to be very hard
to have it and surge.
I think that is really one of the big lessons with the
Ebola outbreak. What is critical is between epidemics, not in a
crisis situation. And it comes back, then, to leadership,
strategy, and accountability; then down at the lower level on
what can we do to improve our medical countermeasure
development.
We have got to be willing to take risk in that in between
outbreaks. We have got to bring more innovation to that. Tried
and true past technologies aren't going to necessarily work. We
have to also think about the regulatory pathways, how can we
improve that. And the FDA [Food and Drug Administration] is
thinking about those things.
Ms. Stefanik. So are increased public-private partnerships
a way we can improve that? How can we better employ public-
private partnerships?
Dr. Parker. Well, I think they are key, because there is no
way that government alone can do this, there is no way industry
can do this. This is a space that, just like tropical neglected
diseases, biodefense, there is no commercial market, or very
little commercial market. So that public-private partnership is
going to be key.
Some of the things I would say actually that DOD does
pretty well is has a little bit more transparency in what their
requirements are and what the 5-year planning budget cycle
looks like. So a little bit more transparency in what the needs
are, what the requirements is kind of critical. Reducing some
of the bureaucratic decisionmaking delays is very critical,
particularly for industry. The panel heard that a lot from
industry during our look at this.
Even in DOD, the Federal acquisition contracting, is not
best business practices for the small companies. We are not
talking about large pharmaceutical companies that are part of
the biodefense space. It is primarily small biotechnology
companies that are having a difficult time surviving. And many
of the Federal acquisition contracting is not conducive to that
industry best practices.
I would applaud DOD. Recently, particularly the Joint
Program Executive Office, has announced an intention to use
more use of other transactional authorities. That is a move in
the right direction.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Wainstein, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Wainstein. No, thanks. He covered it.
Ms. Stefanik. Great.
Well, I have 1 minute left. Can you elaborate on possible
incentives that could be used to improve public-private
partnerships? So we understand this is a way to bring
innovation to the table, but what specific incentives should we
put into place?
Dr. Parker. Well, there are a number of, I think,
incentives that the panel heard during our study. And since I
am not from industry, I am academia now, I may not be the best
to actually get down in the details of specific incentives that
would be good for industry.
But I think the point is, what we recommend in this, is
that we really need to have industry and government come
together and really talk about what works. And industry will no
doubt come up with a pretty good list. And there is no doubt
that some of those may not work for government. But on the
other hand, government is going to have to be a little bit more
open than they have in the past and actually not just listen,
but do something about it.
So I think the real key thing I think that we captured
pretty well in this report is the need to really identify those
with the public and private partners, talk about what is
practical and can be done, and begin to implement. And there
has been discussion about it before, but nothing has been
implemented, or very little.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We now proceed to Congressman Brad Ashford of Nebraska.
Mr. Ashford. Thank you.
Doctor, thank you, and thanks for the report.
We at the University of Nebraska have engaged in--and I
know you are aware of this--a number of initiatives, starting
with Dr. Phil Smith a few years--well, 10 or 12 years ago--in
some of his initiatives that have evolved into the Ebola
facility at UNMC [University of Nebraska Medical Center]. And
there is great hope that they can expand that facility further
to provide training and other, obviously not only for Ebola,
but for the whole grouping of threats here.
And again, I thought Congresswoman Stefanik's point is well
taken, is that facility and that initiative at UNMC is a
public-private partnership as well. And so the kind of training
that would go on there, and I know your report reflects this,
is not only would be training healthcare professionals,
training others that are going to be engaging in these threats.
How would you see that training regimen working? And I know
you have mentioned it in the report, but if you could just
elaborate on it.
Dr. Parker. Well, first, thank you for the contribution by
the University of Nebraska, outstanding professionals that
really stood up to the task when the Nation needed them very
badly. So thank you for that.
And it really is that training education. We really need to
go back to the basics. And I think back, actually, after the
anthrax letter attacks that we have already talked about here
early on, a lot of the programs, particularly, say, the
hospital preparedness, the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention] public health preparedness grant programs that
really expanded after 9/11 really focused a whole lot of effort
on infection control, the medical management of biological
casualties, some of the basics that were really needed across
this country so that we could do that.
I think somewhere in that intervening time, 2005, 2006, we
began to lose that edge, and I think that is apparent in the
Ebola outbreak.
Mr. Ashford. There seems to be such a--your report reflects
this--but such a revival in this comprehensive approach now. It
is not just about reacting, obviously, but it is being very
proactive, and it is a very welcome report.
I hesitate to mention to the chairman that in Nebraska--not
everything happens in South Carolina, I don't want to make
light of that--but, I mean, we have certain--we love South
Carolina, but--thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Parker. But I would say, just to follow on, we have
only made recommendations.
Mr. Ashford. Right. No, I understand. But had that
roadmap----
Dr. Parker. These recommendations need to be implemented
and acted upon so that we can correct some of the deficiencies
that I think are apparent in the system now.
Mr. Ashford. And what is interesting about the effort, I
think, not only at UNMC, but certainly Emory and other
institutions around the country, is these institutions do stand
ready to make the investment in plant and equipment to move
forward.
So thank you very much. It is a great report.
Dr. Parker. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman. And, hey,
from a South Carolina perspective, we really appreciate
Nebraska. You are a hearty people to live where you live.
And, hey, talk about hearty people, it is really tough, San
Diego. Congressman Duncan Hunter from California.
Mr. Duncan. Also in the South.
Mr. Wilson. Yes, yes.
Mr. Duncan. Southern California.
I just want to piggyback on Ms. Stefanik's question. You
didn't really answer. What are the actual incentives? Besides
saying transparency and let's get together and sing Kumbaya,
what are the actual incentives to keep private companies with
stockpiles or to keep them ahead of the whole curve in the
first place? What is DOD doing, with the FDA, for instance, to
say, hey, we are going to add you to the, what is it, the
priority voucher program, like we added Ebola to last year,
what are we going to do to add anything else that our service
members face overseas with the FDA and DOD so that industry is
ahead of it and not playing catch-up when bad things happen?
Dr. Parker. Well, I think actually I go back to perhaps
what the panel actually concluded, that maybe the most
important incentive goes back to the original Project BioShield
in 2004, that having that appropriation up front so that
industry knew that there was going to be a market for the
countermeasures that were going to be developed, that is
probably the single most valuable incentive.
Mr. Hunter. And then DOD says, hey, we are going to focus
in these three areas, for instance, and that is where the
appropriation is going to go towards, we are going to go
towards that?
Dr. Parker. Well, I guess, Project BioShield, that is
focused on HHS and DHS and the relationship of who does the
threat determinations, who works on the countermeasure
development against those threats.
DOD doesn't have a similar appropriation like that, but at
least DOD has 5-year budgeting plans, that short of an
appropriation up front, that 5-year budgeting plan for DOD is
pretty solid and does give industry an idea of what is going to
come. Of course, those budgets can change every year, again----
Mr. Duncan. How do you know what to stockpile or what you
need private industry to do when you don't know what the bad
guys may have or what they may use?
Dr. Parker. In the old days, I would say the Cold War,
post-Cold War era, it was much easier. There was a list of and
the intelligence had a list of potential pathogens, and they
have been codified in the CDC list. And so that could be
anthrax, smallpox, plague, the hemorrhagic fever viruses,
botulinum neurotoxins.
Those are traditional BW threats. We still need to be
worried about those. There is a reason why we need to have a
huge stockpile of antibiotics against anthrax. Anthrax is
special.
But actually you asked a very good question, because the
problem is getting harder. In fact, lists are really no more
applicable today, although we still need to pay attention to
those six I mentioned, but it is getting harder today in the
era of biotechnology, synthetic biology. It could be anything.
And so it is a challenge.
Again, go back to BW intelligence. We need to put more
emphasis on that. And in defense of the intelligence community,
it is a hard, hard problem. Bio in the WMD [weapons of mass
destruction] space is the hardest of the hard.
Mr. Duncan. I want to ask you this. So you know where we
have people at throughout the world. So I would just ask, is
there one, is there anything just screaming at you in the face
where you are like, we have people here and we are not prepared
for this?
Dr. Parker. Yes, there are certain areas. I would say on
the Korean Peninsula, I will give you an example, that we have
been--the DOD, in fact, has been working very hard with
counterparts in the Korean military and the CDC against some
pretty known thought to be high priority threats. And the
doctrine is evolving and should be different, because we need
to be worried about not only force-on-force military deployment
of biological weapons in a scenario like that, we need to be
concerned about covert use against not only the military, but
the civilian population.
So these are areas where we have not only a large number of
military forces, we also have strategic partnerships with our
allies that happen to be in very large population centers that
are living very close to a determined enemy.
Mr. Duncan. Let me ask this, you made me think of another
question, then. You talk about Korea, so I am guessing China
and Russia have the technological capability to be able to
develop different bad things to affect people. Do you have to
worry about that in places like Syria, where the lab might be
in someone's kitchen? I mean, it is not like they are high tech
compared to the North Koreans or the Russians or Chinese or
even the Pakistanis.
Dr. Parker. Well, I think, yes, the first question really
kind of got into that. These areas, the problem is very hard.
And these small clandestine labs, it would be very difficult
for our intelligence community to ever discover these.
Mr. Duncan. But they don't have the technology to be able
to make more sophisticated bad things either, do they? You
can't make that in a kitchen in Syria. It takes a lab.
Dr. Parker. You can make some BW pathogens that can cause
significant number of casualties in a relatively small
clandestine laboratory, and also get it in a condition that
would be relatively easy to disseminate. It is a serious
threat.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman. And thank you for
citing the threat to the concentrated population of Korea,
because actually what you are saying is the capital Seoul has a
population of nearly 20 million people, very compact, very much
at risk.
Congressman Pete Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Just one more question, gentlemen, since we
have you and I get one more bite at the apple. And, Dr. Parker,
you talked about leadership. And could you just describe to me
the discussion and the decision by the panel to
institutionalize and empower the Vice President as the kind of
point of contact and the focal point within the report?
Dr. Parker. Yes. I will start. Ken probably has some
observations as well due to his White House experience.
It became pretty clear early on that leadership was an
issue, it was a factor, and the need to somehow instill,
inculcate stronger leadership. So the panel actually looked at
various options, to include reinstituting the special advisor
for health security and biodefense, even actually had the three
previous special advisors testify before the committee. Looked
at that model. Looked at the so-called czar model. And several
other things were considered.
But it kept coming back to who has got really the ear of
the President, that also has the ability to make some hard
decisions, that can affect the budget, and who can really also
represent those outside of government the best, speak on their
behalf, and also encourage those outside government,
particularly State governments, local governments, and lead
efforts needed there as well. And it really kind of backed into
the decision that the position who is best suited to do that is
the Vice President.
Ken, do you want to----
Mr. Wainstein. Good question. And I concur with everything
Jerry just said. I mean, at first blush when you hear a panel
recommending that the Vice President should take on this one
sort of discrete area, you think, gosh, that is a little bit of
a bold proposal. But for all the reasons Jerry mentioned, I
thought it made sense. And I was the Homeland Security Advisor
the last year of President Bush's administration and obviously
my job was to ensure that there is coordination on major issues
and that we get progress and we get consensus and the like, and
that is tough to do with small issues, day-to-day issues;
incredibly difficult to do when you are trying to take the
bureaucracy and build something new, something much stronger
than what we have now.
And so my favorite reference is what the government did
after 9/11, and I think it is pretty much a success story. Not
absolute success, but the government really went through an
overhaul after 9/11 to meet the traditional terrorist threat
that we saw on 9/11, and it had been pretty successful with it.
But that took an enormous effort driven directly by the
President and obviously with Congress in lockstep.
This is a very serious threat. It is more discrete, it is
more focused, but it requires almost as many different actors
within the executive branch to work in concert. And our thought
was, gosh, we could have one department head sort of anointed
as the coordinator, but then you would have the same
bureaucratic tensions that you would always have when equals
are having to listen to--you know, there is one person
designated as higher than the others.
You could just have somebody in the National Security
Council, like we have had in the past. Bob Kadlec was the
person in the Homeland Security Council when I was there, very
effective, but probably not enough to really get across the
goal line.
So we thought, look, the Vice President has taken these
kind of tasks on before, this Vice President has taken on these
kind of tasks, and this is one that really warrants it, given
the threat. So we thought, look, we will put that out there.
And I know the chairs have had meetings with the White House
about this. And I think people are intrigued.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you very much, Congressman.
And I would like to thank both of you for being here this
afternoon. And Congressman Langevin, the ranking member, sends
his regrets. We are imminent to voting and he is close to the
floor. But I am very grateful for the work of Ms. Sutton, Ms.
Kavanaugh. And we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

February 3, 2016

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 3, 2016

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

February 3, 2016

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. The report discusses the importance of ``building upon
defense support to civil authorities.'' The panel found that ``U.S.
warfighter preparedness for and protection against biological attacks
is inadequate'' and that the ``current military biodefense doctrine and
policy falls short of adequately protecting the warfighter and ensuring
that military operations continue unimpeded.'' Can you describe the
information that the panel gathered to reach this conclusion? What
specific shortcomings need to be addressed to improve warfighter
preparedness and protection against biological attacks?
Mr. Wainstein and Dr. Parker. The Panel gathered information to
support these conclusions from subject matter experts, including Dr.
George Poste (one of our ex officios) and others who spoke at our major
meetings held on December 4, 2014; January 14, 2015; March 12, 2015;
and April 2, 2015. Please see Appendix C of our bipartisan report, A
National Blueprint for Biodefense: Leadership and Major Reform Needed
to Optimize Efforts for meeting agendas and speaker names. A number of
open source documents also support our conclusions regarding the
characteristics of personal protective equipment (also referred to as
protective overgarments), medical countermeasures, detectors, and
surveillance systems, as well as doctrine and policy that would lead to
the likely exposure of military personnel to biological weapons before
they were able to don protective equipment/garments and take other
protective actions during attacks. The Department of Defense also
freely describes and admits to difficulties in preparing warfighters to
execute combat operations in biologically contaminated environments.
The Department clearly communicates its concerns regarding biological
(and other) weapons of mass destruction threats and uses those concerns
to justify funding for its research and development programs (e.g.,
those that produce and improve upon medical countermeasures, protective
overgarments and equipment, detectors, surveillance systems).
Specifically, although their biodefense laboratories appear to be doing
exemplary work in the science and technology discovery phase, the lack
of progress on biodefense vaccine development (where some vaccine
candidates have languished in advanced development for close to 15
years) is not encouraging and serves as an example of the inability to
improve readiness through the use of preventive vaccines. To improve
warfighter operational preparedness, the Panel recommends that the
military go beyond using smoke and other non-biological visually
obvious 2 substitutes and find ways to realistically simulate the use
of biological agents in training environments. Additionally, the Panel
recommends that the military require its personnel to do more than wear
protective overgarments and work in areas thought to have sufficient
protections against these agents for hours on end, as this sort of
training only tests warfighter ability to withstand such conditions and
not the ability to prevent infection. To improve protection against
biological attacks, the Panel supports ongoing military research
efforts (particularly those conducted by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency and the National Laboratories on behalf of the
Department of Defense) to improve materials used in overgarments and
equipment, all military biodefense efforts, and the military-civilian
exchange of relevant information. The Panel also supports similar
efforts made by civilian public and private sector agencies, but notes
that needed exchange of information does not occur automatically. While
both military and civilian sectors would benefit from information
exchange, the Department of Defense must necessarily take the lead and
initiate such exchanges for the benefit of its warfighters.
Mr. Wilson. The Department of Defense played a large role in the
U.S. Government response to the Ebola crisis. What do you think is an
appropriate role for the Department of Defense to play in responding to
global epidemics, such as Ebola? Are there aspects of the response that
would be more appropriate for other parts of government? What role
would you recommend the Department of Defense play in response to the
recent Zika virus outbreak?
Mr. Wainstein and Dr. Parker. The Department of Defense often
provides humanitarian aid during domestic and international crises that
exceed the ability of the civilian sector to respond effectively. For
example, during the recent Ebola crisis, the Department of Defense
provided the United States Agency for International Development efforts
with logistics, engineering, and training support. The Department of
Defense also undertakes a number of other activities that not only
support the warfighter but also support broader U.S. governmental
responses. For example, the National Center for Medical Intelligence
gathers epidemiological, biostatistical, health care, and public health
infrastructure data and information to characterize environments to
which warfighters deploy, and shares this information. The Department
of Defense also sometimes shares with civilian agencies information
produced by its laboratories, surveillance systems, and intelligence
activities throughout the world. In addition, the Department of Defense
supports the Global Health Security Agenda through the Global Emerging
Infectious Disease Surveillance and Response System and the Department
of Defense Overseas Research Laboratories. These unique laboratories
directly and indirectly support deployed forces and contribute to
medical and public health diplomacy in support of U.S. foreign policy
and national security objectives. These are all appropriate activities.
The Department of Defense Chemical and Biological Defense Program
develops medical countermeasures to protect military forces facing
biological threats. While the Panel believes it is within Department of
Defense purview to develop medical countermeasures for its own
personnel, we note that its civilian counterpart (i.e., the Department
of Health and Human Services Biomedical Advanced Research and
Development Authority, BARDA) often works on similar medical
countermeasures for non-military purposes. While the Public Health
Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise (an interagency
coordinating body) exists and the Department of Defense is a member,
the Panel does not believe that these two agencies coordinate optimally
to cover gaps, avoid redundant efforts, and aggressively accelerate
development efforts between outbreaks. This became clear in 2014 when
in response to the global crisis, BARDA announced it would fund the
development of Ebola vaccines. This surprised the Department of
Defense, which had been working on vaccines for some time without
knowing that BARDA was interested in producing Ebola vaccine for
civilian purposes. This situation occurred because there is no leader
who stands above the departments and agencies, maintains awareness of
their activities, ensures the appropriate prioritization and execution
of a medical countermeasure strategy, and prevents redundant efforts. 4
In 2014, military personnel deployed to West Africa without the benefit
of Ebola vaccine or therapeutics. The lack of vaccine limited both
civilian and military responses and readiness. These biodefense
vulnerabilities place Department of Defense missions at risk. The
threats of biological weapons, as well as emerging and reemerging
infectious diseases, imperil force protection and force projection at
home and abroad. While the Department of Defense trains and equips its
forces to operate in radiologically contaminated environments, this is
far from the case for biologically contaminated environments, where
related training is inadequate and equipment is far less advanced.
Diseases that spread across the world quickly affect the United States.
It is, therefore, entirely appropriate to question the role of the
Department of Defense in both international and domestic response. The
Department's role in civil support lacks clarity and dedicated
resources. There is a mutual lack of understanding between the military
and civilian sectors and considerable suspicion regarding operational
capabilities. The Department of Defense must enunciate a technically
feasible and politically acceptable doctrine for biodefense activities
if it is to fulfill its primary responsibilities for force protection
and projection while planning for an inevitably expanded role in
domestic/homeland defense and global response during major biological
events. If the Department of Defense proactively takes needed steps to
develop a robust biodefense capability to protect its own assets, it
will be better able to meet broader civil support requirements. The
U.S. Government cannot deploy Department of Defense personnel and
assets each time a new disease emerges. Military involvement must be
limited to assisting with those diseases that impact national security
and take into consideration the current spread of military resources,
as well as the possibility that the military may need to move to defend
against enemy activity that poses a greater threat to the nation. In
the case of Zika response, the Panel believes that the role of the
Department of Defense should include many of the same activities it
executed during Ebola, with the exception of targeted deployments of
military personnel (due to the current spread and nature of the virus
and disease). As stated in Recommendation 33 of the Panel's report, the
nation and the world need a new global response apparatus based on
public-private partnerships, not solely on U.S. military resources and
capabilities.

[all]
