- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-107] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-107]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST

FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

NUCLEAR FORCES

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 2, 2016

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-651                  WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado, Vice Chair   LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               RICK LARSEN, Washington
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   JOHN GARAMENDI, California
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     PETE AGUILAR, California
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana
Drew Walter, Professional Staff Member
Leonor Tomero, Counsel
Mike Gancio, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Cooper, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Tennessee, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     2
Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1

WITNESSES

Benedict, VADM Terry, USN, Director, Navy Strategic Systems
Programs.......................................................     7
Hopkins, Arthur, Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs, U.S.
Department of Defense..........................................     4
Rand, Gen Robin, USAF, Commander, Air Force Global Strike Command     5
Scher, Hon. Robert, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy,
Plans, and Capabilities, U.S. Department of Defense............     2

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Benedict, VADM Terry.........................................    68
Hopkins, Arthur..............................................    40
Rand, Gen Robin..............................................    51
Rogers, Hon. Mike............................................    29
Scher, Hon. Robert...........................................    31

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Nuclear modernization spending charts........................    87
Quotes on prioritization of nuclear deterrence...............    91

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Coffman..................................................    95

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Coffman..................................................   105
Dr. Fleming..................................................   110
Mr. Garamendi................................................   106
Mr. Rogers...................................................    99

FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE NUCLEAR
FORCES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 2, 2016.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:03 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Rogers. Good afternoon. This hearing of the House Armed
Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces will come to order.
We welcome you to our hearing, which will be on the President's
fiscal year 2017 budget request for the Nation's nuclear
forces. We thank our witnesses for being here and for all the
time that they put into preparing for these hearings. I know it
is a taxing process, but it is very helpful to us.
We have with us today, as witnesses, the Honorable Robert
Scher, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and
Capabilities; Dr. Arthur Hopkins, who is performing the duties
of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical and
Biological Defense Programs; General Robin Rand, Commander, Air
Force Global Strike Command; and Vice Admiral Terry Benedict,
Director of the Navy's Strategic Systems Programs.
This is our third hearing on the budget request for fiscal
year 2017. At our first two hearings, we heard from your
partners over at the Department of Energy and from senior
leaders at STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic Command] and OSD [Office of
the Secretary of Defense]. As my colleague and friend from
Tennessee, Ranking Member Jim Cooper, said at both these
hearings, we have a strong bipartisan agreement that nuclear
deterrence is the Nation's number one priority defense mission,
and we must recapitalize our nuclear forces.
From the Secretary of Defense, to the service secretaries
and chiefs, to the key leaders here in Congress, we are all in
resounding agreement. Together, we know not only is this coming
nuclear modernization affordable, it is the highest priority,
and because it is our top priority, it will be robustly
supported and funded, even if it comes at the expense of other
capabilities.
This is a hard-won bipartisan consensus on defense
priorities, and in a tremendously difficult budget environment.
At the heart of this consensus is the collective understanding
that these programs are not optional, that they are, instead,
the foundation of U.S. security and international stability,
and now we have to get on with the nitty-gritty of actually
carrying out those programs.
The Air Force and the Navy must request the funding
necessary to manage the program well, while Congress must do
its part to authorize, appropriate, and oversee them. We will
scrub your requests hard, and press you equally hard to ensure
you are managing them for efficiency and success. Together, I
am confident we will ensure the U.S. nuclear deterrent remains
what Secretary Carter calls, quote, ``the bedrock of our
security and the foundation for everything we do,'' close
quote.
Thank you, again, to our witnesses. I look forward to our
discussion.
And with that, I would like to turn it to my friend and
colleague from Tennessee, the ranking member, Mr. Cooper, for
any opening statement he may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogers can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COOPER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM TENNESSEE,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, would like to
welcome the witnesses. And since you quoted me in your opening
statement, I can think of no better words to use than the ones
you did, and I am proud to be part of this rare, perhaps
unique, oasis of bipartisanship in the United States Congress.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
And now we will tell all the witnesses we will accept your
written statements for the record, without objection. And we
will recognize the witnesses to summarize their statements for
5 minutes each.
We will start with Secretary Scher. You are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT SCHER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR STRATEGY, PLANS, AND CAPABILITIES, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

Mr. Scher. Thank you, Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Cooper, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify on the President's fiscal
year 2017 budget request, as it relates to nuclear policy and
strategy.
While the administration's ultimate goal is a world without
nuclear weapons, the President has been consistent and clear in
his commitment to maintaining a safe, secure, and effective
nuclear arsenal for as long as nuclear weapons exist. Effective
deterrence remains best served by sustaining the nuclear triad
and dual-capable aircraft [DCA], with a diverse range of
nuclear explosive yields and delivery modes. The triad and DCA
provide the credibility, flexibility, and survivability to meet
and adapt to the challenges of a dynamic 21st century security
environment without the need to mirror every potential
adversary system-for-system and yield-for-yield. In addition to
positioning us to address threats as they emerge, this
approach, with its inherent flexibility, bolsters strategic
stability by decreasing incentives for a future arms race.
The President's nuclear sustainment and modernization plan
is also consistent with his nonproliferation and disarmament
objectives. It sustains a safe, secure, and effective nuclear
deterrent, assures allies that they don't need their own
nuclear arsenals, retains leverage for future arms control
agreements, and reduces the numbers and types of weapons.
The current stockpile is a dramatic departure from the Cold
War. We have reduced from 23 nuclear warhead types in 1990 to
12 types today, and the B61-12 bomb life extension program is
on track to allow us to reduce further to 6 warhead types by
the mid 2020s. The B61-12 will replace multiple existing
variants that have different explosive yields. It will have
lower yields than some of these variants, but will not expand
the range of yield options available in the current stockpile.
The B61-12 will have a measure of improved accuracy as well to
give it the same military capabilities as the higher-yield bomb
it replaces.
My written testimony, as you know, it goes into greater
detail on our modernization program and addresses the issues
raised in your invitation letter to testify, but I was asked to
focus, in particular, on the need for the long-range stand-off
missile, or the LRSO, to replace the aging air-launch cruise
missile, or ALCM, and so I will focus on that for the remainder
of my time today.
The administration's decision to field a modern ALCM
replacement is essential to maintaining the ALCM's unique
contribution to stable and effective deterrence. The current
system is already decades beyond its planned service life and
its viability will be challenged over the next decade by
advanced air defenses.
Cruise missiles provide capabilities that complement rather
than duplicate that of a stealth bomber. Stand-off capability
extends the effective range of our bomber fleet and complicates
the air defense problem facing any country seeking to negate
the air component of our deterrent. As air defense capabilities
continue to improve and proliferate, we cannot assume our
technological lead will forever ensure unchallenged U.S. bomber
operations over any target in any theater.
The ALCM provides an important contribution to the range of
credible options available to the President for responding to
nuclear attack. And because aircraft can be visibly deployed
and flown during a crisis, they provide a forceful reminder to
any adversary contemplating aggression that the risk it faces
is real. The ability to respond proportionately to a limited
nuclear attack strengthens our ability to deter such attacks in
the first place. This is critical in a world where we must not
only avoid unintended escalation, but also deter deliberate
nuclear escalation like that envisioned in Russia's current
strategy.
Retaining a diverse range of nuclear deterrence options
does not mean a lowered nuclear threshold or a higher
likelihood of U.S. nuclear use. Indeed, the United States has
long maintained a high threshold for nuclear use at the same
time that we possess a diverse range of nuclear forces and
response options.
The LRSO will contribute to strategic stability by
retaining a response option that does not pose a threat of a
disarming surprise attack against Russia or China. The process
of alerting strategic bombers is observable, and the aircraft
and the missiles must spend hours flying towards their targets.
Finally, the LRSO will utilize a refurbished version of the
current ALCM warhead. The number of refurbished warheads will
not exceed the current inventory of ALCM warheads, and is far
lower than the approximately 1,000 missile bodies needed to
support the deployed force and testing requirements over the
projected lifetime of the system.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the administration's
nuclear sustainment and modernization plan is necessary, and it
is affordable if prioritized appropriately by the Department,
Congress, and the Nation. Further delays to the program will
put the safety, security, and effectiveness of our nuclear
forces at significant and unacceptable risk. To be clear, our
choice is not between keeping our current forces or modernizing
them; rather, the choice is between modernizing those forces or
watching a slow and unaccepted degradation in our ability to
deter.
We look forward to this committee's continuing support of
our collective efforts to ensure the United States is able to
meet the security challenges we face today as well as those
ahead. Thank you, again, for the opportunity to testify, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scher can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Dr. Hopkins, you are recognized for 5 minutes to summarize
your statement.

STATEMENT OF ARTHUR HOPKINS, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR NUCLEAR, CHEMICAL, AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE PROGRAMS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Dr. Hopkins. Thank you. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Cooper, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for this opportunity to discuss the Department's 2017
budget request for nuclear deterrent systems.
In addition to serving as Principal Deputy Assistant for
Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense Programs, I am the
acting staff director for the Nuclear Weapons Council. The
Council provides an overarching coordinated vision and strategy
for the nuclear enterprise, including nuclear warheads and
delivery platforms. It synchronizes the Department of Defense
and Energy efforts to ensure a safe, secure, reliable, and
effective stockpile.
The Nation's nuclear forces are the Department's highest
priority. The nuclear mission continues to be fundamental to
our Nation's security strategy, and it ensures that we maintain
our extended deterrence commitments to our allies.
The Nuclear Weapons Council has developed a strategic plan
to integrate all three components of the nuclear enterprise:
warheads, platforms, and infrastructure. Portions of the plan
are underway, including production of the W76-1 refurbished
warhead and design engineering for the W88 warhead
modernization for the Navy's submarine-launched ballistic
missiles, as well as the B61-12 bomb life extension for both
strategic missions and extended deterrence.
In fiscal year 2017, the National Nuclear Security
Administration, NNSA, will continue to deliver W76-1 warheads
for the Navy's Trident II D-5 missiles, and will complete
production in 2019. The W88 warhead alteration effort, also for
the D-5 missile, is on schedule to deliver the first production
unit in December 2019. The B61-12 bomb life extension program
is also on schedule to deliver a first production unit in March
of 2020. The B61-12 will enable a reduction in the total
numbers and types of nuclear weapons in the stockpile.
Modernizing our nuclear delivery platforms is also
essential to nuclear deterrence. In fiscal year 2017, the
Defense Department plans to continue to fund several delivery
systems: first, the Ohio-class submarine replacement and its
Trident II D-5 life-extended missile; second, sustainment of
the Minuteman III intercontinental ballistic missile and its
follow-on capability, the ground-based strategic deterrent;
third, upgrades to the B-2 and the B-52H heavy bombers; fourth,
the development of a long-range strike bomber, the B-21; and
finally, the development of a long-range stand-off cruise
missile, the LRSO, to replace the aging air-launched cruise
missile. The LRSO will complement penetrating bomber capability
by extending its effective range, and will complicate
adversaries' air defense operations.
With respect to the Nation's nuclear enterprise, the
Department's fiscal year 2017 budget addresses systemic issues
that were identified in the 2014 enterprise reviews. The budget
request includes resources to sustain and modernize our nuclear
forces and ensure a safe, secure, and effective nuclear
deterrent.
The strategy also requires investment by the Department of
Energy in nuclear infrastructure. The Department supports
National Nuclear Security Administration's efforts to achieve a
responsive infrastructure for our future stockpile.
Our fiscal year 2017 budget request is important for
sustaining and revitalizing the Nation's nuclear deterrent. We
ask that you support both the Department of Defense and
Department of Energy's budget requests in this area.
My written testimony has more detail, and I ask that it be
included in the record of this briefing. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hopkins can be found in the
Appendix on page 40.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Dr. Hopkins.
General Rand, you are recognized for 5 minutes to summarize
your statement.

STATEMENT OF GEN ROBIN RAND, USAF, COMMANDER, AIR FORCE GLOBAL
STRIKE COMMAND

General Rand. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Rogers and
Ranking Member Cooper and distinguished members of the
committee. And thank you for allowing me to appear before you
today to represent the men and women of Air Force Global Strike
Command.
As you know, Air Force Global Strike Command was created to
provide a focus on the stewardship and operation of two legs of
the Nation's nuclear triad, while also accomplishing the
conventional global strike mission. A key to our continued
success will be our ability to modernize, sustain, and
recapitalize our forces.
Our mission set is always evolving and growing in order to
ensure we continue to provide effective forces for those
combatant commanders. Part of accomplishing this goal is to
make sure we are rightsized with our manpower and resources, in
balancing those efforts with ongoing modernization and
recapitalization programs.
Our airmen in the missile fields are accomplishing a
critical mission for this Nation: They are operating,
maintaining, and securing the most responsive leg of the
nuclear triad. However, we must continue efforts to modernize
the Minuteman III weapons system where appropriate until we
bring the ground-based strategic deterrent online. This is an
absolute critical national interest that will provide strategic
deterrence and, if needed, global strike for years to come.
Additionally, I strongly endorse replacing the UH-1N in the
most expeditious manner possible to ensure our missile field
remains secure.
Our diverse bomber forces made up of the B-1, B-2, and B-52
deter our potential adversaries and assure our allies across
the globe. But when that is not enough, they execute a range of
missions, including long-range global strike and close air
support in theater. As you are aware, the B-1s have departed
the CENTCOM [U.S. Central Command] AOR [area of responsibility]
to help facilitate needed upgrades. These airmen have done an
amazing job for many years, and I am proud of each and every
one of them.
Air Force Global Strike Command stands ready to support any
combatant command with our other capable platforms to ensure
there is no gap in requirements coverage. Therefore, I have
directed our B-52 wings to be prepared to backfill the B-1s
later this spring should we be asked to do so.
As with our missile forces, we continue to look forward
with our bomber forces. Last week, Secretary James revealed the
designation for our newest bomber, the B-21. Both the B-21 and
the long-range strike--or excuse me--stand-off weapon will
ensure the United States can continue to hold any target at
risk as potential adversaries continue to modernize their
offensive and defensive capabilities.
I am aware that one of the big reasons I am here today is
to answer any questions on the command's progress in addressing
the Nuclear Enterprise Review findings. We have closed over 300
action items that complement the ongoing review efforts. We
have reinvigorated ICBM [intercontinental ballistic missile]
operations and are effectively making positive cultural changes
throughout the community. We have also overhauled the B-52
training, and streamlined other air crew programs.
Additionally, Air Force Global Strike Command has been declared
the lead command for nuclear command and control and
communications, or NC3, systems throughout the Air Force. And
to recognize the absolute criticality of these systems, NC3 has
been declared a weapons system, which means it is tracked,
sustained, and modernized just like the rest of the weapons
systems in our Air Force.
But let me be clear: We are not done. Culture change is not
something that you can just flip a switch on. We must foster a
culture where we aren't afraid to question how things are done.
Innovative airmen should have the way to push their ideas to
the top, and I will not lose sight of how far we have come, but
also that we never stop working together.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you again for the opportunity
to appear before the committee to highlight the great airmen of
Air Force Global Strike Command. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Rand can be found in the
Appendix on page 51.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, General.
Admiral Benedict, you are recognized for 5 minutes to
summarize your statement.

STATEMENT OF VADM TERRY BENEDICT, USN, DIRECTOR, NAVY STRATEGIC
SYSTEMS PROGRAMS

Admiral Benedict. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Cooper,
distinguished members of this committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee on Strategic
Forces.
My mission as the Director of Strategic Systems Programs
[SSP] is to design, develop, produce, support, and ensure the
safety and security of our Navy's strategic deterrent
capability, the Trident II D-5 strategic weapons system.
This afternoon I would like to talk about three specific
areas: nuclear weapons safety and security, the Trident II D-5
life extension efforts, and collaboration with the Air Force on
weapons system commonality.
First, my top priority is, and always will be, the safety
and the security of the Navy's nuclear weapons. Custody and
accountability of the nuclear assets entrusted to the Navy are
the cornerstones of this program. Our approach to the nuclear
weapons mission is to maintain a culture of excellence and
self-assessment that produces the highest standards of
performance and integrity.
Second, the Navy is proactively taking steps to address
aging and technology obsolescence. SSP is extending the life of
the Trident II D-5 strategic weapons system to match the Ohio-
class submarine service life and to serve as the initial
baseline mission payload for the Ohio replacement submarine
platform. This is being accomplished through a life extension
program for all of the Trident II D-5 strategic weapons sub
systems, to include launcher navigation, fire control, guidance
missile, and reentry. In November of 2015, the USS Kentucky
conducted her demonstration and shakedown operation, launching
two D-5 life extension missiles, marking 157 out of 159
successful launches over the last 26 years. This milestone
continues to ensure a sustainable sea-based strategic deterrent
capability.
Finally, I fully support strategic collaboration between
the services. The Navy and the Air Force are both addressing
challenges in sustaining aging strategic weapons systems. As a
result, I remain committed to my belief that commonality
between the ground-based strategic deterrent [GBSD] and the
Trident II D-5 will improve affordability while reducing risks
to ensure a safe, secure, effective, and credible nuclear
deterrent.
Nine joint teams have identified numerous opportunities
where commonality has the potential to reduce not only cost,
but also risk in the upcoming Air Force GBSD program, as well
as the follow-on D-5 Navy effort.
I am concerned that without proactive leadership
involvement, we will miss the opportunity to take advantage of
the team's effort as we transition to execution. Leadership
commitment and focus are required to accomplish this
undertaking and ensure its success.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and at this time,
I would be pleased to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Benedict can be found in
the Appendix on page 68.]
Mr., Rogers. Thank you, Admiral Benedict.
I will now recognize myself for the first series of
questions.
General Rand, you made reference in your opening statement
to the Minuteman III system, and we know it has got 1970s
technology and it is degrading quickly, but you also know there
are critics out there who are saying that we should slip the
GBSD program to make this nuclear modernization bill a little
bit more manageable. I don't agree with that thinking, but I am
interested in your thoughts on the matter.
General Rand. Sir, I agree with you. I believe that we need
to continue to fund for the GBSD and have it meet a fully
operational capability no later than 2030. My large reason for
that is the Minuteman III with each year becomes more and more
obsolete, and I am concerned that if we don't replace it, that
the enemy gets a vote and we will not be able to provide the
capabilities that are needed with the current system.
Mr. Rogers. Talk about that. Why would it be cheaper to
have a new system as opposed to just indefinitely life
extending the Minuteman III?
General Rand. I am not the expert, but I believe any slaps
that you would do on the Minuteman III would be very costly and
it won't give us the enhancements that we need that keeps us on
the leading edge. So we spend the money, but we don't get the
benefit of the modernized and improved capabilities.
Mr. Rogers. Secretary Scher and Dr. Hopkins, why is the
administration proposing to pursue the LRSO cruise missile,
particularly if the U.S. will already have a penetrating bomber
in the B-61 nuclear gravity bomb? Secretary Scher, you start.
Mr. Scher. The importance of having both the ability to
have a penetrating bomber with a gravity bomb as well as having
LRSO be able to be--from that same platform is that it
complicates the adversaries' planning. Also, we can't expect
that always we will be able to circumvent any advanced air
defense systems from any adversary, so having the ability to
launch from stand-off ranges will be important. And further, I
would like to present the President with multiple options
within his air leg that don't include mandating that it must be
a manned bomber overflying enemy territory with a gravity bomb.
Mr. Rogers. Dr. Hopkins, do you have anything else?
Dr. Hopkins. I would agree with those three reasons. And in
particular, I would like to emphasize the need for
survivability and penetration. We don't know how sophisticated
enemy defenses are going to be 10, 20, 30 years from now, and
having that capability is very important to us for flexibility.
Mr. Rogers. Well, as you all know, some people are calling
the LRSO destabilizing. Obviously, the administration doesn't
share that viewpoint. Can you enlighten us on the
administration's perspective?
Mr. Scher. Absolutely, Congressman. First, this is not
creating a new capability that is suddenly destabilizing the--
having an air-launched cruise missile is something that we have
in the force now, it is a capability that exists, and I would
argue it is not being seen as destabilizing up to this point.
So one that is a survivable one, I believe, is actually--
continues the same capability and, hence, is not destabilizing.
I would also note that using this leg of the triad, in
fact, is one that is most easily seen by any potential
adversary. You must generate the bomber force, you have to--it
then has to fly, as I said, for hours. So it is a well-known
and well-seen and observable piece of the arsenal in the triad,
which, I think, means to me that it is not a destabilizing
weapon unto itself. Having a weapon that is not able to
penetrate enemy airspaces, frankly, I would argue is far more
destabilizing and not knowing what is going to be effective and
what isn't, so we really need to modernize this piece of the
air triad.
Mr. Rogers. Staying on the same subject, General Rand, what
is your professional military opinion on why we need the LRSO?
General Rand. Mr. Chairman, I think it is absolutely
critical that we have an LRSO, not only for the new B-21, but
also for our B-2 and B-52, and that is largely because of the
ever increasing anti-access/area denial that we are facing, and
for survivability, we need to have a stand-off capability,
period, dot.
Mr. Rogers. Are you and the Air Force taking additional
requirement and putting it into program plans?
General Rand. Absolutely, sir. It is fully funded through
the FYDP [Future Years Defense Plan].
Mr. Rogers. When do you expect it to be fielded?
General Rand. Sir, the first one, from NNSA, my
understanding from General Klotz, was delivery in 2025, and we
will get our first one, we are tracking for 2026.
Mr. Rogers. Great, thank you.
Secretary Scher, we are putting a series of charts from DOD
[Department of Defense], CBO [Congressional Budget Office], and
the CSIS [Center for Strategic and International Studies] up on
the screens that show the so-called bow wave of spending that
is coming on nuclear modernization.
I would like to introduce those charts for the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The charts referred to can be found in the Appendix
beginning on page 87.]
Mr. Rogers. While spending on nuclear recapitalization
will, no doubt, increase as we head into 2020, the take-aways
from these charts is that, one, spending on the nuclear weapons
will remain around 7 percent of the budget, even as we peak in
the 2020s, which is far less than historical norms; and two,
the bow wave for modernization spending on nuclear forces is
actually small as a fraction of the overall bow wave of
modernization spending on conventional weapons.
Secretary Scher, does the Obama administration believe 7
percent of our defense budget for a decade or so is a price
worth paying for nuclear deterrence?
Mr. Scher. As you said, Chairman, the nuclear mission is
the number one priority. Affordability is about prioritization.
We certainly have sufficient amount of money in the Defense
Department budget to ensure that we can fund the number one
priority for the Defense Department. So I don't see this as a
problem, in any respects.
Having said that, there is no doubt that there is a lot of
acquisition coming down the pike, and we must understand the
implications of that. I would be remiss if I didn't say that
one of the things that makes it clear that we need to have
cooperation between the administration and the Congress to
ensure we don't return to BCA [Budget Control Act] levels, as
is currently looked at, because that will simply exacerbate
these problems, but even under that scenario, you fund your
number one priority.
Mr. Rogers. I like the way that sounds.
I would also like to introduce for the record a short paper
with quotes from senior Obama administration officials and
military leaders about why they believe nuclear deterrence is
the number one priority mission for DOD, and why they say it
will be funded even at the expense of other capabilities and
programs.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 91.]
Mr. Rogers. Now I will recognize the gentleman from
Tennessee for any questions he may have.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First question to both Admiral Benedict and General Rand
has to do with commonality of the D-5 and the ground-based
deterrent. What further progress is needed to get to where we
need to be on these common components that could be used by
both the Navy and the Air Force? Is there consensus on this
between the Navy and the Air Force?
General Rand. Sir, there is. Secretary Kendall directed the
Air Force and the Navy to work with Draper and to continue to
exhaust all avenues to make sure we can find every area that
there can be commonality. We are committed to doing that, and I
know of no roadblocks that are interfering with the progress we
are making.
Admiral Benedict. Sir, as I stated in my opening statement,
we had a series of teams, joint teams this summer, Navy, Air
Force, that identified numerous opportunities. The general
pointed out one, which is the guidance sub system. There are
many others. We continue to explore those opportunities.
I will tell you that Major General Scott Jansson, who is
the PEO [program executive officer] for GBSD, he and I have a
VTC [video teleconference] tomorrow. We will approve that final
report and submit that up the leadership chain to include
Admiral Haney on that chain. And as the general said, we will
continue to press to find ways to ensure that those
opportunities are properly executed in the upcoming contracts.
Mr. Cooper. Admiral Benedict, you called in your testimony
for proactive leadership on this question, so I hope we will
continue to see that. And I hope if there is any wrinkle or
blip here, that you promptly notify the subcommittee, because
we are very interested in this commonality issue.
Admiral Benedict. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cooper. Another question for both General Rand and
Admiral Benedict. It is my understanding that the Air Force,
unlike the Navy, is giving up on the Personal Reliability
Program [PRP] and substituting instead the sort of right-to-
arms standard, which would enable more service men to be able
to guard nuclear weapons, but I have always been a fan of the
Personal Reliability Program, and relaxing a standard doesn't
sound like the best way to make sure our nuclear weapons are
safe, secure, and reliable. So can you explain why the Air
Force is relaxing the standard?
General Rand. Yes, sir. I would humbly submit we are not
relaxing the standard. Out of one of the independent reviews,
the Welsh-Harvey review, the recommendation is that the arming
use of force and the PRP, with a few tweaks to the arming use
of force, could be identical to a PRP. And we have actually
taken the arming use of force, added two criteria to it that
puts it on par with PRP, and now we have administratively
lessened the load on, for our security forces, and only for our
security forces. Everyone else that still is involved in the
nuclear enterprise is on PRP.
So the arming use of force and the PRP, the medical
requirements, the physical fitness, the emotional requirements
are identical.
Mr. Cooper. You have used the word ``identical'' twice, but
we have to change it to keep it identical. There is a certain
irony there. There were almost 1,000 incidents in the last
several decades of problems with securing nuclear weapons by
the U.S. Air Force. So I hope and pray that this new standard
will be as you suggest, and just as tough.
General Rand. It is, sir.
Mr. Cooper. Oh. And we have your word on that?
General Rand. You have my word on that. And if it is not,
and we find that it is not, we will revert back to the PRP, but
we have run very judicious and cautious testing to make sure we
did not rush to failure on that, and we are implementing it as
we speak across the nuclear wings, again, only for our security
forces, and the arming use of force has the same requirements
for them as does PRP.
Mr. Cooper. Well, time will tell.
General Rand. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cooper. Admiral Benedict, we understand that the
success of some Department of Navy programs hinge on the
Department's ability to develop strong partnerships and
collaborate with State and local government agencies, such as
local law enforcement and emergency response agencies.
Acknowledging this need to collaborate, we also recognize that
it must be challenging for the Navy to ensure protection of
data that is shared with State and local agencies in an age
when information flows so freely through email and other media
platforms.
Would you please describe some of the challenges that your
program faces as it seeks to balance the need to partner and
collaborate with State and local agencies with the need to
protect sensitive information?
Admiral Benedict. Yes, sir. Thank you. We have seen this as
more of a challenge here of recent. While we believe in
absolute transparency with the State and local governments to
ensure that they fully understand how we are protecting and
safeguarding the operations within our naval bases, we also
fully appreciate our responsibility and accountability to
protect sensitive information.
And, so, as we have been honoring FOIA [Freedom of
Information Act] requests and appropriately adjudicating those
requests, what we have found is that some organizations, some
individuals have identified an easier path through the State
and local governments in which we have been sharing some of
that information. So we have been working with Chairman Rogers
and with your staff identifying some of these issues that we
now face, and we have been getting great support in attempting
to ensure that, again, very classified, sensitive information
is clearly transmitted to those who should have it, but is also
protected from other inappropriate or inadvertent uses. So we
will continue to work with your staffs, and I think there is an
opportunity here for us to address this very sensitive issue.
Mr. Cooper. Well, thank you. It is very important that we
protect such sensitive information.
Finally, General Rand, you had mentioned in your testimony
that the Air Force missile program has been reinvigorated but
still more needs to be done. Are you confident that morale of
the missileers can be restored, and do you need additional
resources to do that? And I hope that your relaxation of the
Personal Responsibility Program is not part of your morale
boost.
General Rand. No, sir. I actually, if I may, just add and
clarify a point. Currently, we make up 12 percent of all the
security forces in the United States Air Force are assigned to
Air Force Global Strike, and that is a fairly large percentage,
and of that right now 75 percent of our security forces are
first term airmen on their first assignment. I find that a
little unsettling, and I know now that we are using the arming
use of force, which has the same standards of PRP, that all
security forces now will be eligible for missile duty. That is
a good news story in the sense that I will have a better,
experienced force out there in my missile fields.
As far as morale, that was not one of the areas that we
considered at all to improve morale, was PRP. This was more of
an efficiency and what we feel is a security and surety
measure. There are multiple things we are doing with the
culture. It is not a light switch I can turn on and off, but I
am very impressed by the caliber of our young men and women who
serve in the missile fields. Certainly, we are doing numerous
things for our missile crew members to ensure that they have a
clear understanding of their role, what they play, and the
areas that we can improve to help career develop them. And I
think we have got numerous initiatives that are underway, but I
can't take a lieutenant and turn him or her into a lieutenant
colonel or a colonel overnight, so this will take time for
these to take root.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no more
questions.
Mr. Rogers. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Colorado, Mr. Coffman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Rand, should we review the missile warning and NC3
capabilities as legs of the triad--should we view? Have we been
paying enough attention to missile warning and its enablers?
Are you comfortable with the plan to evolve these capabilities
and that the Department will stick with it to ensure a
survivable capability?
General Rand. Sir, I don't want to give you an incomplete
answer. If I may, I will take that for the record. I believe
that NC3 in itself is addressing numerous shortfalls in the
communication piece of--on potentially our Nation's worst day,
and there are many areas that this covers. Having it now
declared a weapons system, while I don't own all those parts of
the weapons system, having a single bellybutton that is
accountable and reportable and has the authority to work with
my fellow major command commanders as well as the combatant
commanders as well as the Joint Staff, and the Office of the
Secretary of Defense, I think will pay great dividends, but as
particular to your missile warning, sir, I need to research
that and get back to you and the members.
Mr. Coffman. You might have to get back on this one too.
What key investments do we need to make to ensure our missile
warning system is robust? What major investments are you
planning for fiscal year 2017 and over the next 5 years?
General Rand. Sir, I will get back to you with that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 95.]
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Thank you.
General Rand. I am sorry I don't have that information.
Mr. Coffman. I understand. I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Ashford
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ashford. I don't have any questions. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. Then Mr. Larsen is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Scher, are you going to be here in 2040?
Mr. Scher. I don't plan on it.
Mr. Larsen. I don't plan on it either. Are you going to be
here next year?
Mr. Scher. I serve at the pleasure of this President.
Mr. Larsen. So how can you say with confidence beyond
January 20 of next year that this modernization budget will
stay whole?
Mr. Scher. I can tell you what the 5-year plan that was
approved by the Department and then submitted to the President
says. So, that is the plan as of now. Certainly any plan can
change and someone else can, but I know that we have the
ability to fund within a balanced defense program, given the
top line that we hope to be able to get from the Congress and
the administration through. So I feel comfortable about those
figures as for--but certainly, as you note, Congressman, things
can change.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. And one thing that seems to have changed
is--last year, I asked Admiral Haney this question, so it was
in a response, a letter he had sent to the committee saying
that our planned recapitalization activities will require close
to 10 percent of the DOD budget for a period of time. I think
he then testified to 7, although that was based on some
questions we asked him as opposed to another analysis. So you
heard the chairman talk about 7 percent.
Is it 7? Is it 10? Is it something in between? Is it a
multiple of?
Mr. Scher. The difficulty in giving you a percentage of a
budget is that I don't feel confident that I know what that
budget top line is, so giving you a percentage of that is
difficult.
What I do feel confident about is that we have--what our
program is, and--you know, so, again, I feel confident that
what we put up is 3.3 percent of the budget for fiscal year
2017, which is $19 billion. In the fiscal year 2017 to 2021
plan, it is $31 billion for DOD modernization. So I feel
comfortable and confident about those numbers as they stand,
but in terms of percentage and where it is going, that would
require me to be prescient on a number of different issues that
I think are difficult to do.
Having said that, under most assumptions, I don't see--none
of the projections seem to have it above that 7 percent kind of
frame, but, again, I hesitate to even mention it, in part,
because I have no doubt that when neither you or I are here in
2040, that someone will raise this issue of not knowing the top
lines and having the wrong percentages.
Mr. Larsen. If I am here in 2040, the country has other
problems, that is for sure.
So--but this is something I am just asking everyone about
because of the challenges that we would face for the entire
nuclear enterprise, and then, you know, Admiral Benedict's
testimony doesn't address the issue, but he recognizes the
issue that so long as everything works out, then everything
will work out, but our history with MDAPs [major defense
acquisition programs] is that they usually don't, that we
usually end up over budget and things take too long and we end
up dealing with the Department of Defense that finds ways to
add things onto the platforms we have approved, because why not
do it now when we have the money, and, well, it turns out we
don't do it now because we usually don't have the money.
So I am going to just continue to ask these questions of
the Department on nuclear modernization, because I will go out
on a limb and I will say it won't be 7 percent, it will be
something much higher, because that is what history says will
happen in the Department.
Thanks. Appreciate it. Yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Brooks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And congratulations on
your rather close victory last night.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
Mr. Brooks. 50 points.
I am going to give you the questions first, give you some
time to think about it, go through some economic background,
then repeat the questions and ask you to answer them.
The question is going to be, what can we in Congress do to
get more bang for the buck out of our defense dollars,
efficiency measures, things of that nature, or in the
alternative, what mission scopes should we reduce? And I ask
you to focus on your particular areas of expertise on the one
hand, or if you have got broader things related to the Pentagon
and what DOD does, that would be wonderful.
And I ask that question in this context. You all may
remember Admiral Mike Mullen, former Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. In 2010 and 2011, he sat at that same spot
where you guys are now and he told us that America's greatest
national security threat was our deficit and debt. And I think
you have seen with sequestration and whatnot, how he was very
prophetic in his remarks.
Unfortunately, over the past couple of months, it appears
that our deficit and debt situation has taken a rather dramatic
turn for the worse. Since I was elected in 2010, every year we
have decreased our deficits. Now the CBO is warning us that our
deficit for this year is apt to increase by about $105 billion
to $544 billion. Worse yet, long term, the CBO is warning us
that our debt service costs are going to go up roughly $600
billion over the next decade. That is per year. $600 billion,
as you know, is about what we spend on national security. That
money is going to have to come from some place. Additionally,
the CBO is warning us that a decade from now, we are going to
be looking at a $1 trillion deficit in perpetuity until such
time as we, essentially, go bankrupt or insolvent as a nation
with the rather severe adverse consequences that would bring to
us.
So we are going to have to make some hard decisions. That
being the case, what efficiency measures do you think we ought
to be implementing, with your insight and expertise, or in the
alternative, what mission scopes should we start discarding or
reducing in order to be able to meet the kind of financial
pressures America is going to face in the future?
Don't everybody speak at once.
Mr. Scher. Congressman, first, I agree. And I think you
have likely heard or seen that Secretary Carter agrees that we
have to understand a couple of things: one, the importance of
an overall budget, and that the Defense Department has a
responsibility to be as careful and responsible with the funds
that we have, because we have to prove that we are using
effectively every dollar that is given to us by the Congress
and by the American people; and that we must ensure that the
other parts of the United States have strong budgets and
support, because we are only as strong as the people that we
can recruit in terms of the education system, in terms of
foreign diplomacy and aid.
So, I think there is a true understanding within the
leadership of the Department of Defense that we will never--you
know, we can't have a budget that is out of proportion and
misaligned with the rest of the importance of the rest of the
United States Government.
Having said that, you know, we believe we use the money as
efficiently as possible. And we go through a process every year
of revalidating the amounts of money and how we spend it to
ensure that we can deal with the threats that we see in the
security environment to continue to serve our interests, and
propagate those interests, and secure our national security and
friends and allies.
We believe we have put together the most efficient way of
doing that, the most effective way of doing that within the
context, in this case, of the budget agreement that was agreed
to by the Congress and the President. So our role is to ensure
that it is strategically guided in terms of dealing with the
largest threats to the United States, and that we do that as
efficiently as possible.
There are lots of discussions about which mission and
where, but I think the Secretary has been very clear how he
sees this being guided and that the focus is on ensuring that
we can deal with the five threats that he has articulated:
dealing with a resurgent Russia, dealing with a rising China--
--
Mr. Brooks. Excuse me. Secretary Scher, I have only got 30
something seconds left.
Mr. Scher. Right.
Mr. Brooks. Do you have any specific recommendations for
this Congress, actions we should take to make our security
costs more efficient or to reduce mission scope?
Mr. Scher. I think we have--we have done our proposal on
the budget is what we think is the most efficient way of doing
it. The main thing is to continue to be able to have secured
funding and predictable funding in the outyears.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you.
And I see that my time has expired. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. I would also like to
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Garamendi, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Some of this has been reviewed, but I would like to go back
and try to dig a little deeper on it, and this goes to you, Mr.
Scher. Most of the estimates that we have seen with regard to
the entire nuclear programs really go out 5 years, but yet, the
bow wave, an interesting word to be used, seems to occur beyond
5 years.
Do you have estimates of the cost beyond 5 years, and if
so, can you share those specific estimates with us, system by
system, and bomb by bomb?
Mr. Scher. We have some figures and some charts that I know
we have shared with you. I suspect they lack the level of
precision that you are requesting.
Mr. Garamendi. Totally. Not partial, but totally.
Mr. Scher. We do have very clear projections for 5 years.
As we go out, honestly, those projections, even in the greatest
of granularity, become harder and harder to make sure that we
are confident about those numbers, based, in large part, upon
some of the things that Mr. Larsen has mentioned.
So we have some estimates in the acquisition side, that I
don't know if we have the level of granularity you are going to
look for, but we will certainly be happy to go--I will be happy
to go back, and I don't know if Dr. Hopkins has additional
information, to go back and see what level of granularity we
can provide.
Mr. Garamendi. Are there--at some point within the next 5
years, the granularity will become more obvious, and perhaps to
the point where the granules are sufficient to trip over.
Do you have milestones in mind at which point decisions
would be made as to whether it is wise to continue any one of
the programs?
Mr. Scher. In terms of the commitment to the program, we
remain committed to all of the modernization of the program.
And I believe it is critical to ensure that we modernize each
leg of the triad, as we have talked about. We understand that
as we get closer, we will continue to get more granularity for
it, but we--at no point in time is the policy of this
administration to stop any of the modernization programs. They
are affordable if they are prioritized.
Mr. Garamendi. That is the most remarkable statement I have
ever heard.
Well, with regard to priorities, then, this committee and
its subcommittees have gone through hearing after hearing from
other branches of the Department, and their priorities cannot
be met, given the current budgets of the Department. And it
would seem to me that, therefore, the priorities would be for
us to shift money from everything else to meet their
priorities, and what you say is absolutely cannot change, that
is, these priorities, puts us in an interesting circumstance,
wouldn't you say?
Mr. Scher. The Secretary and the President determine what
the priorities for the Department are. The Secretary, I think,
has been pretty clear that he views the nuclear enterprise as a
priority, and hence, he makes the final----
Mr. Garamendi. We are going round and round, and there is
not much value in that. So, if I might just kind of change the
course here.
Down to specifics. General Rand, your new ground-based
strategic deterrent, do you know what it is going to cost 5
years out?
General Rand. Five years after the FYDP? Is that the
question, sir?
Mr. Garamendi. That is correct.
General Rand. I don't have the granularity that you are
requesting at this time.
Mr. Garamendi. Then can you tell me why the existing
missiles cannot be used in 20 years----
General Rand. I certainly may.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. Cannot be rebuilt, cannot be
refurbished?
General Rand. Sure. I previously stated that I believe that
the system will have a difficult time surviving in the active
A2/AD [anti-access/area denial] environment that we will be
dealing with in the 2030-and-beyond time period.
Mr. Garamendi. So that is the warhead itself, or the
missile itself, will not be able to achieve its destination?
General Rand. Yes, sir. That is my contention.
Mr. Garamendi. And the new missile could?
General Rand. Yes, sir. That is our contention.
Mr. Garamendi. It would seem to me, Mr. Chairman, that we
may want to find out how that could be achieved.
General Rand. And I do believe we will have a closed
session to talk to you in more detail.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much.
Mr. Rogers. Yeah. I look forward to that in the closed
session as well. I now go to the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Fleming, for 5 minutes.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, General Rand, as commander of Global Strike Command, I
know you have a deep understanding of the significance of
nuclear weapons, and have a vital understanding of the
deterrent effect. And I just--parenthetically, we are so
blessed to have you as our first four-star in command at Global
Strike, and I hope you find that accommodations in Shreveport
and Bossier City are satisfactory.
But anyway, aside from all that, let's talk about something
that maybe is less obvious but can be even more important, and
that is the culture of deterrence. I am concerned that, through
the day, we have an entire generation of young airmen
performing nuclear operations that have little appreciation for
the special significance that these weapons have. The threat of
nuclear aggression could still persist beyond the Cold War, and
is indeed different, and arguably more diffuse and
unpredictable. I think most of that is more important than ever
that we are taking steps to impart the special significance and
understanding in today's generation of airmen.
So my question is this: What efforts are underway right now
in the Air Force to strengthen deterrence education, research
for airmen performing that nuclear mission?
General Rand. Thank you, sir. That is a great question, and
I am glad I get to comment.
As my good friend, Terry Benedict, mentioned, commonality,
we talk weapons systems. One of the things we need to do is
find commonality between the services. We are doing that. We
have an exchange program with some of our 13N young captains
and majors are in exchange with the Navy right now. This past
summer we start our Schools of Advanced Nuclear Deterrent
Studies, where we have eight majors, O-4 field rate officers,
that are at Albuquerque, New Mexico, for a 12-month study. That
program will continue to grow, where we will be bringing 12 to
15, we will bring different career fields other than nuclear
expertise, we will also be bringing in different services, and
we will be bringing in, on the fringes, some partner nations
that will attend.
One of the areas that we are doing is looking at career
broadening for our missile and bomber pilots, presently looking
at trying to expand assignment opportunities for our missile
crews where they can go and serve in places in Europe where we
have the dual-capable aircraft missions, and we can get them in
their plan.
So, there are multiple programs, and then the last one,
with folks that have helped us build a series of strategic
deterrent courses that we have called nuclear deterrence 100 up
to 400 series, which the 400 is for general officers and senior
executive service personnel, all the way down to 100, which is
for our sessions people and everything in between.
Sir, I could go on for the rest of this session, if you
would like, but I think that gives you a hint.
Dr. Fleming. Please don't, because I have got less than 2
minutes, but I thank you for that. It sounds like it is very
robust, and I appreciate that there is a lot behind that. You
know, we put language in the NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] to look at that, and I think we are
expecting a report. I assume that this is sort of a preview of
that report?
General Rand. Sir, and I will send you personally some of
the initiatives, all the initiatives that we have.
Dr. Fleming. Awesome. Okay. Very good.
Well, in the time I have left, I am also concerned about
the nuclear command and control, N3, and I am a little--to be
honest with you, it is a little ambiguous as to is this spread
over four commands as we are understanding, or is this really
controlled in a singular sort of silo? Can you explain that for
me?
General Rand. Certainly. The nuclear command and control
communications is a system of systems. And if I could, there
are approximately 107 systems that would make up what we would
call NC3. The Air Force is responsible for 63 of those 107
different systems. And we have found that the best way to
manage this is to put it in a singular major command, and that
is now Air Force Global Strike, but I have to be very
collaborative with my fellow major commanders.
For example, some of these systems reside in Space Command,
the FAB-T [Family of Advanced Beyond Line-of-Sight Terminals],
for example, the NAOC [National Airborne Operations Center]-E4B
resides presently in Air Combat Command, but the issue of how
do you have responsibility without authority, a lot of the
authority will come through the budget, and that I will have
budgetary oversight of how dollars are spent in accord with
these programs.
And we are getting significant top cover and support from
the OSD, and Mr. Halverson specifically in CIO [Chief
Information Office]. And so I think, sir, that potentially, if
I may, late to need, but we are actually pedaling very, very
hard to make sure that we address the shortfalls that currently
exist in many of our NC3 overall weapons system.
Dr. Fleming. Right. Okay. Thank you.
My time is up. I yield.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Montana, Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank you for
allowing me to attend the hearing today.
I guess where I want to turn to is the helicopters. And the
reason why I--out in Montana, I tour the facilities, and the
airmen came up to me knowing I was a former SEAL [Sea, Air,
Land teams], and they had some concerns about the UH-1s, the
Hueys. And looking at the inventory of what we have out there
and doing a little research where our staff tried to find some
alternatives that were cost effective, we looked at Navy
helicopters, we looked at everything, and it seems to me that
we do need to replace the helicopters, because they are at a
concern with alert. Admiral Haney also suggests that.
And I guess my question to you is, in previous budgets, did
we look at using sole source acquisition to replace these, and
what were the options that were presented before us? Dr.
Hopkins.
Dr. Hopkins. I am not aware of any previous attempts to use
sole source arrangements. However, I can say that within the
Office of the Secretary of Defense, we have assured the Air
Force that they have the authorities they need to do
procurement in whatever fashion that is necessary to get the
helicopters out in the most expedient manner possible.
Mr. Zinke. And, General Rand, you are aware, I am sure, of
the Secretary of Air Force's letter to Chairman Rogers that
expressed they really can't--they failed a couple exercises in
there, and there is a concern that they can't fulfill their
alert duty with the UH-1s?
General Rand. Sir, there are two requirements that we have,
real briefly, and I won't belabor this. We have the convoy
escort duty for when we are moving the warhead to and from the
launch facility to base, and vice versa. The other requirement
that the combatant requirement is to provide an emergency
security response team.
With mitigation efforts that we put in place with the UH-
1N, we are arming the helicopter right now, we put some
refueling capabilities out in the missile alert facilities, we
will be able to do the convoy effort, I think, safely and
effectively until the replacement for the UH-1N comes on board.
We will not meet the emergency security response with the
present helicopter.
And, so, there is no seam between myself and Admiral Haney
on the need for a replacement helicopter, and there is no seam
with the United States Air Force on the need to replace that.
And in this current budget, we have $1 billion right now that
is allocated to replacing that, and we are finalizing our
acquisition strategy as we speak. And I strongly recommend to
the Secretary and the chief that we do the most expeditious
manner possible to get a replacement out to the missile fields.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, General. As a taxpayer and an
individual who is in charge of now looking at taxpayers, and I
look at present programs out there. As a former SEAL, I notice
some contracts out there that I would encourage you to find,
not only the most expeditious way, but also a way that is most
cost effective. I can't believe that the Black Hawk, given my
experience, cannot meet this role. So I would encourage you to
look at what is out there, and certainly, on the Black Hawk, if
it fills a mission, and we have contracts out there that we can
add on top without re-inventing the wheel, I would strongly
encourage that. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield my time
back.
Mr. Rogers. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Franks.
Mr. Franks. Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank all of you
for being here, and with great deference to the civilians here,
let me express, as I always do, a special appreciation to those
who wear the uniform. General Rand, you know you and I have
been friends for a long time, I am grateful for men like you
that dedicate their lives to the cause of freedom, and know
that my children, as I have said to you many times in private,
have a better chance of walking in the light of freedom because
people like you that do what you do. I am grateful to all of
you.
General Rand. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Franks. With that, Mr. Scher, Dr. Hopkins, and General
Rand, why has the President, in your mind--I will start with
you, Dr. Scher--Mr. Scher, why has the President consistently
supported the ICBM leg of our triad? And why does that continue
to be relevant from your perspective?
Mr. Scher. Congressman, I think, first of all, the
President's determination is from a broad perspective that the
triad is important, it brings flexibility across a range, it
brings hedges within and amongst all the different elements, so
that, in and of itself, is an important piece.
The ICBM leg, as certainly you know, sir, is the most
responsive of the legs and ensures that no adversary can
believe that they have a strike that immediately eliminates all
of our capabilities to respond. So from a policy perspective,
those are the key elements of why the ICBM force is so
important.
Mr. Franks. Well, as you might imagine, I couldn't agree
with you more.
Dr. Hopkins. Mr. Franks, I would just add the attribute of
survivability; ICBM force does provide an enduring capability
to respond. And it really does discourage attacks on the United
States.
Mr. Franks. General Rand.
General Rand. Sir, they covered it--we have, as you know,
24/7 alert right now of great young men and women that are in
our missile silos performing, I think, a tremendous duty for
our country.
Mr. Franks. General Rand, I may sort of elaborate on the
question. You know, Mr. Scher mentioned the word
``responsive,'' and certainly, I think that is correct. But
sometimes we hear the characterizations that our nuclear
forces, particularly our ICBMs, are on hair trigger alert, this
is at least the phrase that I hear a lot.
Many are suggesting that we, quote, ``take our ICBMs off
alert.'' Would you agree with that? And why would you think
that might be a good or bad idea?
General Rand. Sir, I don't agree with that. My personal
opinion is that our enemies sleep with one eye open at night
because of the men and women in the missile fields.
Mr. Franks. Well, I just wanted to get that on record.
Obviously, I agree with that.
Admiral Benedict, what is the minimum number of Ohio-class
replacement submarines that are required to fulfill STRATCOM's
requirement for sea-based deterrence? The Navy, and STRATCOM,
and DOD have been very clear on this. And I wonder if you would
explain why less than 12 doesn't meet the requirement?
Admiral Benedict. Sir, the number is 12, you stated that
correctly. That is the program of record for the Ohio
replacement program. And essentially throughout the entire life
cycle of that platform, we have done the analysis. We need 12
to make 10, where 10 is the requirement to support Admiral
Haney's mission statement at STRATCOM.
Mr. Franks. Well, let me ask you, and I don't know if we
will get through the whole thing, so General Rand, I will start
with you again. If there was any one thing that you believe
that right now we should have particular focus on in terms of
our strategic capability, would there be anything that you
would emphasize?
General Rand. Sir, I think that the balance of where we are
focusing right now for me is with our bomber recapitalization
modernization along with our modernization/the development of
the GBSD, that those two fit like a glove, and it is important
that we have parallel efforts on both those.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Chairman, I am going to do something really
rare and give back about 30, 40 seconds here, and thank all of
you for your gallant commitment to human freedom.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
Chairman Forbes from Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Gentlemen, with so
much falling on the line of Mr. Franks questions and with so
much focus on the next generation of command and control
infrastructure launch platforms and next generation missiles,
how confident are we that our current fleet of the Ohio-class
submarines and their support networks will be able to maintain
our tactical advantage over the rest of the world until the
Ohio replacement comes online?
Admiral Benedict. Sir, I would say we are very comfortable.
Although, I think you are well aware, sir, from your position
as chairman, that those platform are aging. We are going to
take the Ohio-class submarine to a life that we have never,
within the Navy, experienced before. I know that within Naval
Sea Systems commands, Naval Reactors, and the entire shipboard
community, we are watching those platforms very, very
carefully.
Maintenance is a challenging experience within those
platforms, it is growing. But I think that we have the right
emphasis from the top down, from the CNO [Chief of Naval
Operations], from Mr. Stackley, to ensure that we are
appropriately funded to address that, get those through their
42-year life history, or planned experience, and then bring the
Ohio replacement on to the program of record to ensure that we
can meet the 12 submarine platforms necessary to support
Admiral Haney.
Mr. Forbes. Is there anything Congress can or should do to
strengthen our current nuclear triad to ensure that we are
ready to face any global challenges in the immediate future and
are ready in the event of any delay in future replacement
programs?
Admiral Benedict. Sir, I think that just recently, both Mr.
Stackley, as well as the CNO, have testified, what they believe
they need in order to execute the Ohio replacement program as
cost efficiently as possible. Things such as economic order
quantity, advance construction authorization, incremental
funding, class procurement, things like that. They just
recently have been up on the Hill.
Mr. Forbes. Are those things contained in the sea-based
deterrent fund?
Admiral Benedict. I believe those authorizations are, sir.
We need those types of authorizations and relief so that we can
deliver, within the cost budgets that we have agreed to, in
order to hold those platforms to an economic goal-order
quantity.
General Rand. Sir, I think the key for the Air Force is
that we get appropriated and approval authorization for the
current--the PB [President's budget], the budget, in fiscal
year 2017 and through the FYDP, and then, I think, we need
reprieve from the Budget Control Act.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Bridenstine, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Scher,
as a policy matter, what should an adversary know if it thinks
about attacking our missile warning or nuclear command and
control satellites or ground links?
Mr. Scher. So certainly, the pieces of the nuclear
enterprise that you mentioned are critical parts to our ability
to be able to assess and respond to any adversary. That--
however, I would argue those attacks are as serious as any
attack on any U.S. facility, any U.S. service member, any part
of the United States. So equally, the key piece of deterrence
is ensuring that the adversary understands that the risks that
come from taking that action will far outweigh any advantage
they believe they can accrue by taking such action. It doesn't
matter what it is, but the NC3 and those pieces are critically
important.
Mr. Bridenstine. Is the adversary crossing a red line by
attacking systems designed to maintain situational awareness
during a nuclear conflict?
Mr. Scher. The adversary should not believe that by
attacking anything. I am, Congressman, uncomfortable with
constraining options for red lines and others, but attacking
those facilities are critically sensitive, and it is
understood, and needs to be understood by the adversaries, that
that is something that will not be allowed to remain.
Mr. Bridenstine. Do we have a declaratory policy on this?
Mr. Scher. We do not have a specific declaratory policy on
that, but I think the overall declaratory policy contains
references--that looks at the whole range of our nuclear
enterprise.
Mr. Bridenstine. I just received an out-brief from the
latest Schriever war game. I was interested if you have
received that brief, or maybe if you attended the war game
itself?
Mr. Scher. I did not attend and haven't actually seen the
out-brief of that one, sir.
Mr. Bridenstine. So the Deputy Secretary of Defense
attended, and I would highly recommend you do as well.
Mr. Scher. Will do so.
Mr. Bridenstine. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. I would like to ask one
final question before we go to the classified section.
Secretary Scher, the New START [Strategic Arms Reduction]
Treaty doesn't expire until 2021. At that point there is an
option for 5-year extension if Russia and the U.S. agree.
Since we are 5 years away from that expiration, is there
any reason to trigger that extension now, especially since
Russia is cheating on the INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear
Forces], the Open Skies Treaty, and has never been in
compliance with the chemical weapons or biological weapons
conventions?
Mr. Scher. I think there is--first of all, I will note that
Russia, at this point, continues to abide by the New START
Treaty. The reason we went into the New START Treaty with the
Russians is that we saw it in our interest to do so. I would
argue that that treaty is still working for our interests in
terms of constraining the number of deployable weapons from
Russia. Whether or not it is in our interest to extend it I
think is a decision that is a policy decision that people will
be considering, but I do think it should be looked at in
isolation of whether or not it still serves our interest, since
the Russians are still adhering to that treaty.
Mr. Rogers. All right, that is debatable, but I'll let it
go. I appreciate all the witnesses.
We are now going to recess for 5 minutes while we move into
classified session.
[Whereupon, at 3:14 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 2, 2016

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 2, 2016

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
