- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-22]OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. "MAC"THORNBERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-22]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2016

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSED

AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE OF

MILITARY FORCE AGAINST ISIL AND THE

FISCAL YEAR 2016 NATIONAL DEFENSE

AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST

FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 18, 2015

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-224                            WASHINGTON : 2016
________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado                   Georgia
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
PAUL COOK, California                GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             PETE AGUILAR, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Kari Bingen, Professional Staff Member
Mike Casey, Professional Staff Member
Michael Tehrani, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Davis, Hon. Susan A., a Representative from California, Committee
on Armed Services..............................................     2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Carter, Hon. Ashton B., Secretary of Defense.....................     3
Dempsey, GEN Martin E., USA, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff..........................................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Carter, Hon. Ashton B........................................    64
Dempsey, GEN Martin E........................................    84
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services........................    63

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Moulton..................................................   103
Mr. O'Rourke.................................................   102
Mr. Takai....................................................   102
Mr. Thornberry...............................................   101
Dr. Wenstrup.................................................   101

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Ms. Bordallo.................................................   107
Mr. Conaway..................................................   110
Ms. Duckworth................................................   112
Mr. Shuster..................................................   108
Mr. Walz.....................................................   113

THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSED AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE OF MILITARY FORCE
AGAINST ISIL AND THE FISCAL YEAR 2016 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION
BUDGET REQUEST FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 18, 2015.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. Committee will come to order.
Before we begin today, I want to ask unanimous consent that
non-committee members, if any, be allowed to participate in
today's hearing after all committee members have had an
opportunity to ask questions.
And by way of explanation, I might say that one of our
committee members has tentatively been appointed to another
committee, and his replacement has tentatively been named, Mr.
Russell from Oklahoma, but it has not been ratified by the
Republican Conference yet. And so Mr. Russell is with us today.
But without objection, non-committee members will be
recognized at the appropriate time.
Let me welcome our distinguished witnesses to today's
hearing.
Secretary Carter, thank you for being with us. You have
been in this room in a variety of capacities over the years,
but this is the first hearing since you were confirmed as
Secretary of Defense roughly a month ago, and we are very glad
to have you with us.
General Dempsey, thank you for being here. And I want to
say again, all the committee members appreciated your
participation in our retreat about a month ago at Annapolis.
The fact that you would take time to come out there, meet with
us and discuss some of the challenges we face was extremely
helpful and meant a lot, and we are very grateful for that, for
being here today, and for your many years of service.
As you all know, this committee has done things a little
differently this year. Rather than start out talking about the
President's budget, we have spent the last 2 months looking at
the national security challenges that we face around the world,
and I think that has put us in a better place to be able to
look at the administration's budget request and a number of the
other issues that are before us.
I would say for me, one of the key takeaways from the last
2 months has been the growing threat to our technological
superiority. We have had classified and unclassified sessions
on that, and to me, it is one of the key challenges we face.
And as I mentioned, Mr. Secretary, as I was perusing my
bookshelf, I came upon a very brilliant edition called
``Keeping the Edge: Managing Defense for the Future,'' edited
by one Ashton B. Carter and John P. White.
And there is a particular chapter talking about the
technological edge that I had made some notes in, where
essentially, it said two of the things we have to do to
maintain the technological edge is to align our defense
procurement practices with market forces, and secondly, to
remain the world's fastest integrator of commercial technology
into defense systems.
I kind of wonder how we are doing these days. I think that
is very relevant for today. I just had a meeting with one of
the leading defense thinkers last week that talked about the
challenge of integrating commercial technology into defense
articles and how we are not doing as well as we should.
As you know, reform is a major priority of this committee
on both sides of the aisle. Mr. Smith certainly shares my
concern, as do, I think, all the members here. And so that is
one of the topics that we want to talk with you about.
There are many others, including the President's request
for the authorization to use military force against ISIS
[Islamic State of Iraq and Syria]. We have had several sessions
on that with a lot of concerns with the wording that has come
to us from the administration, and I know members will want to
ask questions about that and other topics.
Before we get to those, let me talk--let me yield to the
distinguished ranking member sit-in for today, the
distinguished gentlelady from California, Mrs. Davis, for any
comments she would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. SUSAN A. DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mrs. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Carter, Chairman Dempsey, thank you both for
being here today.
I want to first send our best wishes to the ranking member,
Adam Smith. We all know that he has been through a difficult
time, and we wish him a quick and a speedy recovery.
I want to ask unanimous consent that we put his remarks and
his opening statement into the record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 63.]
The Chairman. Without objection.
Mrs. Davis. Chairman Dempsey, this will likely be your last
time before this committee. We are probably going to find some
excuse to get you back, I am sure.
While I am sure you aren't too broken up about not coming
back, we will surely miss your thoughtful discourse and your
care of our young service members. Thank you very much, sir,
for your service.
And Secretary Carter, I bet you would rather have waited
until after the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] was
complete before coming up and speaking with us, but I think
that it presents a great opportunity to help shape the budget
during a very difficult time, and your expertise, your
insights, are going to be very well received. Thank you, sir.
Sequestration is obviously at the forefront of everyone's
minds. But we must also remember that we are still engaged in
two conflicts, facing unconditional threats halfway around the
world, while still battling suicide, sexual assault, and
retention and recruitment issues here at home.
But these are only a few of the discussion points that we
face when looking at the budget. We have to look beyond just
defense to the entire budget, and we realize that cuts to other
portions of the Federal budget will affect the Department of
Defense [DOD] more often than we realize.
It was just yesterday that the secretaries and the service
chiefs spoke about of those who consider going in to the
service, roughly 75 percent do not meet the requirements today.
And we have to be mindful of that, and maybe that is what we
call a whole-of-government approach to that particular issue.
We must also ensure that this budget is in line with our
national security strategy. We cannot address conflicts around
the globe if our strategy is not in line with current threats
and our budgetary situation.
We should not be finding piecemeal ways of fixing these
problems in our budget, but we really do, and I know the
chairman believes in this, rolling all of our sleeves up, and
working together in addressing sequestration as a whole.
I look forward to both of your statements here today, as
well as the opportunity for an honest and open dialogue. Thank
you, again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Secretary, again, thank you for being here. Without
objection your full written statement will be made part of the
record. Please proceed.

STATEMENT OF HON. ASHTON B. CARTER, SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Secretary Carter. Thank you very much, Chairman Thornberry.
Thank you, Congresswoman Davis, thank you also.
And all the members of the committee, thank you for having
me here today. It is a pleasure to be with you once again.
I have had the opportunity to speak with many of you
before, but this is my first time testifying as the Secretary
of Defense. And I know that all of you, all of you on the
committee, including the 23 veterans on this committee, share
the same devotion that I do to what is the finest fighting
force the world has ever known. And to the defense of our great
country. And I thank you for that. And I hope that my tenure as
Secretary of Defense will be marked by partnership with you on
their behalf.
I am here to present the President's budget for the
Department of Defense for this year, fiscal year 2016, and I
strongly support the President in requesting a defense budget
above the artificial caps of the Budget Control Act, that is,
above so-called sequester levels, next year, and in the years
thereafter.
I also share the President's desire to find a way forward
that upholds the fundamental principles behind the Bipartisan
Budget Act of 2013. And I support his commitment to vetoing any
bill that locks in sequestration, because to do otherwise would
be both unsafe and wasteful.
The administration is therefore proposing to increase the
defense budget in line with the projections submitted to
Congress last year, halting the decline in defense spending
imposed by the Budget Control Act, while giving us the
resources we need to execute our Nation's defense strategy.
As the chairman noted, strategy comes first. And that is
the appropriate way to think about the budget.
But, and I want to be very clear about this, under
sequestration, which is set to return in 197 days, our Nation
will be less secure.
And Mr. Chairman, as you and your colleagues have said,
sequestration threatens our military's readiness. It threatens
the size of our warfighting forces, the capabilities of our air
and naval fleets, and ultimately, the lives of our men and
women in uniform. And the Joint Chiefs have said the same.
And the great tragedy is that this corrosive damage to our
national security is not a result of objective factors, logic,
reason. Instead, sequester is purely the fallout of political
gridlock. Its purpose was to compel prudent compromise on our
long-term fiscal challenges. A compromise that never came.
And this has been compounded in recent years, because the
Defense Department has suffered a double whammy. The worst of
both worlds, that has coupled mindless sequestration with
constraints on our ability to reform. We need your help with
both.
And I know that Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith,
and others on this committee, are as dedicated to reform as I
am. And I appreciate the--your dedication to it and the
opportunity to work with you, because we at the Pentagon can
and we must do better at getting value for the defense dollar.
There are significant savings to be found across DOD, and we
are committed to pursuing them.
But at the same time, I have to note that in the past
several years, painful but necessary reforms proposed by DOD,
reforms involving elimination of overhead and unneeded
infrastructure, retirement of older systems, and reasonable
adjustments in compensation have been denied by Congress at the
same time that sequestration has loomed.
If confronted with sequestration-level budgets and
continued obstacles to reform, I do not believe that we can
simply keep making incremental cuts. We would have to change
the shape and not just the size of our military, significantly
impacting parts of our defense strategy. We cannot meet
sequester with further half measures.
As Secretary of Defense, I will not send troops into a
fight with outdated equipment, inadequate readiness, or
ineffective doctrine. But everything else is on the table,
including parts of our budget that have long been considered
inviolate.
This may lead to decisions that no Americans, including
Members of Congress, want us to make.
And, now, I am not afraid to ask the difficult questions.
But if we are stuck with sequestration's budget cuts over the
long term, our entire Nation will have to live with the
answers. So instead of sequestration, I urge you to embrace the
alternative--building the force of the future. Powerful enough
to underwrite our strategy. Equipped with boldly new technology
as the chairman stressed. Leading in domains like cyber and
space. Being lean and efficient throughout the enterprise.
Showing resolve to friends and potential foes alike. And
attracting and retaining the best Americans to our mission.
Americans like the elite cyber-warriors I met last week when I
visited our Cyber Command. That is the alternative that we can
have without sequestration.
So, Mr. Chairman, the world in 2014 was more complicated
than anyone could have predicted. Given today's security
environment, the President's proposed increase in defense
spending over last year's budget is responsible, prudent, and
essential for providing our troops what they need and what they
fully deserve.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Carter can be found in
the Appendix on page 64.]
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
General Dempsey, I am not quite ready to let you go yet, so
I am not gonna talk about this being one of your last hearings.
But thank you for being here, and please make any oral comments
you would like to make.

STATEMENT OF GEN MARTIN E. DEMPSEY, USA, CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT
CHIEFS OF STAFF

General Dempsey. Thank you, Chairman, Congresswoman Davis,
distinguished members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to provide you an update on our Armed Forces and to
discuss the defense budget for 2016.
And I will add, it has been a rare privilege to have
represented the Armed Forces of the United States, the men and
women who serve around the world, before this committee to live
up to our Article I, Section 8 responsibility together. And so,
if this is my last hearing, I thank you for the opportunity,
and if it is not, until we meet again.
I would ask you, Chairman, to submit my written statement
for the record, and I will defer the many--I will defer mention
in my opening statement of the many security challenges we face
because I am quite confident they will be addressed in
questions.
But I will say the global security environment is as
uncertain as I have seen in my 40 years of service. And, we are
at a point where our national aspirations are at risk of
exceeding our available resources.
We have heard the Congress loud and clear as it has
challenged us to become more efficient and to determine the
minimum essential requirements we need to do what the Nation
asks us to do. And PB16 [President's budget for fiscal year
2016] is actually that answer.
In my judgment this budget represents a responsible
combination of capability, capacity, and readiness. It is what
we need to remain at the bottom edge of manageable risk against
our national security strategy. There is no slack.
I have been here for 4 years now, and we have watched our
budget authority decline. I am reporting to you today there is
no slack, no margin left for error, nor for response to
strategic surprise.
Funding lower than PB16 and a lack of flexibility to make
the internal reforms that we need to make will put us in a
situation where we will have to adjust our national security
strategy. That doesn't mean it disappears in its entirety, but
we will have to make some adjustments to the way we do
business.
You may decide that is a good thing. I will certainly be
willing to have that conversation with you.
For the past 25 years, the United States military has
secured the global commons. We have deterred adversaries, we
have reassured our allies, and we have responded to crises and
to conflict principally by maintaining our presence abroad. It
has been our strategy to shape the international environment by
our forward presence and by building relationships with
regional partners.
In general terms, one third of our force is forward-
deployed, one third has just returned, and the other third is
preparing to go.
Of necessity, even at that, there have been certain
capabilities who actually operate half the time deployed and
half the time back at home. And this, as you know, puts a
significant strain on the men and women and their families who
serve in those particular specialties.
Sequestration will fundamentally and significantly change
the way we deploy the force and the way we shape the security
environment. We will be, at the end of the day, if
sequestration is imposed, 20 percent smaller, and our forward
presence will be reduced by more than a third.
We will have less influence, and we will be less
responsive. Conflict will take longer to resolve and will
create more casualties and cost more. In an age when we are
less certain about what will happen next, but I think we would
agree, quite certain that it will happen more quickly, we will
be further away and less ready than we need to be. Simply
stated, sequestration will result in a dramatic change in how
we protect our Nation and how we promote our national security
interests.
Mr. Chairman, members of this committee, our men and women
in uniform are performing around the globe with extraordinary
courage, character, and professionalism. We owe them and their
families clarity and, importantly, predictability on everything
from policy to compensation, health care, equipment, training,
and readiness.
Settling down uncertainty in our decision-making processes
and getting us out of the cycle that we have been in, which has
been one year at a time, will help us keep the right people,
which, after all, is our decisive edge as a nation in our All-
Volunteer Force, and we will be able to maintain the military
that the American people deserve and, frankly, expect.
I am grateful for the continued support to our men in
uniform--men and women in uniform from this committee and from
the Congress of the United States, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Dempsey can be found in
the Appendix on page 84.]
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
I might also note that we have Mr. Michael McCord, the
Comptroller of the Department, who is available with us to
answer questions.
And Mr. McCord, I might just warn you that audit came up
several times yesterday with the service chiefs, and if
somebody else doesn't ask about it, I am going to at the end,
because there is concern that some of the defense-wide agencies
are going to be the hold-up rather than the services. And we
will get into that as appropriate.
Mr. Secretary, I very much appreciate your willingness to
work with us and the Senate on various reform issues. I think
you make excellent points about the need to find greater
efficiency in the Department.
And again, thinking back to what you wrote 15 years ago, as
the chairman just said, our security environment is incredibly
more complicated than we could have imagined in the year 2000
when you wrote those words.
And so it seems to me that even more than efficiency, some
sort of reform, and especially reform in how we acquire goods
and services, is needed to make the Department more agile,
because there is no way we are going to predict what is
happening. And if we--if it takes us 20 years to field a new
system, there is no way we will be up with technology or
meeting the threat.
So the need for agility is even a higher priority, in my
mind, than the need for efficiency.
Do you have any comments about how that interplays?
Secretary Carter. I think that is very wise.
It is not just about saving money; if we can't keep up with
the pace at which technology is changing in the world as a
whole and we can't turn technological corners faster than a
typical program duration now in the Department of Defense,
which lasts years and years and years, we are not going to be
the most modern military.
So it is not just a matter of saving money; it is a matter
of being the best. And the word ``agility'' is a perfect one.
Back when that was written, it was even apparent then, 15
years ago, that the era in which all the technology of
consequence to defense was developed within the Department of
Defense and within the United States, it was even apparent then
that that era was coming to an end.
Now a lot of technology of vital importance to defense is
out there in the world. We need to be the fastest and the first
to have it in order to keep up with and keep ahead of all our
opponents. So I couldn't agree with you more.
The Chairman. And let me ask about one other area of
reform.
A number of people are concerned about the reductions in
end strength for especially the Army and the Marine Corps. And
yet as one looks at the Pentagon, you haven't seen commensurate
reductions in the number of folks who work there.
And so there is interest, including from a number of people
who come out of the Obama administration, to streamline the
bureaucracy in the Department and thin out some of those layers
that add cost and time to--that affect this agility we were
talking about.
Is that something that is on your radar screen, and is
there a chance we could work together to give you some
authorities to move folks around but have the effect of
thinning that out and lowering the bureaucratic hassles?
Secretary Carter. I would very much welcome and appreciate
your help in that regard.
Now, a lot of that is on us, and we need to do it
ourselves. But in many cases, we would benefit from legislative
help.
But if--as you used the example of end strength, if all we
are doing in a period of straightened budget is shrinking tooth
and the tail remains the same size, that is an unjustifiable
way of managing the place.
So we have gotta, gotta, gotta get after these
headquarters, these offices that were set up once upon a time,
seemed like a good idea at the time, but have lost their
purpose or lost their way or lost their vitality, and we need
to be aggressive with ourselves and rigorous.
So I would very much appreciate your help and working with
you. And I don't know who those people are that you said, but I
associate myself with them, if that is the----
The Chairman. Well, I think there is interest on that on
both sides of the aisle, again, and we look forward to working
with you.
Mr. Chairman, let me just ask you one question. When you
were kind enough to be with us at our retreat, and you said we
could quote you--that the President's budget level was the
lower ragged edge of what it takes to defend the country.
The President has requested $561 billion in base, $51
billion in OCO [overseas contingency operations] for a total of
$612 billion when you put it together.
Is it still your opinion that that is the bare minimum. I
don't want to put words in your mouth, but how would you
describe how that figure, $612 billion, meets the national
security needs of the country for the coming fiscal year?
General Dempsey. Thank you, Chairman.
As I mentioned at our retreat, or your retreat where you
were kind enough to invite me, the strategy that we developed
in 2012, if you recall, we submitted a budget to support that
strategy in 2012 and then in 2013 and 2014, and the budget has
been continually pushing down from that level at which we said
we could achieve our strategy at moderate risk.
We are now at the point where the risk to the strategy has
increased. And what we are reporting to you, as a group of
Joint Chiefs, is that we have reached the edge of that.
So anything below that level of budget support, however you
choose to knit it together for the total amount, will cause us
to have to adjust our strategy. It is as simple as that.
Some of those adjustments will not be life-altering, if you
will, or security-environment altering, and some very well may
be.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In line I think with the discussion that we are going to
have today, could you go back and be a little more specific in
terms of not just the authorities that you need but
flexibility? How can we get that best value for the dollar that
you were suggesting? What is it that--what is it that the
Congress has denied, actually, in terms of that flexibility in
the past, and what would you like to see? How can we best work
together on that?
Secretary Carter. Well, thank you, and I will give you some
examples. And I realize this is not a popularity contest, in
terms of these proposals. Because they are tough things to do.
And that is why there has been debate over them.
Mrs. Davis. That is why you are here.
Secretary Carter. I think that is why we are all here. We
have to do what we have to do for the country's defense. But it
is tough.
And it falls into three categories. And I am using the
categories that I have learned from the chairman. One is in the
acquisition area, where we need to have the discipline to stop
things that aren't working. To not pretend that something is
going to work when it isn't, just to keep going. That we can
afford it, when we can't, just to keep going. Then we have to
stop it and all the money on it has been wasted.
So in the acquisition area there is a lot----
Mrs. Davis. Is there one particular area that when you make
that statement, that you are thinking about, that needs work?
Secretary Carter. Yes, I--well, there is--one is the
process and the paperwork, which is ridiculous, and which leads
to these perverse results. Because the system can sort of keep
suggesting to itself that it is doing the right thing.
And the other thing is the incentives that we--remember we
don't do anything in the Pentagon--we don't build anything in
the Pentagon. We contract out to our excellent industry. So we
depend upon our industry and the incentives that we give them
that to provide what we need that are included in contracts and
other relationship is another place that is critical to think
about in the area of acquisition.
Then there is compensation, how we compensate our troops,
our retirees, families, all very important, very sensitive
issues. But an important part of our spending.
And then a third is the one the chairman was mentioning a
moment ago which is kind of the overhead--the people overhead,
the facilities infrastructure, and I know base closings are not
a wonderfully popular thing either.
But at some point, when the budget comes down, you need to
make sure that you are taking away the tail the same way you
take away the tooth.
So I would--I organize it in those three categories which I
think are the same ones that the chairman does. But these are
difficult choices, there is no question about it. We can only
do these things when we do them together. I know they are hard.
Mrs. Davis. And, General, did you want to comment on that,
as well? And flexibility for the service chiefs, I know that
there is some concern that Goldwater-Nichols has created some
constraints, and perhaps it is time to address those.
General Dempsey. Well, speaking as a former service chief,
the service chiefs have been uniquely limited in their
influence over the acquisition process in terms of identifying
requirements, and then it passes into the acquisition
community. You know, neither side is trying to in some way
limit the other. But there is no kind of life-cycle
responsibility.
So the requirements grow, and the procurement timelines
stretch. And I will just give you an example. Many of you in
this room probably have an iPhone, iPhone 6, I would imagine.
Well, the first iPhone was introduced to the market 8 years
ago. So in 8 years, we have got six variations of iPhone. That
is not the way we deliver our information technologies.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Go on to other members.
The Chairman. Thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And, General Dempsey, thank you for your service.
And to Secretary Carter, welcome to this hearing today and
your new leadership of our Nation and our military. And I want
to thank you.
I would like to start with an article that I read back in
December this year, and then get to a question. The article is
titled ``Down the Opium Rat Hole.'' If you have spent 13 years
pounding money down a rat hole with little to show for it, you
might wake up one morning and say, ``Hey, I am going to stop
pounding money down the rat hole.''
Unfortunately, the United States Government does not think
that way. And when that rat hole is Afghanistan, the billions
are essentially without end.
Mr. Secretary, when I listen to all the threats to a strong
military, and I have Camp Lejeune down in my district and
Cherry Point Marine Air Station. And I think about all the
problems we are faced with, it brings me to this question: We
have 9 years of an obligation, an agreement, that was not voted
on by the Congress and of course the President did not have to
bring it to the Congress, I understand that, so I am not being
critical, but here we are in a almost desperate situation to
fund our military so we will have an adequate and strong
military, and then you read articles like this, and there is
one more that came out this week that says, this is from John
Sopko, by the way, ``Afghanistan cannot manage billions in aid,
U.S. inspector finds.''
There are people on this committee in both parties, and we
have met unofficial I with Mr. Sopko for 2 years and listened
to him, and I am going to ask you and Mr. McCord how in the
world can we, for 9 more years, continue to spend millions and
billions of dollars in a country that we have very little
accountability?
And we had General Campbell here last week, and I was very
impressed with him. Let me make that clear. But the point is
that we will continue to put money down the rat hole and never
say that it is time to stop putting money in the rat hole.
Why in the world can't an administration, and I would say
this if you were Secretary of Defense with George Bush or the
next President, whomever it might be, why can't people like
yourself, sir, be honest with the American people who pay our
salaries, who pay for the military, and say, ``You know what?
We need to rethink where we are. We need to have a benchmark.
We need to say in 3 years, if this has not been accomplished,
and we have not reduced the waste of money, then we might need
to change our policy and start pulling out''?
I want to ask you, sir, with Mr. McCord there, are you
going to bring in John Sopko and these other people to tell you
about the absolutely waste of money in Afghanistan that is
taking away from us rebuilding our military?
Secretary Carter. Well thank you for that, Congressman, and
your very straightforward question. I will try to give you a
very straightforward and honest answer. There are kind of two
parts to it.
One is, the effectiveness and the controls on contingency
contracting in Afghanistan and before that in Iraq. There were
and persist issues with contingency contracting, going back
years now. And I know that Mr. Sopko tracks them.
And I remember when I was Under Secretary for Acquisition,
Technology and Logistics, the difficulties in teaching our
people to do contingency contracting in such a way that there
were always--that contracts were awarded properly. That they
were overseen when they were being executed. And that was not
happening in Afghanistan in many places.
I think the Department has improved over these long years
of war, but it is not perfect yet by any means. It is not where
it should be. So I want to associate myself with your argument.
I guess, indirectly, and Mr. Sopko's, we have got some work to
do.
On the strategic question of Afghanistan, I would say the
following: I--it, to me, ``rat hole'' doesn't quite capture
where we are in Afghanistan. I certainly hope that where we are
in Afghanistan is that we are going to be able over the next
couple of years to increasingly turn the security, the basic
security for that place, over to the Afghan security forces
that we have built in such a way that it doesn't--that country
doesn't pose a threat to the United States anymore, which is
the reason we got in there in the first place.
Now that is a difficult task. General Campbell is doing it
as well as anyone can possibly expect. And we have in President
Ghani in Afghanistan one new ingredient, which is a very bright
one. This is somebody who, when I visited in my first week in
office, Kabul, the first thing he said to me was, would you
please go back and thank Americans, and especially thank
American service members, for what they have done here and are
doing here in Afghanistan? That is a whole different
atmosphere.
And so, in partnership with him over the next couple of
years, our objective is to stand the Afghan security forces up
on their feet, so that we can have a very small presence there
in the future, not the big force we have had, and leave it in a
circumstance where it doesn't threaten us anymore. That is the
plan we have. And, you know, you can never say a plan is 100
percent probability of being successful but I think this has a
high probability of being successful. And Ghani is an important
new ingredient in that.
Mr. Jones. Thank you.
The Chairman. Gentlemen, we have got the largest committee
in Congress. In order to get everybody a chance to ask
questions, I am going to ask members to limit their time to 5
minutes. If at any point you need to supplement and add because
if a question lasts 3 minutes and you have got 2 minutes to
answer it it puts you in a tough position. So feel free to add
any that you need to at the end.
Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Carter and General Dempsey, thank you for coming
today.
Secretary Carter, it was a pleasure working with you in the
past and I am glad to have you back. As I mentioned in the
service chiefs and secretaries hearing yesterday, I appreciate
your sharing the dangers of sequestration. It is a short-
sighted policy that undermines our Nation's ability to project
power, work with our friends and allies, and protect our
citizens, and I hope that our Congress can show the courage to
repeal this bill.
Now while our Nation faces challenges across the globe we
have made strategic choices in developing a focus in the Asia-
Pacific region. Mr. Secretary, it is my understanding that in
many areas such as infrastructure, maintenance, when we take
cuts today we end up paying far more in the future.
Can you talk about areas where we would likely see
increased future cost, if sequestration cuts funding today?
And if you could, make your answers brief, please.
Secretary Carter. I will give you one simple example of why
sequestration is wasteful, as well as damaging to security. And
that is when we are forced by the suddenness of it to curtail
the number of things of the overall size of our procurement in
such a way that we drive up unit costs or we prolong the
duration of a contract. And you all know that a short-term
contract you pay more for than a long-term contract. That is
the kind of thing we are driven to by sequester.
And it is obvious to anybody who has contracted with
somebody to get their lawn mowed or something, that that is
economically inefficient. So it is more than strategically
dangerous as the chairman rightly said, it is wasteful, which
is not what people want.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much. Also I have another
question for you. Can you comment on how, broadly speaking, the
fiscal year 2016 budget supports the strategic rebalance to the
Asia-Pacific region?
How important was removal of the restrictions on the
government of Japan funds for the relocation of the Marines in
last year's defense bill?
And also, are you looking to activate the Guam Oversight
Committee, which I felt was a helpful Internet tool to the DOD?
And how is revision of the U.S.-Japan defense guidelines
going and how important is that to our bilateral relationship
with Japan?
Secretary Carter. Well, thank you.
Just the Asia-Pacific so-called rebalance is central to our
strategy. That is where half of humanity lives. That is where
half of the economy of the world is. And you know, one of the--
strategy means keeping everything in perspective. And while we
are focused as we need to be on ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant], Afghanistan, which is already mentioned, Ukraine
and other trouble spots elsewhere in the world, we have to
remember that this is where much of our future lies.
And the American military presence there has been the
central factor that has kept peace and stability and therefore
prosperity going in that region. We need to keep that going--
and you mentioned Japan and the revision of the guidelines
there. This is an extremely important development.
And by the way, Prime Minister Abe will be visiting the
United States shortly. This is an opportunity for Japan to
become a--help us maintain the peace in the Asia-Pacific
region, but the guidelines are global in scope. So it gives a
military that is quite capable in Japan and a country that
shares a lot of our strategic objectives and basic values a new
way of helping us out in the region and around the world. It is
a very positive thing.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Secretary. My time is
almost out so I don't have time for the third question.
So, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Dempsey, we--the country owes you a great deal of
gratitude. We thank you for your service, all you have done for
this committee and for the country.
Mr. Secretary, we thank you for being here today and it was
my full intention to come in here and applaud you and talk
about how talented you were, which I believe that to be the
case, and realize what a difficult job you have until I heard
your opening remarks.
And let me just ask this question, because you heard
Chairman Thornberry mention the phrase that if we get the--
anything below the President's budget, that we would go below
the lower ragged edge of what we need for national defense.
Do you agree with that?
Secretary Carter. I do.
Mr. Forbes. And would you therefore say if we are going
below that lower ragged edge, that it would be a crisis for
national defense if we went to sequestration, as opposed to the
budget the President's proposed?
So that would be yes?
Secretary Carter. Yes, yes.
Mr. Forbes. Would you also say that that would be
devastating to defense if we went there?
Secretary Carter. Devastating.
Mr. Forbes. Then help me with this, because what really
took me back is when you said that you supported the
President's position to veto any bill that didn't do away with
sequestration, because you do understand that the President's
position is that he would veto any bill that doesn't do away
with sequestration, not just for national defense, but also for
everything else.
Do you understand that is the President's position?
Secretary Carter. I do.
Mr. Forbes. So then what you are telling me as the
Secretary of Defense, you would be prepared to support a veto
that would end up with a crisis for national defense and be
devastating to national defense, unless the President can also
get all the funding he needs for EPA [Environmental Protection
Agency], IRS [Internal Revenue Service], and all the other
nondefense items that he has proposed in the budget.
Is that your position?
Secretary Carter. What we need for defense, Congressman
Forbes, is two things. We need stability----
Mr. Forbes. And that is not my question. I don't mean to
cut you off. But as the chairman said, I only have 5 minutes.
I just need to have you tell this committee that as the
Secretary of Defense you are coming in here today and saying
that unless the President gets a full sequestration taking off
the limits of spending that he has on EPA, IRS, and other
nondefense matters, you would rather have a crisis when it
comes to national defense funding?
Secretary Carter. No, that is not----
Mr. Forbes. Then would you support a bill that this
committee would pass that would do away with sequestration for
national defense only?
Secretary Carter. No, the President--no, I would not.
Mr. Forbes. So then you would support----
Secretary Carter [continuing]. I will tell you why. I will
tell you why. We need relief from sequestration across the
board. Every other manager of an agency in the government----
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Secretary, you are not managing all these
other agencies. You are coming in here today telling us that
you would be prepared to accept a crisis for national defense
unless the President gets the funding he needs for EPA or the
Internal Revenue Service or all these other programs he has
across the country?
Secretary Carter. No, I--no, Congressman. I take a view of
national defense and national security that is--that takes into
account the fact that to protect ourselves and as part of
security, we need the Department of Homeland Security----
Mr. Forbes. I am not saying that. But I am saying you don't
necessarily need the Internal Revenue Service----
Secretary Carter. We need our law enforcement agencies.
Well, I think each of those budgets can be looked at in
their own terms.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Secretary you are the expert on defense and
what we need is that testimony today.
And what bothers me is when you will come in here and say
that you would rather have a crisis in national defense, which
is what the President is saying, by the way, than to cut or
have a cap on any nondefense spending that could be in anywhere
else in the government. And I just find that a travesty.
Let me just say this----
Secretary Carter. I think what the President is saying,
Congressman, and which I agree with, is that we need relief
from sequester across the board. It is no way to run----
Mr. Forbes. But you are the expert on defense.
Secretary Carter [continuing]. A government----
Mr. Forbes. And we may argue on IRS or EPA but what we need
is when you come in here as Secretary of Defense to tell us
that you are not willing to accept a crisis in national defense
if you can't get everything you want with the IRS or EPA, some
of these other funding programs.
And just to put it on the line, when you talked about the
flexibility that you need in Department of Defense, let's just
recognize also, that sometimes Congress has to hold up
flexibility. If we would have given it to the Pentagon in the
1980s we wouldn't have stealth platforms, we wouldn't have
precision munitions, we probably wouldn't have jointness and
also sometimes when you talk about these outside cuts to
facilities, remember what we did to the Joint Forces Command.
Oh, we cut that down and said we are going to save all the
money. All we did is take all those jobs and centralize them in
the Pentagon and the Joint Staff. So we need to make sure, Mr.
Secretary--and I just say this with all due respect, that we
are dealing with a crisis we have in national defense. That is
what this committee should be about. That is what the Pentagon
should be about. And we shouldn't have to hinge all of that on
what happens to the Internal Revenue Service or the EPA.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Secretary Carter. It is great to have you, and
I look forward to working with you, and have appreciated your
insight and knowledge just in the brief testimony you have been
able to make today.
And, Chairman Dempsey, it is always great to see you. And,
as we may not see you again, I just want to reiterate again how
much I have appreciated your always candid, forthcoming
testimony before this committee.
And just to address briefly the issue of sequestration, I
too share the view you have, Secretary Carter, that we have to
deal with it across the board. As we know, how we defend our
country does not exist in isolation. I come from a State that
is heavily invested in education and it is that educated
community that leads so often on developing all the
technologies that all the service chiefs have acknowledged are
very important to how we move forward in defending our country
as we remain very agile.
So, to protect our country as well as we want to, we have
to invest in our minds as much as anything else. So it all is
all very much linked. And I appreciate your acknowledging of
that.
But 2 weeks ago, this committee had the chance to discuss
the proposed AUMF [authorization for the use of military force]
against ISIL with General Austin and Secretary Wormuth, so I
thank you both for your presence here today to continue that
discussion.
And at that hearing, I asked General Austin about the
complexity of the challenges that the United States has to
address to successfully confront ISIL. I liken it to a
multidimensional chess game. And nowhere is that more apparent
than in Tikrit, where recent news reports detail Iran's
involvement in training and equipping Shia militias in support
of the Iraqi government efforts to retake that city.
Iraq's engagement, I think, highlights the complexity of
the challenge, rooted as it is in a highly complex region, and
underscores the need for Congress to weigh in and think through
the assistance that we are providing to the Iraqi government as
well as other partners.
So with that in mind, Secretary Carter, how does Iran's
engagement with the Iraqi government and its military efforts--
the Iraqi government military efforts to confront ISIL
complicate our efforts to ensure a pluralistic order? As we
know, it was the Maliki government's unwillingness to create an
inclusive governing structure that created the opening for
ISIL. So as the Iraqi government seeks out Iran's help and is
receiving it, how do you see it complicating our efforts going
forward?
And then, General Dempsey, how does it complicate our
military efforts?
Secretary Carter. It can complicate our efforts, and that
is why we need to watch this very closely, because, as you say,
it is sectarianism which brought the Iraqi security forces to
the low point that led to their rout last summer in the first
place. And we are supporting a government of Iraq that is
multi-sectarian and that encompasses the entire country. That
is our preference.
And so, our preference is that all operations to combat
ISIL, which we obviously support, are conducted with the
knowledge and authority of the Iraqi government. And we support
them in doing that. When there are others who are conducting
operations without the authority of the Iraqi government, that
is the face of sectarianism rising again in Iraq.
Ms. Tsongas. So, I am sorry, are you saying----
Secretary Carter. And we are very concerned about that.
Ms. Tsongas. So, are you saying what is happening in Tikrit
is without the authority of the Iraqi government, independent
of it?
Secretary Carter. No, I am not. But you are asking me would
I be concerned about a purely sectarian military activity
there, and I would be concerned about that. And I am concerned
that the Iraqi government be controlling and the Iraqi security
forces be controlling in directing all military activity on
Iraqi soil, and that is why the nature of some of the militia
activities and so forth is so concerning to us.
Ms. Tsongas. General Dempsey.
General Dempsey. In terms of how it complicates things
militarily, you know, we are building the Iraqi security forces
to contribute to inclusivity. And they are being the kind of
internal media blitz by the Popular Mobilization Forces has
made them popular because they did succeed in pushing back on
ISIL in and around Tikrit, although they are not having as much
success as I think they initially reported.
So we have the issue of trying to make sure the Iraqi
security forces remain the force for stability in the future
and not this mobilization force.
And, secondly, there is just an issue of deconflicting
space--air space, ground space and decision space. And so, yes,
it does make it complicated.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you.
My time is up.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here today. General Dempsey, your
service to our country, we appreciate so much and wish you well
in the future.
And Secretary Carter, best wishes for success in your
position.
I am very pleased, in a way, to see the concern being
expressed about defense sequestration, because many of us have
been talking about this for the last 2 years. And we have--and,
in particular, General, thank you for pointing out the issue of
readiness, putting our troops at risk.
And this needs to be addressed, but it should also be put
in the context that actually Bob Woodward, the very respected
journalist, in his books, ``The Price of Politics,'' identified
that this was the President's policy. And so, I believe that I
hope he makes every effort to change that policy because the
consequence was revealed yesterday by Secretary James, and that
is that we will have the smallest Air Force since it was
created in 1947, the smallest Army since 1939, the smallest
Navy since 1916.
I believe the American people are at risk and this needs to
be addressed. And it should be pointed out, and I don't want to
finger point, and we don't need to get to that, but the facts
are clear. The House Republicans twice voted to address defense
sequestration, but it was never taken up by the former U.S.
Senate.
As we look at the world today, I am very concerned. General
Jack Keane testified earlier this year about the spread of
radical Islam across North Africa, Central Africa, the Middle
East, Central Asia. And I am just so concerned that safe havens
are being created, which can attack the American people. And in
light of that, in fact, Boko Haram last week, Mr. Secretary,
indicated that they would be a part of ISIL, Daesh [Arabic
acronym for ISIL]. What is our policy to address this
particular situation in Central Africa?
Secretary Carter. Well, you are--as you say, the ISIL
phenomenon is metastasizing. There are groups, and Boko Haram
or some parts of Boko Haram may be one of them, that are
rebranding themselves as ISIL, joining ISIL, getting a new
lease on life by affiliating with this movement.
And it is the ability of this movement to spread through
social media, to motivate younger members of groups that
already existed, radical groups that already existed, but whose
younger members are particularly attracted to the ISIL
ideology, that makes it so dangerous and makes it so important
to combat it wherever it arises.
Mr. Wilson. And I--has there been any progress on releasing
the kidnapped young girls in the region?
Secretary Carter. You are speaking of the ones that were
kidnapped some time ago.
Mr. Wilson. Yes, by Boko Haram.
Secretary Carter. Yes, I think the best I can say about
that in here is that we continue to assist in trying to locate
them and return them to their homes. But that that effort still
continues.
Mr. Wilson. It is such a clear indication of the barbarity
of the people that we are facing.
I want to commend you in regard to your visit to
Afghanistan. You expressed concern about a drawdown and how it
should be conditions-based, and then action has been properly
taken.
What are the conditions that you are looking at in regard
to the drawdown?
Secretary Carter. There are conditions on the ground in
terms of the strength of the Afghan security forces, the
performance of those Afghan security forces. They are
conducting operations, as we speak, in the Helmand Valley,
which are very impressive and unprecedented in the scale and
complexity of an operation that the Afghan security forces do
by themselves. They are absorbing enablers, and so they are
beginning to--the Afghan forces--operate independently. And
that is one set of conditions that are very important.
Another one I mentioned earlier is the successful creation
of a national unity government with President Ghani and CEO
[Chief Executive Officer] Abdullah--their willingness and
ability to do that and what that could mean for the political
development and coherence of Afghanistan.
So there are both things at the military level over there
and things at the political level, both of which are change--a
very different circumstance from a year ago or 2 years ago.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Duckworth.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And General Dempsey, I join my colleagues in sending you
warm wishes your way and thanking you for your many, many years
of serving our great Nation.
Mr. McCord, I would like to chat with you a little bit
about the proposed budget that is upcoming. The House Budget
Committee chairman has proposed boosting the fiscal year 2016
defense budget with an increase of OCO allocation. Is an OCO
dollar just as useful for the Department as a base budget
dollar? In other words, should there be limitations on OCO
funding that Congress needs to be mindful of?
Secretary McCord. Congressman, both dollars are useful to
us if they are provided for the purposes for which, you know,
they are intended and needed. We don't need $36 billion or $38
billion extra OCO. We need that money in the base budget, but
they are both useful to use and both have restrictions in law
and in regulation.
Ms. Duckworth. So if you had your druthers, you would
rather have that--those dollars be in the regular budget as
opposed to OCO funding? Is that correct? Mr. Secretary, do you
want to speak to that?
Secretary Carter. Absolutely. That is where we asked for
it. That is where we need it. That is where we have identified
the needs. And that also, and this is very important and this
gets back to the earlier discussion of sequester, if it is in
the base budget, it is the base upon which we build our future
budgets. And we need stability. We need a horizon so that we
know what our budget is going to be not only this year, but in
years to come. Otherwise, we can't spend it efficiently and we
can't spend it strategically.
So that is--we need that kind of horizon. And sequester is
what robs us of that. And that is why it is bad in a managerial
sense for anybody who has their budget sequestered.
Ms. Duckworth. General Dempsey, do you want to speak to
that and perhaps its effect on readiness?
General Dempsey. Well, as you know, we have been trying to
dig out of a readiness hole. We said 3 or 4 years ago that if
the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan ended then, it would take us 3
or 4 years to recover our readiness. Because we were ready for
10 years for a particular kind of conflict, which you know
better than most. And so we had to kind of recapture our
credentials for other kinds of military missions, to include
high-end.
And sequestration when it hit us last time, readiness tends
to suffer a deeper impact because you have to go get the money
where you can get it. And you can't--in some cases, you can't
get it in manpower. You can't shed it quickly enough. You can't
shed excess infrastructure quickly enough. You sometimes can't
terminate contracts because of the penalties involved.
You end up taking more than you should out of readiness.
So, yes, I do think readiness always suffers more than we
think.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, I, you know, I share the concerns of my
colleagues and other defense officials in terms of the
detriment of sequestration. But I also am interested in
implications for money that is also spent in wasteful and
inefficient ways. Specifically, I am thinking about the fact
that we really don't know the kind of money that we are
spending when it comes to service contractors. And there is
still yet to be enterprise-wide contract manpower reporting
application in DOD. Under your own documentation, I believe the
goal was to have 95 [percent] compliance by 2018. I don't think
you are probably going to make that goal.
So despite the numerous commitments from senior-level DOD
officials, can you tell me when you will re-start work on the
ECMRA [Enterprise-wide Contractor Manpower Reporting
Application]; when you are going to use accepted Army
methodology; and when will you be insisting on compliance from
the components and agencies to ensure that inventory is used to
inform and review decision-makings on taxpayer dollars spend in
the Department?
Secretary Carter. Well, thank you for that. And some of the
detail I will have to supply to you separately.
Ms. Duckworth. That is fine.
Secretary Carter. But the general point that you are
raising is our tradecraft and excellence in the acquisition of
services. And I will just say something for everyone's benefit
that you know, which is half of the money that DOD contracts is
not for goods. It is for services. And so as we talk about
acquisition reform and improving our game, we need to improve
how we acquire services as well. And the initiatives you cite
are some of the ways in which we are trying to improve our
performance and our tradecraft in the acquisition of services
because that is half of our spend.
Ms. Duckworth. Right. And I will give you that--or the
question for answering on the record.
Secretary Carter. Will do.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Turner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, Mr. Chairman, thank you for being here.
Thank you for all your hard and diligent work.
Mr. Secretary, welcome. We are all very pleased and very
happy that you are in your position. You do have very difficult
times and issues as the chairman was indicating in the world
view that we see in front of us.
We need some plain answers and talk on the issue of this
budget. Chairman Dempsey, you and I as you were walking in had
a brief conversation about this. So let me tell you where we
are and then tell you why we need your help.
Right now, the President had submitted a budget that had a
base amount of $561 [billion] and our Budget Committee is
currently marking up a budget with a base of $523. They are
indicating that they want to make up the difference to that
jagged edge of the lowered number, as you said, Mr. Chairman,
by OCO, so that the aggregate number, as you said, Mr.
Chairman, would be somewhere around $613.
You sort of said, however you cobble it together, but how
you cobble it together does make a difference. And I would like
you guys to help us with this. I have told the Budget Committee
that making it up with OCO does not work. Seventy members of
the House signed a letter and sent it to the Budget Committee
asking to honor the base budget number of $561 that the
President asked for.
What I have said to the Budget Committee is that they
should ask you guys. So this is my asking you guys; help us.
So Mr. Secretary, you said that, one, it affects because
based upon--this is the basis upon which you build your next
budget. That is certainly important. But we don't need to hear
that it is an issue of ``rather.'' I think there are structural
issues, as Ms. Duckworth was going to, that are important that
could impede your ability to access those funds.
One, the National Defense Authorization Act isn't marked up
until December. Your fiscal year begins in the fall. Tell us
why a base of $523 with an OCO of $90-plus billion doesn't
work? Or, you are going to be facing that.
Secretary Carter. I will start first, and then the
chairman.
It doesn't work because to have the defense we need and the
strategy that we have laid out, we need the budget that we have
laid out not just in one year, but in the years to come. And
so, budgeting one year at a time, and this proposal is a one-
year-at-a-time thing, doesn't work for national defense. It is
not going to permit us to carry out the strategy as we have
planned.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Secretary, one more thing, to jump in,
because you have said that point before. You said that the
President would veto a bill that legislates sequestration. If
we pass a budget that has $523 as the base and we send you a
National Defense Authorization Act that is a base of $523 with
OCO of $90-plus billion, is that within that veto threat?
Secretary Carter. I think what the President meant was that
a budget that did not relieve sequestration--that is, give a
multiyear perspective for the budget, he would veto not just
for defense, but as has been mentioned earlier, for others as
well.
Mr. Turner. Okay. Now, getting to, Mr. Chairman, OCO, Mr.
Secretary, there are restrictions. If we don't lift those
restrictions in our bill, the NDAA doesn't get passed until
December and your fiscal year begins before that. Won't you
have a period of time, almost a quarter of a year, where you
can't use the money?
Secretary McCord. Yes. If this is done without an
appropriation that is in line with it, you are right. We would
have that problem. And I think your earlier point, too, the
question about whether this approach being proposed by the
House committee would be acceptable to the Senate, to the
President; the uncertainty about whether this would even work
for this year, is another one of the problems with that
approach.
Mr. Turner. So you guys have got 40 more seconds. If you
want to tell the Congress why they shouldn't do this, you
should do it now. Because otherwise, you will be facing this.
General Dempsey. I am not going to tell the Congress why
they shouldn't do it; the Congress makes its own decisions with
my advice.
My advice is that we need to fix our base budget, because
you build the institution through the base budget, and you
respond to contingencies with the fund called Other Contingency
Operations.
We submit a 1-year budget but in the context of a 5-year
Future Defense Plan, and we won't have the kind of certainty we
need over that period if the current strategy is followed.
But look, as you heard the service chief say, you know, we
are at the point where this is better than nothing, but
frankly, it doesn't do what we should be doing for defense in a
predictable fashion.
Mr. Turner. Thank you.
The Chairman. I would mention to the gentleman, it is going
to be before December before we have a defense authorization
bill this year. Senator McCain and I are determined to move--I
know it is different than we have had in the past, but it is
going to move a whole lot quicker.
Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, you said in your opening comments that you
would never send our men and women into harm's way without the
necessary readiness, the necessary equipment, and the necessary
doctrine. I think you would also agree that we shouldn't send
them in harm's way without the necessary strategy.
I am having a difficult time in light of the 6 months
during which we have been at war in Iraq and Syria against ISIS
and in light of the President's authorization for the use of
military force, or AUMF, that is now before this Congress for
consideration.
I am having a very hard time understanding what the
strategy is, and I want to make sure that--as my colleagues
have said, that we fund our military well beyond the budget
caps and sequester levels--I agree with them there--but I
think, perhaps more importantly, that we have the necessary
strategy in place so that their efforts, those men and women
serving this country and our interests overseas are not in
vain.
Could you answer the strategy question for me?
Secretary Carter. Certainly, first of all, strategy is--
does take a--in addition to geographic perspective, a multiyear
perspective and a multiyear commitment, which is why annual
budgetary turmoil isn't consistent with our strategy in taking
a strategic view.
With respect to the strategy against ISIL, and defeating
ISIL, in Iraq, the first thing I would say is that we not only
need to defeat ISIL, we need to defeat them in a lasting
manner. That is always the difficult part.
We can defeat ISIL, but defeating them in a lasting manner
means having somebody on the ground who keeps them defeated
after we assist them in the defeat.
On the Iraq side of the border, that is the Iraqi
government, a multi-sectarian force organized by the Iraqi
government. That is our strategic objective----
Mr. O'Rourke [continuing]. To interrupt there, we will just
take the Iraqi portion of this.
From my understanding, based on the testimony from the
excellent series of hearings that the chairman has brought
before us, our strategy there largely relies on training,
equipping, and advising the Iraqi national army. We have spent
tens of billions of dollars doing just that from 2003 to 2010
to awful effect. The army melted in the face of a far inferior
enemy.
What is different about our strategy today that is going to
ensure its success?
Secretary Carter. Well, it will hinge, as it did then, upon
a multi-sectarian approach by the government of Iraq. Without
that, it cannot succeed.
And what happened to the Iraqi security forces a year ago
was that they collapsed because sectarianism had taken root in
the government of Iraq, and the people who lived in the regions
that were swept over by ISIL were not willing to accept or
support the Iraqi security forces, as they were then
configured.
They need to be configured in a non-sectarian manner--a
multi-sectarian manner, or it won't be possible to have that
lasting defeat of ISIL on the Iraqi side of the border. It is
as critical now as it was last year.
Mr. O'Rourke. Mr. Secretary, with all due respect, the
strategy insofar as we understand it today, I think, is
insufficient to achieving the President's aims of degrading and
destroying ISIS, to your aims of ensuring a lasting defeat of
ISIS. I think if we are honest with ourselves and the American
public and the service members who will act out the policies of
this country, if we are going to achieve those aims, we are
going to need U.S. ground forces in Iraq and Syria.
We cannot depend on a Syrian moderate opposition force. We
cannot depend on the political whims of the different sectarian
factions in Iraq. We should not depend on Iranian-backed Shia
militias in that country as well.
If we are going to do this, let's be honest about what it
is going to take to do it.
And with today's topic of the budget in mind, do we have
the resources necessary in the President's request to support
ground forces to achieve our tactical and strategic goals in
Syria and Iraq vis-a-vis ISIS?
Secretary Carter. I will answer that first, and the
chairman may want to add something to it. We do have the
resources to support our strategy.
The one ingredient, very important ingredient, that you
left out was air power, and we are applying air power in a very
effective way in support of ground forces that are not U.S.
ground forces but that are local ground forces, because we want
a lasting defeat of ISIL and only local forces on the ground
can impose a lasting defeat. And that is our strategy.
Chairman.
General Dempsey. And if I could, just in the interest of
time, Chairman, I will take this for the record, because I do
think the strategic advantage we have is the coalition, and I
think that will eventually be the path to enduring defeat.
But I will take it for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 102.]
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you both.
The Chairman. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here.
Secretary Carter, I want to start off with a shamelessly
parochial issue.
The AMPV [Armored Multi-Purpose Vehicle] program, which I
know you are familiar, is replacing the M113 combat vehicle,
which is maintained at the Anniston Army Depot. I am very
interested in seeing the AMPV maintained at the Anniston Army
Depot.
Do you know who is going to make that decision and when
about where the source of repair is going to be made?
Secretary Carter. I do not know when that source selection
will be made, but I will find out and make sure we get back to
you.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Rogers. General Dempsey, based on open-source
reporting, Russia is planning to put tactical nuclear weapons
in the illegally seized territory of Crimea.
What is your best military advice as to how we as a nation
should respond to that?
General Dempsey. Well, there are several things.
I saw the same open-source report. I haven't seen it
reflected in intelligence, and if I had, I would have suggested
we would have this conversation in closed session.
There are other things that Russia is doing that seem to be
provocative in nature, and I think we have to make it very
clear that things like their compliance with the INF
[Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces] Treaty--that there will be
political, diplomatic, and potentially military costs in terms
of the way we posture ourselves and the way we plan and work
with our allies to address those provocations.
So I have seen it. It concerns me greatly. I certainly
would counsel them not to roll back the clock to previous
experiences, and I have had those conversations with my
counterpart.
Mr. Rogers. Great.
And this would be for Secretary Carter. I was very pleased,
a couple days after you were approved by the Senate for your
new position, to see you publicly announce that this INF Treaty
violation by Russia can no longer be tolerated without some
sort of response.
I am curious. How much longer do you think it will be
before we do provide some sort of response to that violation,
that continued violation of the INF Treaty?
Secretary Carter. Our response is twofold.
One is to--a diplomatic one, which is to try to get the
Russians to come back into compliance with the INF Treaty. Not
my responsibility, but an important part of it.
But on the military side, we have begun to consider--and I
think this--what our options are, because the INF Treaty is a
treaty, meaning that it is a two-way street. We accepted
constraints in return for constraints of the then Soviet Union.
It is a two-way street, and we need to remind them that it is a
two-way street, meaning that we, without an INF Treaty, can
take action also that we both decided years ago it was best for
neither of us to take.
So we are looking at our alternatives in the areas of
defense against the systems that they might field in violation
of the INF Treaty, counterforce options and countervailing
options.
All of those are available to us. We are looking at all of
those because the Russians need to remember this is a two-way
street.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I appreciate that. I would hope that one
thing that you would consider is to modify the Aegis Ashore
site that we are currently constructing in Deveselu, Romania,
with the capacity to defend itself against those intermediate-
range missiles that they are illegally testing.
Secretary Carter. Defenses are one of those, the categories
of response that we can consider.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much.
That is all I have, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Takai.
Mr. Takai. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, Mr. Secretary.
And nice to see you again, General. I wanted to ask a
little bit about what is happening in Hawaii. There has been a
lot of talk regarding the drastic reductions in Army troop
levels, which I believe actually is contrary to the Defense
Strategic Guidance that called for the rebalance or the shift
to the Pacific.
So, Mr. Secretary, does the President's fiscal year 2016
budget request provide you with the capabilities and the
resources to conduct a rebalance to the Pacific? And how would
drastic reductions in this theater affect this capability?
Secretary Carter. Well, it does provide for the rebalance,
but I want to second what the chairman said, which is we are on
the ragged edge of being able to satisfy all the ingredients of
our strategy, of which the Asia-Pacific rebalance is a central
ingredient.
So if we don't get some budget stability and we keep doing
things one year at a time and one piece at a time, we are going
to have to reconsider our strategy. The way I put it earlier is
not just the size, but the shape.
Now, I would hope that our rebalance to the Asia-Pacific is
something that we are able to sustain. And, in our budget and
our multiyear budget plan, we are able to sustain it.
But under sequester and in one-year-at-a-time fashion, as
the chairman said, we are on the ragged edge in our strategy,
and something will have to give.
Mr. Takai. Okay, thank you.
And, Mr. Secretary, the other purpose of this hearing is to
talk about the President's requests, the AUMF requests, so I
wanted to shift gears a little bit and talk about that and ask
you to clarify some aspects of the request.
In subsection (c), called ``limitations,'' it says the
authority granted in subsection (a) does not authorize the use
of the United States Armed Forces in, ``enduring offensive
ground combat operations.''
So what is ``enduring offensive ground combat operations''?
Does this refer to the length of time in which the operation is
ongoing, the scope of the operations, some undefined
relationship between time and scope?
Secretary Carter. Well, thanks. The AUMF, for me, as
Secretary of Defense, two things are important in the AUMF. One
is that it gives us the flexibility to carry out our campaign,
and that speaks to the provision you quote, and I will come
back to that in a minute.
But the other is that it is passed up here on Capitol Hill
in a way that says very clearly to our men and women who are
conducting the campaign against ISIL that the country is behind
them. That is very important to me. Both the content of the
AUMF and that it is supported widely in the Congress.
To get to the provisions of it, the AUMF doesn't try to say
everything that is permitted. Instead, which is, I think, wise
because for the chairman and me we need the flexibility to
conduct the campaign against ISIL in the way that the enemy--
that defeating that enemy requires.
It does rule out, using the language that you described,
what the President has said, an Iraq- or Afghanistan-type long
off-period of offensive combat operations. And that is, that
language, by taking that possibility only out, leaves, to me,
our Department, the flexibility we need to conduct the campaign
against ISIL both practically and geographically, because we
don't foresee having to conduct another campaign like Iraq or
Afghanistan, and that is the one thing that is ruled out in the
formulation you describe.
Elsewhere, we have substantial flexibility under the
President's formulation, and I welcome that, because I said,
flexibility and widespread support are the two things that we
need most.
Chairman, do you want to add anything to that?
General Dempsey. There is no doctrinal term in our military
taxonomy that is ``enduring offensive.'' But it is clearly a
statement of intent by the Commander in Chief. It does allow us
to execute the campaign as it is currently designed.
Mr. Takai. Okay, thank you, I appreciate that. But maybe if
you can, for the record, provide it to us. I mean, I think it
is important to define this provision of the request. So if you
can provide it in writing, some clarity as to what the
President means by ``enduring combat ground offensive
operations?'' Thank you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 102.]
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you so much for joining us today, and
thank you for your service to our Nation.
We have heard a lot about how we are going to address
future challenges in our military. Obviously, a lot on the
funding side, but I want to follow up, Secretary Carter, with
some of the things you have spoken about about how we can do a
better job in the dollars that we get in spending. Especially
in making decisions on things like acquisition, big programs,
making sure we have efficiency and timeliness in those
decisions. That agility, as Admiral Howard spoke about
yesterday, is critical.
Give me your perspective on where you believe we are right
now with the acquisition process. Should there be greater
authorities given throughout the different levels of decision-
making in acquisition? And what do we really need to do as far
as acquisition and, well, acquisition reform throughout the
process?
Secretary Carter. Well, thank you, and thank you for your
interest in that subject, because it is central. And I
appreciate the fact that this committee is committed to it.
And I am sorry I can't give a simple answer to that because
there are so many ways that we can improve our performance in
acquisition. And that we need to improve our performance in
acquisition.
There is acquisition of services that has been mentioned
previously. There is the requirements process and the role of
the service chiefs. And I would--I personally welcome a greater
role on the part of the service chiefs in the acquisition
system. I think maybe Goldwater-Nichols went too far in the
other direction in that regard, and we could get some of that
back.
There is an enormous amount of simple process that
encumbers good sense. There is some training that is required
to better equip our people to interact with industry and
understand how to give appropriate incentives and partnership
with the industry that we serve.
There is the technology point that the chairman was
pointing to earlier, where we have to work very hard to stay up
with today's eight generations of iPhones. We can't take for
granted anymore that we are at the cutting edge. We have to
fight our way to the cutting edge again.
So there are many, many dimensions to this. And I--this is
something that I believe we will be continuing to struggle with
for a long time because technology changes, the world changes,
and we have to keep up if we are gonna continue to have the
best military in the world.
Mr. Wittman. General Dempsey, your perspective on what we
can do to help the procurement and acquisition process?
Yesterday, some of the chiefs said they would like to be able
to have the thresholds heightened so that they can be more
involved in that decision-making process.
And give me your perspective too on how do we get, as
Secretary Carter said, how do we get technology ideas,
innovation, more quickly to the warfighter?
General Dempsey. Well, I align myself both with what the
chiefs said yesterday about increasing their role in this
process because it is a very bright red line right now that
probably needs to be dotted, as we say, so there can be much
more collaboration across it.
And, in terms of the technology, I think it is a
combination of shortening our programmatic time horizons. You
know, I recall the days of the Future Combat System, which was
conceived in 2003. It was going to deliver in 2017, which, to
my way of looking at it, doomed it to a graceless death from
the moment because we--that is seven cycles of the Congress of
the United States.
So I just think we have to take a look at the pace at which
we try to develop.
I think, as the Secretary said, commercial is outpacing
government at this point. And we can either fight that or find
ways to conform to it.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Secretary Carter, just your perspective, it seems like what
you are advocating is putting more authority but also
accountability in the hands of decision-makers, so taking it
more away from process, which, right now, is more of a process-
driven effort, to more of a person- or individual-driven
effort.
Kind of give me your perspective on where you think the
balance is there, because it seems like we are too much of a
process-driven effort today.
Secretary Carter. I think that is right.
We have gotten to a point where there are as many checkers
as there are doers. And we need the doers to be enabled and
then held accountable.
So today, you have the worst of all worlds. There aren't
enough doers, and when something goes wrong, you can't tell how
it happened or what its causes were or who is responsible for
it.
Mr. Wittman. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Graham.
Ms. Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Carter and General Dempsey.
First, Secretary Carter, congratulations on your recent
confirmation.
And General Dempsey, I want to say thank you not only for
your generosity of time before this committee but also with new
members in general. You have been very, very kind, so thank
you.
First, I would like to start, Secretary Carter, in 1915,
100 years ago this year, the Mark V dive helmet, the trademark
of diving, was created.
Military divers are located at a number of military
installations around the country, including at the Naval
Support Activity Center in Panama City, which is in my
district. I had the opportunity to visit recently, and it is
just phenomenal.
With the 100th year upon us, Mr. Secretary, I would much
appreciate if you would support the designation of 2015 as the
year of the military diver to honor those who are serving and
have served and will serve as military divers for our country.
Secretary Carter. Well, first of all, thank you for hosting
our folks and for supporting service members in your district.
We don't take it for granted. We are very appreciative of it.
And that sounds like an excellent way of commemorating the
significance of the diver community, so thank you for that
suggestion.
Ms. Graham. Thank you. I really appreciate that support,
and I know that the men and women who serve as military divers
do as well. So thank you.
A separate question; yesterday, to both General Dempsey and
Secretary Carter, I asked the secretaries about their wounded
warrior care programs.
As the Congress debates a new authorization for use of
military force, one of my priorities is knowing that we should
engage in military--in current or future--or military--current
or future conflicts that our military service members go into
this fight with confidence that this country will take care of
them, especially the most severely injured, when they return
home.
So I would like to learn, what is the Department of Defense
doing to ensure the transition from active service to the VA
[U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] for our most injured and
ill service members, and what can we do to make sure that we
identify every discharged service member who qualifies for the
VA's Federal Recovery Care?
And I appreciate your answers.
Secretary Carter. Well, I will start, and then, Chairman,
if you want to join in.
First of all, thank you for your interest in that, too. We
are fortunately at a period right now where the chairman, and
I, on a weekend at Bethesda, won't find 10 new wounded
warriors, as was the case for many years when I was serving in
the Department and chairman was serving in the Department. And
we are very grateful for that.
But we can't forget that those who have been wounded will--
in many cases, they are 20 years old. They have a long life
ahead of them, and that means we have a long obligation to
them. And I am concerned that our country remembers the
sacrifice of the service members in all the years that they
will live, and I think we owe them that.
And of course, we hand them off to the VA, and your
question goes to, how good is the transition program for their
care to the VA and, in general, to civilian life. That is
something that we have done a lot of work on in the course of
these works, but I think there is more that we can do and
should do to smooth that transition and prepare them for the
life ahead.
But, you know, to me, it is really something from the heart
that we need to--remember, these are young people. They have
got a long life ahead of them. It can be a productive, happy,
and wonderful life for them, notwithstanding the sacrifice they
made at a young age.
But we owe them the help to make sure that they can do
that.
Chairman, do you want to add anything?
General Dempsey. Thanks, Mr. Secretary.
Yes, we have actually--the service chiefs and I and with
the help of the Department have included in our budget two
aspects of this.
One is the care of those who have already been wounded
through the life cycle of their care.
And secondly, importantly, we are taking a look at--there
are three areas where we have developed incredible expertise,
and we can't let it erode. One is amputees, second is burn
victims, and third is brain injury.
And so we are looking to the future now that we don't have
a population, thankfully, that is suffering those injuries. We
have got to make sure we can sustain our expertise that we have
developed, and that is also baked into the budget as well.
Ms. Graham. Thank you very much. And our hearts are in the
same place.
And I yield back the time I don't have left. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Hunter.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here. Mr. Secretary, it is
great to see you in your new position.
So three things.
First one is this: When it comes to acquisition reform, one
of the best ways to do it, I think, is, instead of doing a
process or policy change, which we do every year, part of the--
if you can use technology and actually change the system
itself.
For instance, you have testing. It takes months to test our
systems, whether you are talking F-35 or an Aegis test. It
takes forever.
There is now a programmatic line in your budget request
that we are going to match and hopefully put more money in. It
is a new way to test, where you can test your Aegis cruisers on
the spot, literally on the spot as they are out there in the
water and see if they are going to work or not.
That has met with fierce resistance, even in SPAWAR [Space
and Naval Warfare Systems Command] in San Diego, where they
say, ``We have entire departments that are testing
departments.'' That is what they do. You have entire
departments that spend years and years simply testing. They
aren't happy about things like this that really disrupt the
system and cause reform just because of the nature of the
technology, if that makes sense.
So I would encourage this committee and you to, instead of
just doing policy reforms, working within the system and
technology to put in systems that reform no matter what.
Because people can't stop it, right? If it is faster, it takes
fewer people.
There is major pushback, because you have literally tens of
thousands of people within DOD and OSD [Office of the Secretary
of Defense] who test. That is their job. They don't like it.
That is the first thing.
Number two, we talked about ISIS in Syria and Iraq and our
coalition partners.
You have Jordan, for instance. Jordan, I have talked to
them. I have written the President letters. We have MQ-1s and
MQ-9s in warehouses, even if--and we have the Exportable
Predator, too, the XP. Even if you would change the ITAR
[International Traffic in Arms Regulations] rules and State
approves this stuff, it will take a year or two to get these in
the hands of the Jordanians.
You have to deal them with the qualitative military edge
[QME] issue with Israel, because the Jordanians would then own
those aircraft. A fix to this, I think, is taking some of the
aircraft that we have now that are in warehouses, letting the
Jordanians fly them and basically having the contractor that
makes the Predator, have them recover and launch and have them
do it.
So then the Jordanians don't own them, there is no QME
problem, and they are able to use that now. And they are
requesting this now. The king has requested this, his
ambassador has requested this, and their military liaisons here
in the U.S. have requested this, too.
Just want to run that by you. What do you think?
Secretary Carter. Thank you.
That is one of the, actually, many forms of assistance to
the Jordanians and other coalition partners that we are looking
at, and no decision has been made about that.
But the logic that you describe and the possibility that
you describe is a real one. And to get back to your testing
thing, I think that is a very good point also. Technology can
transform the way we do tests and therefore the ponderousness
and the cost of the test system. So both good points.
Chairman, you want to add anything on the----
General Dempsey. Just after King Abdullah visited, the
Secretary chartered his deputy to run a senior initiative group
[SIG] to take a look at all the coalition members, because
there are many requests coming in and there is this thing--it
is called a warfighting SIG--that the Secretary directed that
is getting at things like that.
And you are right. Your letter is being addressed at the
Department of State right now.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
And the last thing is, I am going to have a piece of
legislation, due to all the hostages that we have had taken in
Iraq and Syria and Afghanistan. We kind of have--it is on an
unprecedented level to have so many hostages taken in places
where we don't have a big FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]
contingency, where the FBI can't do it.
The FBI still has purview over hostages, anywhere in the
world. So, even if they only have 3 agents at the embassy in
Iraq, or 12 agents, whatever, they don't have the ability that
JSOC [Joint Special Operations Command] has, that any of our
special operators or just big Army, big Marine Corps, whoever.
I think that there needs to be a buck-stops-here person.
Your predecessor, Mr. Secretary, put in Mike Lumpkin, who was
the ASD SO/LIC [Assistant Secretary of Defense, Special
Operations/Low-Intensity Conflict]. He became the hostage guy
during the Bergdahl case, at our recommendation.
And we also recommended this, that there be a buck-stops-
here person that answers to the President. So that person,
whether they choose the FBI or the CIA [Central Intelligence
Agency] or the DIA [Defense Intelligence Agency] or DOD,
whoever has the most resources to bring to bear for that
particular hostage case, I think that is the way we should go,
and we can maybe recover a few of these hostages, which we
haven't done yet.
Just wonder if you could comment on that. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Carter. My only comment would be you are
absolutely right, that this hostage rescue is an example of
something that can only be done with a whole-of-government
approach. We need, obviously, things to be done in a way that
is law enforcement sensitive, but in many cases, we have the
assets or the Intelligence Community has the assets, or it
involves Homeland Security.
And this gets to the point I was making earlier. I mean, I
have to take a view of security and the future strength of our
Nation that is--that looks beyond the Department of Defense
itself to all of the instruments of national power and
everything that is going to carry us into the future.
And these kinds of operations are a perfect example of
that, where you need all those parts to come together. You are
right, we do need a choreographer when that time comes to bring
all those pieces together. It is very--it is essential. But the
times in which we live require for most problems that there be
the defense instrument and then other pieces of the government
as well, whether it be technology, whether it be our personnel,
or whether it be operations.
The Chairman. Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, gentlemen, thank you very much for your service to the
country. There is tremendous bipartisan agreement on this
committee that we need to move past the sequester. I just came
from a Budget Committee hearing where this is being debated.
There is a lot of frustration with the way that the budget is
being handled at the present.
But the question, therefore, is just how do we get there?
How do we figure that out? One question that has been debated
much this morning on this committee is is there a role for
nondefense spending cut under the Budget Control Act in
ensuring our national defense? And, I think, Secretary Carter,
you have made your view quite clear on that.
General Dempsey, I was wondering if you could offer your
own comments.
General Dempsey. Look, everything we do around the world in
terms of security these days are done with other government
partners. Whether it is DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration],
[Department of] Homeland Security, FBI, CIA, and so, yes, there
is a role on the nondefense side for security.
Mr. Moulton. Great, thank you.
If you could both comment on this, and I want to be just
very specific here to try to cut through the rhetoric. What are
the top five programs or weapons systems that you want to cut
to take that money and better invest it in ensuring the safety
of our troops--the safety and success of our troops on the
ground or more broadly in our future national defense, but are
prevented from cutting by congressional politics?
Secretary Carter, perhaps we can start with you.
Secretary Carter. There are more than five, I am sorry to
say. And some of them are programs, some of them are older
platforms.
There has been a lot of discussion and debate around the A-
10, for example, in the Air Force, which the Air Force wishes
to retire, not because it is not an excellent airplane but
because their budget doesn't provide room for it anymore
compared to other things that are higher priority. So that is
one.
And we--there are a number of those that we have enumerated
in past years. And we are willing to work with people here. We
understand--I want to find common ground with people, but we
can't just continue to be frustrated year after year in these
program areas or in a whole number of compensation areas,
efficiency areas, and so forth.
And I would be happy to provide to the committee a list,
and it will be more than five items of initiatives that we have
proposed in past years. This was before I was here. But that we
thought on balance and sometimes with great regret, as in the
retirement of older systems, we needed to do, and we have not
been permitted by Congress to take those steps.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Secretary. If you could provide
that list, I would greatly appreciate it.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 103.]
Mr. Moulton. General Dempsey, if you could, as specific as
possible, outline--specifically as possible, outline what
things would be on your list.
General Dempsey. Well, I actually can't, Congressman,
because--recall my role. The services build their program to
deliver service capabilities, which then we integrate into a
joint force. So what we submitted was actually what we believed
we need to accomplish a joint force to execute the strategy.
I am not in a position now to tell you that, you know,
there were ways we could have done it otherwise. We have given
you our best advice. And I can't help you decide how to find
the money to do it. We need the capabilities we have described
in our budget.
Mr. Moulton. Fair enough. Thank you very much, gentlemen.
Chairman, I yield my time.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you both, or all of you being here. I appreciate
that, and we all do.
Secretary Carter, as you know, Qatar is an important
partner of ours. We have troops stationed there, and they have
played a role in the counter-ISIS fight.
However, they are playing both sides. There are a number of
U.S.-designated terrorist financiers operating openly in Qatar.
The leadership of Hamas, a designated terrorist organization,
openly operates there and they have been financing some very
bad Islamist extremists.
So my question is, how can the U.S. hold them accountable
and how can we make it clear that playing both sides is simply
unacceptable?
Secretary Carter. Thank you for the question. Qatar, as
with other of our coalition partners in the fight against ISIL,
are being very helpful. And in the case of the Qataris in terms
of the air base we use, indispensable.
At the same time, not everything that our coalition
partners do in the region are things that we support or that we
think are constructive with respect to either the ISIL fight or
other things.
And so, all of our partners are--we are trying to work with
so that we get their support for the fight against ISIL, but we
can continue to work with them on areas where we disagree. And
there are disagreements we have with almost all of our
coalition partners that are helping us with ISIL. And we just
try to work through them.
Mr. Lamborn. But, Secretary, I understand that we may
disagree on this or that issue, but when their policy is
cutting against what we are trying to accomplish in that very
fight, I have got a real problem with that.
Secretary Carter. Well, we have problems with that too in
some cases, and we explain that in our view that their policies
are contradictory in that way. But we have those disagreements
with them we try to work through while at the same time
benefiting from their help where we can agree.
But we don't agree 100 percent of the time.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you.
Also, Secretary Carter or General Dempsey, on the AUMF, I
have a real problem with the two major limitations that the
President has put into his proposed language: a limitation on
time and a limitation on scope.
Is it right to be tying the hands of this President or a
future President in that way?
Secretary Carter. I will start first, and then, Chairman,
if----
Mr. Lamborn. And if you have already addressed this, I
apologize. I was in another committee meeting.
Secretary Carter. No, the time part--no, no, no, I did not.
On the scope, the proposed AUMF gives us wide scope to
conduct the campaign that we are anticipating against ISIL.
The time limitation has nothing to do with the length of
the campaign. It has--it--I cannot tell you that the campaign
will be over in 3 years. I don't think anybody can tell you
that.
That feature of the AUMF is included for reasons that are
not military-related. They are related to the fact--they are
derived from the fact that we will have a new President in 3
years and the AUMF provides for a new President, and for that
matter a new Congress, to revisit this issue.
Now, that is not something that comes from the Secretary of
Defense, or I would say from our thinking. But we understand
and respect it. It derives from the way the Constitution
regards use of military force as a very grave matter in which
both the Congress and the executive branch play a role.
So I understand that; I respect that. But the number three
doesn't come from the campaign. It comes from our political
system. And again, as I understand and respect that and I hope
the result of all this is an AUMF that tells our troops that we
are behind them in this fight.
That is the key thing to me, in addition to having the
flexibility to main--to carry out the campaign that will win.
General Dempsey. Congressman, I was consulted on the AUMF
before it was submitted to you and I believe it does allow us
to execute the campaign that we anticipate against ISIL.
I think what you are sensing is the difference in using
military force against state actors, nation states, and these
groups of non-state actors, which have a very different
character to them.
And I think the last time we ever were handed a completely
unconstrained authorization to use force was probably
Eisenhower's orders on the eve of the invasion of Europe, where
he was told to take the Armed Forces of the United States,
deploy them to the continent of Europe and defeat Nazi Germany.
That is probably the last time we have had a completely
unconstrained AUMF.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary and General Dempsey. Good to see
you again.
I wanted to talk a little bit about that--the AUMF that was
just discussed in this wide scope that you just mentioned. You
know, one of the questions I had was the hostility.
Would the--if the hostility--it doesn't say anything about
the termination of hostilities at the 3-year period.
Is it your feeling that hostilities could continue and that
we could have actions against ISIL beyond the 3 years as
currently written and implemented?
Secretary Carter. Again, the 3 years is not a prediction
about the duration of the campaign to defeat ISIS. It is a
recognition of the way our political system works and the
recognition that a new President and a new Congress in 3 years
may wish to revisit this issue. As I said, I understand and
respect that. But it isn't a prediction about the duration of
the campaign against ISIL.
Mr. Aguilar. General.
General Dempsey. My military experience and judgment
suggests that the answer of your question is it will likely
extend beyond 3 years.
Mr. Aguilar. Could it extend--could hostilities extend
without a new AUMF by a new commander?
General Dempsey. If I understood the question, the enemy
gets a vote, as we say, on how long hostilities extend.
I don't--I honestly don't understand the question.
Mr. Aguilar. Sure, sure. I guess what I am trying to
understand is, is as proposed, if Congress gives the authority
to use military force, we have this 3-year window which you
both said is--you know, offers a flexibility but is more a
political discussion than anything and it allows the new
President to make that determination.
Absent a new discussion about AUMF, could hostilities
continue in perpetuity beyond the 3-year window?
Secretary Carter. I think the AUMF that the President
proposed would require action by a new administration and a new
Congress in 3 years, in light of the circumstances at the time,
which we can't foresee.
Mr. Aguilar. One of the other pieces that isn't discussed
is detention policies within the AUMF and this was discussed in
another hearing that this committee had as well.
Could you provide us with examples of what U.S. forces
could and could not do with respect to detention policies under
the AUMF, under the proposed AUMF?
Secretary Carter. Under the AUMF, the law of armed conflict
and all the applicable U.S. and international law would apply
to detention operations, as they would apply to all aspects of
waging this campaign.
Mr. Aguilar. General.
General Dempsey. I have nothing to add to that,
Congressman.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Fleming.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary Carter, Chairman Dempsey, thank you for your
service and thank you for coming for us today.
You know, the President has said that his goal is to
destroy ISIS. He has submitted a proposed AUMF. In the AUMF it
says a limitation is no enduring offensive ground combat
operations. That suggests no significant boots on the ground,
sort of a colloquial expression that we use about that.
So my question to both of you gentlemen is can you give
examples of wars America has won with sustained success and
peace without substantial ground forces in relation to the foe?
Secretary Carter. I am not a historian so I am not sure I
can answer your question from an historical point of view. I
can give a logical answer, a commonsense answer to the boots on
the ground question as it applies to a campaign like the one
against ISIL.
And it has to do with the--who sustains the victory after
ISIL is defeated, because we seek not only the defeat of ISIL
but we seek the lasting defeat of ISIL----
Dr. Fleming. Well, if I can interrupt you----
Secretary Carter [continuing]. That means that--if I can
just finish the thought that means that there are local forces
involved who control the territory after it is won back. That
is our strategy and otherwise we have boots on the ground for a
very long time.
Dr. Fleming. Well, you know, many experts believe that the
main reason why we have the ISIS problem we have today is we
didn't have a status of forces agreement and we didn't have a
stay-behind force.
So again, I will ask you, Chairman Dempsey, can you name
the wars that America has won without sustained boots on the
ground against a significant foe?
And I do believe--I remember that Boko Haram now has given
its allegiance. The forces are growing with ISIS and we know
how barbaric they are.
Can you name some examples of wars we have won without
boots on the ground?
General Dempsey. We have--historically we have had several
campaigns against insurgencies--in the Philippines, for
example, back at the turn of the last century and generally
our--actually our campaign strategy has been the same as it is
today, which is to find a coalition and to find indigenous
forces--as we used to call them, now we call them regional
partners--to do the lion's share of the lifting because, unless
they own it, they will often allow us to own it.
Dr. Fleming. Well, then can you tell us who this--these
forces are going to be?
Now I get we are trying to stand up, again, an Iraqi army
that fell apart because we left.
But can you explain in other regions outside of Iraq, where
we are getting these forces, where they are coming from and
when they are going to take action?
General Dempsey. I will. But I don't want to align myself
with that we were the cause of the current crisis. I think the
Secretary mentioned earlier that Iraq had an opportunity to
demonstrate to its population that it would actually work on
its behalf of all groups and failed to do that, which provided
the environment in which this challenge arose.
We have got a 20-nation coalition; we have--two of--members
of which are the Kurdish forces and the Iraqi forces. We have--
we are working to develop a moderate Syrian opposition. We are
calling it the New Syrian Forces. We are hardening regional
allies--you heard some of that discussed moments ago--and it is
actually--the reason that the campaign has a defeat mechanism
is the coalition. It is not----
Dr. Fleming. Well, again----
General Dempsey [continuing]. Our activities.
Dr. Fleming [continuing]. Who are the core forces, who are
going to be the core forces, in Syria, for example?
Again, we hear about the Free Syrian Army, which nobody
really seems to know who they are. They were referred to, of
course, as doctors and pharmacists before and we are going to,
I guess, offline train them someplace maybe in Kuwait.
But again ISIS is growing every day; they are killing a
number of people in very brutal ways, specifically going after
Christians and Jews, so my question is who is this core force
that is going to go up against ISIS in the near future?
I am still very vague on who this force is?
Secretary Carter. Well, there are forces. It depends on
which side of the border you are talking about.
On the Iraqi side, there are the forces that----
Dr. Fleming. Well, I get Iraq. I am talking--in the limited
time I have I am talking about Syria now. Who--where are these
forces----
Secretary Carter. On the Syrian side, as the chairman
indicated, we are trying to build a----
Dr. Fleming. Trying to build.
Secretary Carter. Trying to build.
Dr. Fleming. So we really don't know who they are. We don't
know the size.
Secretary Carter. Well, the reality of the situation is,
you have the forces of the Assad regime and you have the forces
of ISIL, neither of which we want to align ourselves with, and
they are the largest forces on the ground in Syria. That is the
circumstance in which we find ourselves.
And we are trying to create a moderate Syrian force that
will be able to defeat them and own the future of Syria. That
is our objective.
Dr. Fleming. Mr. Chairman, as I yield back, I just have to
say we are not finding out who these people are. There is no
answer here in this question.
The Chairman. Appreciate.
Mr. Ashford.
Mr. Ashford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
And General and Mr. Secretary.
Pardon my parochialism, I am just going to have to ask kind
of a broad question related back to our people in our district,
University of Nebraska at Omaha [UNO]. When we went to the--to
see--I absolutely agree with you about President Ghani, and
there is a lot of hope there, in his ability to start reforms
in the armed services, open up discussions with Pakistan which
are meaningful, apparently.
It was interesting, when we went in to visit with the
President, one of his first comments to me was how is my friend
Tom Gouttierre. And Tom, many of you probably know of Tom, but
he started the Afghan studies program at UNO 35 years ago, and
is a friend of the President's and they communicate. So that
was nice to see.
Also, you know, the Peter Kiewit Institute at University of
Nebraska at Omaha is doing research into ISIS and has had--in
fact had been doing the research prior to June of last year.
And the Ebola work done at the University of Nebraska Medical
Center, and is pretty significant. And we are very proud of all
that.
Having said that, I guess my question is, when I visit
those institutions and talk to the principals, it is clear that
not just the University of Nebraska, clearly, but all over the
country, there are partners at that level who are
sophisticated, significant partners in our efforts in the
Mideast.
And would you comment on that, on how you foresee those
partnerships continuing to develop and evolve and move forward?
Secretary Carter. Well, it is critical, because we depend
for our technology, all the research and development that
underlies our system, we depend upon private institutions to do
that, whether they be our universities, excellent universities,
university-affiliated R&D [research and development] centers,
in industry.
I always have to remind people, we don't build anything in
the Pentagon. This isn't the Soviet Union. Our way of doing
things is not to do it in the government, it is to contract
with private entities, because we think that is the best way to
stay up with technology and to get excellence. And that is how
we--and so, we depend upon those institutions, our great
university systems, our great laboratories, and our great
defense industry to make us the best military in the world.
Mr. Ashford. I just--I think that is absolutely right. And
I think it does differentiate us from everywhere else in the
world, really. And, you know, we are proud of what we have
contributed in Nebraska, obviously, but every State has similar
experiences.
One other--and thank you for that answer.
One other--this goes back really to Congresswoman Graham's
question, and this is something that I am trying to figure out.
Your comment about transitioning the military back into
civilian life and the role of the Veterans Administration, I
don't necessarily want to comment on that, but I know in
Nebraska, we have had, as most--a lot of States have had, this
infusion of new veterans, obviously, with distinct problems
that are somewhat unique, are unique to a great degree to the
Middle East, and the higher degree of disability claims and all
of that.
And I know what we are trying to think about doing in
Nebraska, in Omaha and Sarpy County, where Offut [Air Force
Base] and STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic Command] is to think about
developing sort of outpatient clinics, because we are seeing a
real need of the veterans coming back now, the military coming
back now and needing that sort of that outpatient in the mental
health area, women's health issues that are not being addressed
in the traditional mode.
I don't actually need a comment on that because that is a
different department, but if you have any thoughts on that,
kind of the new way of delivering health care.
Secretary Carter. I would only echo something that the
chairman said, which is that by sad necessity over the last
dozen years, we have learned a lot and in a sense pioneered
techniques in treating amputees, burn victims, very importantly
TBI [traumatic brain injury], PTS [post-traumatic syndrome],
and we need to make sure, as the chairman said earlier, we
remember those lessons and that we transfer that knowledge to
society more widely, which I think is happening in our medical
system, including the medical system of the Veterans
Administration.
Mr. Ashford. Right. And I agree. And my only thought would
be that clearly in our area of the country where we have a
robust medical system at the university and other facilities
is, you know, being able to develop those new options as we
move forward is part of our strategy in the Mideast generally
and everywhere.
So thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Gibson.
Mr. Gibson. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. And greatly appreciate
the panelists.
Thank you for your leadership and commitment to our Nation.
General Dempsey, I noted in your opening remarks you laid
out a case for continued forward presence, put some passion
behind that. Some of us, myself included, have really been
arguing for thinking and acting differently, certainly
recognizing the need for some forward presence, particularly
with naval forces for open sea lanes and access to markets. And
then in places like Korea, of course, there is going to be a
need for land forces there for the near term, at least.
But that when we rely on this, as we have really have since
the end of the Cold War, we end up with free-rider problems,
and we end up with friends and allies who don't fully ante up
for what they had admitted on paper that they would do, and we
end up with some other second-order effects.
I have been arguing for a peace-through-strength approach
that really puts reliance on agility, strategic maneuver, and
particularly the restoration of the global response force
capability, with the idea that--and of course we deal with
nation states and we deal with transnational actors, here I am
talking about the former, not the latter, you know, this idea
of deterrence and deterrence really being defined by capability
and will.
And here is where I get to the point on the global response
force. Now, we had the service secretaries and the chiefs here
yesterday, and they gave a response to this. And so, I am
interested in, from the Department standpoint, from the
Secretary and from the chief, leadership, as it relates to
restoring the global response force and how you see that
factoring into our posture going forward.
Secretary Carter. I will start, and then the chairman. We
do have something called the GRF, the global response force,
which we provide very carefully for just the reason you
describe, namely, it is the most ready force, it is the one
that has the greatest deterrent value, because it has global
reach and it is highly ready.
And one of the things that is concerning about our whole--
this whole budget drama of sequester and so forth year after
year and its effect on readiness is that if it continues in the
way that it is, it is going to affect our readiness, even at
the GRF level. And that is not good for deterrence. It is not
good for the picture of American strength that is so necessary
to avoiding conflict in the first place.
General Dempsey. Congressman, you have touched on two
things that are actually near and dear to my heart. One is the
GRF. We do have to restore its readiness. There are times when,
of late, because of increasing demand and reducing supply, we
have had to actually reach into it and send it forward, which
is not the intention, but we are forced into that position on
occasion.
The other one is the issue of presence. You know, I think
we have got our forward stationing about right. And what we are
doing is looking at how we can be a little less predictable to
our adversaries, more reassuring to our allies, and maintain
readiness through a thing we call--we are calling ``dynamic
presence.''
And so, we are very much interested in pursuing that idea.
But I will tell you, you know, sequestration actually makes
this--both of those almost impossible.
Mr. Gibson. I appreciate those responses.
And to be clear, even the vision that I am laying out here
requires the world's strongest military as a deterrent to those
who would do us harm. And we are also--this vision also
includes American leadership. It is just a different conception
of power and how we would array it that would look for the
contributions from our friends and allies I think at the level
that we would expect.
And also recognize the moral strength of our country as
evidenced through diplomacy, commerce, and trade. And in the
way that we are able to strategically maneuver our forces with
a real capability, I believe, strengthens the hands of our
diplomats that will allow us to, I think, reach a level of
security that we are striving for.
So thanks. Thank you very much, once again, for everything
you do for our service men and women and their families. And I
will yield back.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
the Secretary and general for your service and all the
witnesses here today.
I think when historians write the book on this
administration, one of the overlooked achievements was the New
START [Strategic Arms Reduction] treaty, which was ratified on
a bipartisan basis. And you know in the wake of it we have
heard a lot of testimony at the Seapower Committee about the
fact that the triad is going to change as a result of the
realignment that the treaty created in terms of the leg of the
triad that is going to carry the heaviest burden is the sea-
based deterrence, about 70 percent, according to, again, some
of the Navy witnesses that we have had here.
In the wake of that, in the aging out of the existing Ohio
fleet, Admiral Greenert, Secretary Stackley, yesterday
Secretary Mabus, I mean they made it crystal clear that the
Ohio replacement program is at the absolute top of the list
because the timing, even with the President's robust funding
for design work, which again is another reason why we should
support that top line.
You know really there is just no margin for delay in terms
of making sure that we are going to be able to implement New
START. So you know, Mr. Secretary, I was reading your testimony
over at the Appropriations Committee and others about, again,
we have been hearing about this for years, you know what the
impact is going to be on the shipbuilding account.
So last year's defense bill when we created the Sea-based
Deterrence Fund, we thought you know really used well-
established precedent from the National Sealift Defense Fund,
which again was an effort to take pressure off the shipbuilding
account for a once in a multi-generation investment missile
defense, et cetera.
I was just wondering if you could kind of talk with us a
little bit about what your sort of thinking is. Because there
is just no question that something is going to give when the
resources are needed to build those boats in terms of the
shipbuilding account, if it has to all come out of there.
Secretary Carter. Well, thank you for that. And you are
right. The triad is part of our future. It is part of our
future planning.
You know nuclear weapons aren't in the news very much,
thank God. So they are not the answer to the ISIL crisis and so
on. But they are a bedrock of our security.
And we have to--we are going to need a safe, secure, and
reliable deterrent as far into the future as I can see. And we
need to provide for that.
And the sea-based leg is an essential leg because it is
survivable on a day-to-day basis. That has long been a tenet of
strategic stability. It remains true now.
And it is also true that the Ohio-class replacement is a
very expensive proposition. Now, we are trying to get the cost
of that down like all our other programs as much as we can. But
it is--we have to pay that bill. And I think it is more
complicated, as I am sure you would say also, than how we label
the money.
The money has to come from somewhere, and we are going to
have to make difficult tradeoffs, particularly in the decade
between 2020 and 2030. And that is just a fact of life if we
are going to have an Ohio-class replacement.
And if Secretary Mabus and Admiral Greenert said it was a
highest priority, they are absolutely right. It is just
something we have to do and we have to find room in the budget
to do it. And there are going to be tradeoffs there that are
not going to get alleviated by calling the money this or that.
General Dempsey. The only other thing I would add,
Congressman, is we--the Joint Chiefs and I firmly believe that
the triad, all three legs, which as you know is
intercontinental ballistic missiles, long-range bomber, and the
Ohio-class replacement submarine, are necessary to make our
deterrence credible and survivable.
And just because it is an unfortunate happenstance of time
that the three legs of the triad are all requiring
modernization at some level over the next decade. But you know
we have been kept safe. This is our strategic deterrent
responsibility. And we are going to have to find a way to do
it.
Mr. Courtney. No quarrel with your comment. Again, just
when you look at the size of the legs, it is not quite--it is a
kind of funny looking stool because one of them is a lot longer
than the other I guess.
And as long as I got a few seconds left, General, first of
all thank you for your service. First time I met you was in
Iraq when you were in charge of retraining the Iraqi forces.
And I know you are probably more passionate than anyone about
trying to re-bolster that force that is over there.
We had a National Guard unit leave for Afghanistan a few
nights ago out of Hartford. And I just--the expectation was
that the Reserve force was kind of going to stand down as the
troop drawdown took place.
And frankly, for some people it was a little jarring to
still see National Guard forces going over there. And I hope
you are keeping an eye on those guys because you know it caused
a lot of dislocation for the families to have a 60-day call-up
when I think, again, people's world expectations, thought was
going to change with the drawdown.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Franks.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, Secretary Carter, some of us were a little
bit surprised at your appointment. And I just have to say to
you, it was a pleasant surprise. And I, for one, am very
gratified, sir, that you are where you are. I think it is a
good thing for the country.
Secretary Carter. Thank you. My wife and I were surprised
also.
Mr. Franks. Well, as you know, producing fissile material
is by far the most challenging component of developing nuclear
weapons. And I know you also know that once the 4.5 percent
enrichment level has been reached that about 75 percent of the
work or the enrichment has been done to gain the weapons grade
material.
Requiring Iran to dismantle its mechanism to enrich uranium
or produce plutonium was the centerpiece of nearly a dozen U.N.
[United Nations] Security Council resolutions because
essentially we considered that in many ways the whole ballgame.
But in direct contradiction to that reality and the U.N.
Security resolutions, Mr. Obama's interim agreement with Iran
astonishingly provides a protected protocol to enrich uranium.
And if you forgive the political importunity of the
question, do you believe that an agreement of the long-term
with Iran going forward that allows him to enrich uranium or
produce plutonium is in the best national security interests of
the United States?
Secretary Carter. It is an excellent question and I think
it is the key question for the--for such an agreement is, does
it provide insurance against breakout and the development of a
bomb by Iran?
Now, I am not involved in the negotiations there and so I
can't discuss an agreement that hasn't been concluded yet. But
that has got to be its underlying principle. And I think that
is the underlying principle with which the negotiations are
being conducted. And I associate myself with the phrase that no
deal is better than a bad deal.
The only other thing I would say about that is for me and
for our Department, we have some other obligations associated
with this. One is to continue to deter Iran's other detrimental
behavior in the region and in the Gulf, and protect allies and
partners there to include, secondly, very importantly, are in
critical partnership with Israel, is a very strong ally. And
that is important. And then the third is our general presence
in the Gulf.
So those responsibilities which reside to us which are also
related to Iran and Iranian behavior, those are
responsibilities that fall on the Department of Defense and
that we take very seriously. I know the chairman does also.
Mr. Franks. Well, I certainly wish you the very best in
that and everything else that you do, sir.
And General Dempsey, let me just express--just personal
gratitude and collective gratitude for the whole country for
the gallant service that you have offered to the human family.
I mean this has been an amazing thing that you have done and we
are grateful to you.
So with that you know I always ask you a tough question.
General Dempsey. Let me--can I go on for a minute and 25
seconds thanking you for the kindness that you have just----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Franks. I think he gauged that I have about 25 seconds
left.
General Dempsey, what is the current cap on troop
developments--deployments I should say, in Iraq? I think it is
around 3,100. And is there a justification for that troop
level? Or is it really an arbitrary policy decision?
General Dempsey. No.
Mr. Franks. And do you believe in your best military
judgment that that policy represents the surest and best policy
to expeditiously defeat ISIS?
General Dempsey. My military advice on the best and most
enduring way to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and Levant is
through our partners, with a coalition, and using our unique
capabilities, whether they be training or precision strikes or
working to build institutions, so that the Iraqis, notably,
understand they have--and other regional stakeholders who have
more to lose and more to gain by the defeat of ISIL--actually
are in the lead.
And therefore, that number is not arbitrary at all. It is
purpose-built to that effect.
Mr. Franks. Well, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back.
Thank you both again.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And to Mr. Carter, and first of all, I want to thank both
of you. General Dempsey, I really appreciate your service to
our country, and particularly the uniform that you wear, the
United States Army. It means a lot to me.
Secretary Carter, first time I get to meet you.
But the question I have, and I guess where I am kind of
perplexed, is what is going on within Iraq today, where we have
the general of the Quds force leading the charge, basically.
And, you know, I get our reluctance to have boots on the
ground. Because let me tell you, I mean, my kids have been
there. So I don't necessarily want to see them go back.
But the other--on the same token, though, I hate to see
that Iran now has taken the lead, and particularly when you go
back to the history in Iraq with us recently, in 2011 when I
was there, we had five U.S. service members killed the night I
was there by an advanced IED [improvised explosive device]
supplied--go figure--from Iran. And now we are allowing them to
take the lead. And, you know, you remember back, I mean, we had
our forces in Iraq at the drawdown. We had American troops
being killed and ambushed. And because of the status of forces
agreement, particularly as it related to Iraq, they kept us
from going and hunting or capturing or killing these guys that
were killing our troops.
We knew where they were laying their heads down at night,
but the fact was these are the same people now that are taking
the lead in Iraq and we think we are going to see a different
outcome with the Iranian regime today than what it was then.
And the pressure it is going to put on the Iraqi leaders--and
Ghani I think is a breath of fresh air, but I don't know how he
is going to operate within that when the Iranians are standing
there saying, ``Listen, we are giving you back your country.''
How do we deal with that?
Secretary Carter. Well, it is a very good question because
the--what defeated the Iraqi forces last summer was
sectarianism. And if the fight against ISIL becomes a purely
sectarian fight and not an Iraqi fight, then we----
Mr. Nugent. But let me interrupt you, I mean, because the
time is limited. But isn't it going to turn back into a
sectarian fight when you have Iran providing the leadership and
the training to the troops that are going to push ISIS back out
of Iraq?
Secretary Carter. Well, it is actually a complicated
situation. In many places, the Iraqi security forces, including
with Sunni elements and the support of Sunni tribes, are
participating in the recapture of ground. In other places, it
is our air power and Iraqi security forces entirely.
In Tikrit, you are right. There is a heavy presence of
Popular Mobilization Forces which are Shiite in sectarian
orientation and getting some support from the Iranians. And
that is concerning to us. So it is a very mixed picture. But
the side that we are on is the side of the Iraqi government
operating on a multi-sectarian basis. And that is the only way
in which we are going to achieve success.
Mr. Nugent. I don't disagree with that, but, you know, when
you talk to the forces that were there in place in 2011 and the
training that we did for the Iraqis, it was pretty evident then
that we had some very, very good brigades within the Iraqi
military, and then we had some that were the sectarian split-
off that were incompetent.
And I think that is what we saw, you know, happen. I think
that is kind of the remarks we have heard is that having an
enduring force there would have prevented it, I don't know, but
we would have had a much better chance of preventing it had we
been there to train and assist and keep the pressure on the
Iraqis at the time. And I just want to make sure we don't do
the same now in Afghanistan.
Secretary Carter. I will say something about Afghanistan,
and then maybe the chairman wants to say something about Iraq.
We have fortunately at the moment a very different
situation in Afghanistan, namely a bilateral security agreement
in place that is welcomed by the government of Afghanistan, and
a partner in the government of Afghanistan in the national
unity government of Ghani and Abdullah that is not sectarian in
nature; that is welcoming of the American assistance and the
American training.
So it is a very different situation from--Iraq and the
reason why, as I said earlier, we may well be achieving our
objectives in Afghanistan in a way that a few years ago when I
was working on that campaign, I would not have predicted that
we would get as far as we did. It is a very different
situation, fortunately, in Afghanistan today from Iraq a few
years ago.
Mr. Nugent. And I appreciate your comments.
And with that, General, I would love to hear from you, but
I have been gaveled back and----
General Dempsey. And I would love to chat, sir, but my time
is out.
Mr. Nugent. Okay.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Yep, you all are right.
Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here today.
As I am looking at the AUMF, it says the use of special
operations forces to take military action against ISIL
leadership--and again, this is a proposed AUMF--does that
include capture or is it kill only?
Secretary Carter. It includes capture.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. So, you know, my question is, we talk
about capture and the use of all of our tenets of war, whether
it is diplomatic, intelligence, military, economic--all those
things. You know, I have some visions of how we could form
multiple coalitions--our NATO [North Atlantic Treaty
Organization]-type coalition and Middle Eastern coalition. Then
we work together with command and control. This is good versus
evil. I think that is the message the world should hear.
And, you know, when it comes to holding, though, you know,
I have some ideas about holding those we capture and how we try
them and how we involve maybe the nation of incident, whether
it is ISIL or the global war on terror, how we involve the
nation of incident and the nation of origin. And are they going
to be part of the process of those that we capture.
So my question is, if we capture, what do we do with them?
Secretary Carter. Well, thanks for that question. Let me
just go back to the logic of capture. Obviously, our objective
where possible is to capture, rather than dispatch.
Dr. Wenstrup. Have we been capturing anyone? Have we been
capturing anyone in the last couple of years? Or especially
since we reengaged in Iraq?
Secretary Carter. Well, exactly as you say. Our coalition
partners have been capturing.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay, so what are we doing----
Secretary Carter. They have been doing that and they have
been detaining. Now, just to take Afghanistan as an example,
these are Afghan--on Afghan territory. They are detained by the
Afghans and subject to Afghan law.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. So our special forces, for example, you
say their mission is to capture or kill. And so if we capture,
what are we doing with them?
Secretary Carter. The answer is it depends on the
circumstances and the location; the willingness of a host
country to take custody of them, to prosecute them. I am not an
expert on this. You have got to talk to the Justice Department
about that and they are involved in these decisions.
But since these are--captures are--your question concerns
captures that take place outside of U.S. territory, there are
laws respecting that that we obey.
Dr. Wenstrup. So, Mr. Secretary, are we capturing and then
hands-off, we just turn them over? Are we involved with what
may happen? The collection of intelligence is what I am after
here. And so, what are we doing? And if you can't answer, maybe
General Dempsey can, what our current posture is under this----
Secretary Carter. Well, the answer is, Congressman, it
depends on where--the circumstances of the capture. But to get
to the point you are making, which is interrogation and
intelligence value that is an important value to us. And it is
important that whatever the ultimate disposition of the
detainee is, that we have the opportunity to interrogate and
debrief. And that is very important to us whatever the ultimate
disposition of the detainee is.
And the chairman can add to that if he wants to.
General Dempsey. Yes, Congressman, what I would do is I
think this is probably an important enough question that I will
have my legal team work with the Secretary's and provide you a
longer answer for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
General Dempsey. But I will say in places where we are in
support of the host nation, for example in Iraq, we are
literally in support of them. So they will do the capture
operation, they will give access to the prisoners for us to
conduct the kind of interrogation you describe as well as
sensitive site exploitation, which is where you get even more.
Where someone is a direct threat to us, either U.S. persons
and facilities or to the homeland, we actually have conducted
operations with the Department of Justice represented and those
individuals--there has been a handful, have been brought back
to this country for trial.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, I appreciate that answer.
Can I ask you, if you could, Mr. Secretary, to finish this
sentence for me.
And the sentence is, publicly stating that we will not use
ground troops, although I may agree with the policy of using
other troops, but publicly stating that we will not use ground
troops is a good idea because--
If you could finish that sentence for me?
Secretary Carter. I have got--I am not sure what you are
getting at. I don't----
Dr. Wenstrup. I am wondering why we want in our AUMF to say
what--that we will not use this entity that we have?
Why is----
Secretary Carter. Oh, the AUMF--well----
Dr. Wenstrup. Even if I am not in favor of using them, why
would we say that?
Secretary Carter. What the AUMF says is that in the
campaign against ISIL, we have a very wide range of authorities
to wage that campaign, including those that we anticipate are
necessary to conduct the campaign--and there is one limit to
that, which is a Afghanistan or Iraq-like long ground campaign.
That is not foreseen and so the AUMF does not request the
authority to conduct that.
Dr. Wenstrup. That doesn't really explain to me why it is a
good idea. But I thank you for your answer and I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Walorski.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thanks for being here.
Mr. Secretary, in follow-up to Representative Wenstrup's
question, it just brings back to my mind this issue of GTMO
[Guantanamo Bay Naval Station], when we are talking about
people taken on the battlefield, people taken for questioning,
intelligence gathering, do you support the President's plan?
I just came back from GTMO a couple of weeks ago, carried a
lot of legislation since I have been here in a very short
amount of time on the issue of GTMO.
Do you support the President's proposal to close GTMO by
the end of this year and transfer those terrorists back to this
country, to U.S. prisons?
Secretary Carter. Thank you for that question. I don't
think the President has a plan to close GTMO and return all the
detainees to this country by the end of this year because there
is a law that prohibits that. The President does have the
stated intention to close GTMO and I am in favor of the safe
closure of Guantanamo Bay.
I have been there, too; I thank----
Mrs. Walorski [continuing]. Would that include the core
that can't be released to be--come back to the United States,
the United States' prison system?
Secretary Carter. Well, they have to be incarcerated in
some way, there is no question.
Mrs. Walorski. The U.S. prison system?
Secretary Carter [continuing]. But it cannot----
Mrs. Walorski. Do you--Mr. Secretary, do you support them
coming back to the U.S. prison system?
Secretary Carter. There has to be some final disposition--
--
Mrs. Walorski. Is that the only option for final
disposition is the U.S. prison system?
Secretary Carter. A, that is an option that is available--
--
Mrs. Walorski. What is the other alternative?
Secretary Carter. But----
Mrs. Walorski. What is the other----
Secretary Carter. Just a moment.
But it is now forbidden by law to do that.
Mrs. Walorski. This President has been known to override
the law. It is not that this would be breaking news.
So do you support--not that you--what is the other
alternative, if the U.S. prison system is not the final
destination, what is the alternative, where would they go?
Secretary Carter. I think that there--we need to work with
those of you on Capitol Hill to find a lawful disposition for
people who cannot be transferred or released safely from
Guantanamo Bay.
The reason why I think it is desirable to close GTMO,
though I realize it is now unlawful to transfer people to the
United States, is that I think it still provides a point--a
rallying point for jihadi recruiting, and I think that is
unfortunate. That is the reason to try to close it. But I say
safely close it. We need to find a way----
Mrs. Walorski. I appreciate----
Secretary Carter [continuing]. To safely close it and that
needs to be lawful and that has got to be done in cooperation
with you.
Mrs. Walorski. I appreciate it.
As you know, Mr. Secretary, this committee is undertaking
an investigation of the transfer of the Taliban Five from GTMO
to Qatar in May of 2014. I am just asking, in light of the
committee's responsibility to conduct a comprehensive
assessment based on a review of this important subject, will
you commit today where the previous Secretary left off to
continue the Department's engagement in ensuring all the
requested materials provided and to work with the interagency
to ensure that requested information is provided in those
limited instances in which other organizations and the U.S.
government have an equity?
Secretary Carter. You bet, Congresswoman.
Mrs. Walorski. I appreciate it.
And then my final question is, in the--our President as the
Commander in Chief said in his State of the Union address that
the number one threat to the national defense is climate
change.
General--Admiral Mullen just a few years ago said he
believes the number one national defense issue in our Nation is
the debt in our country.
Do you believe that the debt this Nation is carrying,
nearly $18 billion as we are sitting here as well, having
budget conversations, is more of a threat to this Nation's
national security than climate change?
Secretary Carter. There are a number of serious dangers to
the future of our country----
Mrs. Walorski. I would agree with you, sir. I am just
asking----
Secretary Carter [continuing]. Of which----
Mrs. Walorski [continuing]. I don't know you well. I am
just trying to get a perspective from where you are coming
from, as we are going to be voting on a huge leap in this
budget, and I think the American people want to know where the
national defense leader is coming from as well.
Do you believe that the Nation's debt is a greater issue
than climate change, as our Commander in Chief has stated?
Secretary Carter. I think they are both serious problems
and there are other serious problems that are not those two and
that we have to deal with all of those strategic challenges at
the same time. You are naming two of the problems.
Mrs. Walorski. I am naming what the Commander in Chief said
as he puts forth a budget that you guys have been defending
here for 3 hours now.
I am just saying he says the greatest threat to our Nation
is climate change and we are trying to make an argument that
says, you know, the greatest threat to this nation in trying to
rally people and understanding is that we have an issue of debt
that an admiral went on the record to say was a serious
consequence and a threat to the survivability of this country.
Did you agree?
Secretary Carter. I think that to the extent that the
deficit drives a budget behavior like the year-to-year struggle
with sequester that we faced, that is a challenge to our
national security because of the challenge to our national
defense.
I think we have threats around the world that are very
dangerous to us. I think that, to get to back to an earlier
line of questioning, the strength of our Nation depends upon
other instruments of national power than our military power.
I think in the long run the strength of our Nation depends
upon our ability to educate people and to have scientists and
engineers. There was a discussion of our scientific base
earlier. There are many, many ingredients to making a healthy
and productive America going forward. We need to tend to them
all and I think we have to have balance in how we approach
these things. So I would appeal for balance and a strategic
view that looks at all of these issues.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And gentlemen, the country is in your debt.
General, I have known you a long time and certainly for
your service.
And Mr. Secretary, I had not known you as long but thank
you for taking the job.
Having said that, this committee, I am a freshman. And
before this committee, we have heard the testimonies of General
Abizaid. We have heard certainly in conversations with General
Conway that I know well and fought with in Fallujah.
And both of them have said that--I will quote General
Conway--``there is not a snowball's chance in hell that our
operations alone are going to degrade and defeat ISIS.''
And then given the recent success of Iran, certainly they
have embedded commanders in their forces, even though it is a
modern Shia force, which has great ramifications long term.
And I have always been a fight-or-go-home guy. If we are
going to fight, fight to win. I was never a flag officer; I was
a deputy acting commander of special [operation] forces in
Iraq, and I was a commander at SEAL Team Six. But I have
always--in my career I have always looked at protection of our
troops and making sure they had the right equipment, the right
training, and the right rules of engagement to win decisively
on the battle of field.
And having said that, if we are to embed, as Iran is having
success to do, and if we are going to look at General Abizaid
and General Conway's and some of your senior leadership, then
my concern is that if we embed, we don't just embed with just a
few, because we have seen what happens should an individual get
captured. He is going to die a heinous death in a cage and
burned alive.
So embedding is going to take a force package of relative
weight and we are going to have to have a MEDEVAC [medical
evacuation] because if one of our guys gets hurt, we are going
to have to bring him out. And it is going to be at a U.S.
facility somewhere close.
And if our guys get pinned down for some reason, that is a
QRF [quick reaction force]. So that is American armor, American
forces, because we don't want another Somalia or Benghazi.
Then we have to have, you know, a logistics arm to make
sure our allies we are fighting with--the Sunnis and the Kurds
directly and the centralized government--have the ammunition,
food, fuel, everything it takes to win, because now we have
committed and embedded.
And my question is, do the current authorization as
proposed, does it allow the flexibility for you, should the
decision be made to embed the force structure I have laid out?
Does that authorization that you are asking--does it include
the flexibility to embed that force package to win?
Secretary Carter. Well, first of all, thanks for your own
service, and thanks for bringing what is evidently a great
store of knowledge to this committee. So thanks for that.
And the answer is yes. In fact, the President, when he
first described the AUMF, enumerated a few things that were
specifically permitted by it, which include many of the items
on your list, so the answer is yes.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield the remaining part of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Knight.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair, but not least.
I am going to talk about air power a little bit, since it
seems like over the last 15 or 20 years, we have diverted kind
of a little away from X-Plane technology, put it into a little
bit different phase of different exploration.
And now we are in a phase of flying the wings off an
aircraft after 40 or 50 years and not going onto the next
generation in, it seems to me to be a little quicker phase to
stay up with technology.
Everyone has talked about the iPhone here today, and I have
a 16-year-old at home that doesn't know anything different than
living with the iPhone, even though it has only been out for 8
years.
So in the time--in the 1950s, when we had five or six
fighters working through the program and we worked through the
Century series and about an 8-year program, now we are looking
at fifth-generation fighters that will probably go through 2050
or 2060.
Is that a concern? Is that a concern that we can do
something quicker? We always talk about how we acquire things
and how we can get through the acquisition phase quicker.
Well, if we could do that with technology, say we could do
a sixth generation fighter today, it would be much more
advanced than our Raptors in the air.
But how could we do that in a quicker phase of 15- to 20-
year period and then fly them for 40 or 50 years?
Secretary Carter. Well, thanks for that, and that, to me,
recalls a word that the chairman used at the beginning of this
hearing, which is agility. And if we don't have agility and our
programs take 15 or 20 years to develop, we are not going to
have the best military in the world.
On the other hand--not on the other hand, but in addition,
it is the case that aircraft remain in our inventory for a long
time. Now, they are not the same old aircraft; they are
continually modified, their software is changed, their
armaments are changed, and so forth.
But few realize, but I am sure you do, that 70 percent of
the cost of a military system is in owning it, not buying it in
the first place.
And so as we talk about acquisition reform and cost
control, as we began this morning discussing, we must pay
attention to sustainment costs. And in the fifth generation
aircraft, the F-35 and so forth, we are trying to be very
attentive to sustainment costs because they are going to be the
lion's share of the total life-cycle cost of the airplane.
Mr. Knight. And Mr. Secretary, I do not argue with you, but
in the phase of an aircraft, before fifth-generation, we are
talking about armament and how we could change the aircraft.
Some of that was with avionics. Some of that was with guts. But
a lot of that was what we hung off the airplane.
Today, it is changing quicker, and it is changing yearly,
of what the advancement in aircraft can be, how we detect them,
how far they can get into the battlefield without being seen.
Those are the things that our young airmen are--should be
worried about, because the advancements are coming so quickly.
For about 50 years, those advancements weren't there. It was
just, if we were faster than you and we could shoot first, then
we beat you.
Secretary Carter. I am with you, and I am very concerned
that we keep up in the electronic-warfare field, which I think
you are referring to in that.
Some of our potential opponents have made advances in that
area, enabled by the spread of technology around the world. And
so if we are going to keep the advantage that we have
historically had, we need to keep up in those areas. So I am
completely with you.
Mr. Knight. Okay. In my last 50 seconds, I am just going to
say that if there is some way we can do this in DOD that, you
know--companies do this all of the time. We have talked about
one today. They talk about how quickly they can get it out into
the field, because the quicker they get it out there, the
quicker they make money.
The quicker we can do that in DOD, the quicker the
warfighter is safer or is ahead of the technological curve. And
we have seen that with UASs [unmanned aircraft systems], with
the young soldiers on the field where they are able to see the
enemy where they probably couldn't see them without them
getting around.
So those things, I would ask that we can do something like
that in DOD that might replicate what they do in the private
industry.
Secretary Carter. We have a number of initiatives,
Congressman, in our budget that have exactly that intent, and I
would be pleased to provide you with more information on them.
But I think you are onto something that is terribly
important, and it is one of the areas where we are trying to
make investments, and we need the funding to make those
investments.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And General, thank you. You have helped the freshman class
very much. I am sure you have helped everyone on this dais, but
I appreciate your service and your commitment to our country.
The Chairman. Ms. McSally. You are on.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Carter, General Dempsey. I was a
masters of public policy graduate, so you were one of my
instructors back in 1988 to 1990, so it is good to see you
again.
Secretary Carter. Wonderful. Good to see you.
Ms. McSally. Good that we have both been able to find a,
you know, good job to make a difference here, right?
Secretary Carter. Well, thank you. You make me proud.
Ms. McSally. Well, I look forward to working with you in
future.
I want to talk a little bit about combat search and rescue
capabilities in Iraq and Syria. I was 26 years in the military.
I was an A-10 pilot, just truth in advertising there, and ran
our joint search and rescue center during Operation Southern
Watch and then the early days of the Afghanistan war.
So I know there are tremendous challenges in trying to make
sure that if someone has to eject or they get shot down, that
we are able to rescue them very quickly, also in the
environment that we have seen with the fate of the Jordanian
pilot, to be able to immediately be overhead to locate and
protect them while we are moving the forces to pick them up. I
mean, we have got to get them right away. I am sure you are
aware of that.
I have gotten an initial brief, and I will get a more
detailed, classified briefing tomorrow by the Joint Staff on
our combat search and rescue posture.
But I am concerned, and I know maybe we will have to talk
more classified about our response capability and our posture
and whether it is limited by the 3,100-person-on-the-ground
limitation, because we have got to be able to make sure,
especially the guys flying single-engine airplanes, like the F-
16, that if they have to eject, that we are going to do
everything it takes, and sometimes that takes tremendous
resources on airborne alert to be able to go in and protect
them so that we can get them out.
So could you speak generally about that, and I would like
follow-up probably in a more classified hearing.
Secretary Carter. I will speak generally, because as you
know full well--and thank you for what you did--we need to talk
the details about this in a classified session, which we can
do.
But in general, it is not the 3,100 limit that in any way
paces the search and rescue effort there; it is time and
distance, and we are very attentive to that.
Again, I don't want to say more here, but I am sure you can
well imagine what I mean. Very attentive to that, indeed, for
our air operations over both Iraq and Syria.
Let me see if the chairman wants to add anything.
General Dempsey. Yes, thanks, Mr. Secretary.
By the way, Congresswoman, speaking to you about combat
search and rescue is like talking about nuclear issues sitting
next to a nuclear physicist. But I will do so nevertheless.
It isn't--we are not limited--the BOG [boots on the ground]
does not limit our ability to do combat search and rescue.
Ms. McSally. Okay.
General Dempsey. And you know generally where we are
postured. My staff will articulate that tomorrow.
We also, if we think the mission is high risk, as you know,
we can actually put the package airborne as part of the air-
tasking order. So we are very attentive to that. But I think
you will find the staff will ease your concerns tomorrow.
Ms. McSally. Okay, great, thank you. I wanted to follow up
on the A-10 issue. You mentioned it earlier. I commanded the
354th Fighter Squadron. It's now deployed over to the European
theater dealing with working with our allies related to the
aggression that we have seen come out of Russia. And we also
have A-10s deployed, as you know, to Iraq and Syria.
But the President's budget requests mothballing 160 of
them, and while we don't really have a suitable replacement.
And I asked yesterday, Secretary James, if that was strictly a
budget decision, and she said yes.
And I just wanted to hear from you if that is the case;
whether this is--because we have heard many different arguments
over the last few years, quite frankly, which are all over the
map, that if you had the resources, would you keep the A-10
flying to its lifespan, which is 2028?
Secretary Carter. I agree with Secretary James. It is
strictly a budgetary issue. We are squeezed on all directions,
and we are doing our best under--to give the country the
defense it needs for the amount of money that we have.
The A-10 is a very proud aircraft, and has done an enormous
amount for us over the years. And I think we have tried to find
common ground with those here on the Hill. And very important
to me, which is not a money issue, is to make sure that our
close air support from the Air Force to our ground forces is a
real enduring capability. I am satisfied that it is. I am sure
that Secretary James said the same thing yesterday. Chairman,
you want to add anything?
General Dempsey. You know, Congressman, we have got
aircraft providing close air support from the Apache helicopter
to the B-1. And the A-10 is in that sweep of capabilities. But
it is, we are faced with a budget issue, and trying to make
sure we keep enough capability that can operate both in
contested and uncontested airspace.
Ms. McSally. Great, thank you. My time is about to expire.
But for the record, I do have a question I will be following up
with. I know we are talking about making sure that women can be
fully integrated into all jobs in the military, but I also want
to hear whether there are deployment positions that are male-
only positions.
We have seen some of the issues pop up at GTMO, when I
served in Saudi Arabia. There are some specific positions that
were male-only. So across the board, military and civilian, I
would like a follow-up, whether you have male-only deployment
positions for civilian and military. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. McCord, as promised, I want to
come back on the audit issue, because we had two service
secretaries yesterday who said the biggest impediment to
achieving--to meeting the deadline in 2017 for their service to
pass a clean audit was the Defense Finance and Accounting
Service [DFAS] over which they had no control. Are you aware of
the problem, and are you going to fix it?
Secretary McCord. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes. I think we
have a lot of hard work to do on audit, and we are making good
progress. I think you probably heard both of those thoughts,
both those sides yesterday.
The issue that came out--audit is very much a team sport in
two ways. It requires the military departments who were here
yesterday to work with service providers, which DFAS is
probably the most important one in the Department in that
respect.
The second way, though, it also requires the collaboration
of people throughout the Department, people who do audit as a
primary function, like our DFAS folks, it is a primary
responsibility of theirs, but it also requires the logisticians
and the personnel community, people who don't normally think,
``Audit is my primary job,'' to work, or we can't make it work
because it requires information from all those systems.
So in that respect, it is very much like if the Secretary
were to turn to General Dempsey, to his right, and ask him to
accomplish a task, and set up a task force, it would require
the people at the tip of the spear, but it also requires the
logisticians to airlift all the things that support.
Very much the same with our audit task. It requires
financial managers that I am in charge of, but also, again, the
logisticians and the personnel community, the people that own
information across the Department.
So with respect to the DFAS issue that was raised
yesterday, as I understand it, DFAS is an entity of itself. As
an entity--reporting entity, it has passed a clean audit 15
times in a row. So they are not an incapable organization in
any way. They are also doing the contracting for audit for all
the military departments to get people on contract to do the
independent auditing.
In a role as a service provider, they have had four areas
where they have a clean audit, and have had a clean audit,
which is their bread-and-butter areas of paying military,
paying civilians, paying contractors, and disbursing.
The issue that came up where they did not pass was called
``financial reporting,'' which is the most involved, complex,
spreads across the whole Department issue, and that is where
the challenge lies. So they were given 10 areas, 10 areas where
they didn't--where they were examined, and there were 9 that
didn't pass.
They were given 12 items to work on by the auditors. Ten of
those will be done by the end of this year. But the other two
will require a little more time. So I would say that this is
why you do audits and exams the same way, again, just to make a
military analogy, why you have an operational readiness
inspection of a unit, to find out where you are good and where
you are not.
But I just wanted to say that the DFAS is a capable
partner. They do have a problem here. But financial reporting
is not strictly a DFAS issue only, because it is interaction of
information across the Department, which is one of the real
hard parts of audit for us.
The Chairman. Mr. Secretary, all this talk about budget up
here, and this makes a big difference. And those of us who
believe we need to spend more on defense, if we can't improve
the accountability for how we spend that money, it makes our
job much, much more difficult.
And I appreciate how many--how complex this is, but I am
just--as an editorial comment, it makes a big difference in
getting budget support up here if we can meet those deadlines
for an audit. And if we can't, it undermines that effort. I
know you know that, but it--particularly in the middle of these
budget discussions, it is very much on my mind.
Mr. McCord, let me ask you one other thing. You have heard
some of the discussion about what we can use OCO for, what we
can't. My understanding is there is OMB [Office of Management
and Budget] guidance, and perhaps some Department guidance,
that helps direct the uses for OCO funds versus base funds.
My understanding, and my memory is that Congress can also
designate OCO funds for procurement. And we bought F-35s in the
past with OCO funds. Am I on the right track here?
Secretary McCord. Yes, Mr. Chairman. There is an agreement
between the Office of Management and Budget and the Department
of Defense. I was involved in negotiating that early on in this
administration. We felt that it needed to be a little tighter
than it had been when we got here.
That agreement dates to 2010, and it has got geographic
aspects to it. Things that happened in this country, that
country, the other country, are okay. Things that happened in
countries not in the agreement may not be. And we have had some
modifications to that.
You are also correct in that Congress plays a role. In
general, OCO funding has to be designated by both the Congress
and the President, as OCO spending, as emergency spending. That
is the procedure that was followed both by this administration,
and under the previous administration as well. So both parties
have a voice.
And you mentioned F-35s have been an issue of contention in
the past. In fact, just a few months ago, we requested to buy
some F-35s to replace aircraft that were destroyed at Kandahar,
as well as some training losses, and several of the committees,
including this one, approved, but one did not. So there was
division, remains division on these questions, sometimes of
what was appropriate use of OCO.
The Chairman. Okay. Would you do me a favor, and would you
or your folks submit to us in writing an overview of how OCO
works now? As y'all said, this is not the best way to run a
railroad. And I hope that we can have a different method of
funding the Department as we move down the many steps ahead in
the budget process.
If, however, we end up with a substantial amount of OCO to
make up for gaps in the base, then I want to understand what
all of those restrictions, administrative or legislative, may
be, because those are things that we can obviously address in
the authorization bill.
I don't know how this is going to go. I just want to be
ready, and you can help us in understanding that. I would
appreciate it.
Secretary McCord. Certainly will provide that information
for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 101.]
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, last question I
have got is about Ukraine. Mr. Smith has introduced legislation
along with me that would require lethal assistance be provided
to the Ukrainians so they can defend themselves, so they can do
something about these tanks and armored personnel carriers that
are pouring in from Russia.
What we have been told in all our previous hearings from
the administration witnesses is, ``Well, we are studying it.''
Well, every day that the White House dithers about this,
more equipment is pouring in for what I presume is going to be
a renewed offensive at some point. So can you help me
understand what the timeline is for a decision on--from the
administration on providing lethal assistance to the
Ukrainians?
Secretary Carter. Yes. Thank you, Chairman. Two things. The
first is you are right; our support for Ukraine, as it tries to
create a place for itself in Europe, situated as it is between
Europe and Russia, is very important. And I know you are asking
about the military side of it.
The part I would preface, though, is that is principally a
political, and above all, economic challenge, because the
economy of Ukraine is in serious trouble. So I think the
assistance of Western countries to the economy of Ukraine is
the most important thing. It is not my responsibility, but I
just wanted to say I think that is the most important thing.
We are supplying military assistance to the Ukrainian
military. The President just made an announcement about a week
ago about a military assistance at a number of categories,
vehicles and so forth, that I think will be of material
assistance to the Ukrainian military.
There are also under consideration--and yes, it is under
consideration--some additional categories of assistance, which
are defensive lethal assistance. And those are being
considered. I think they should be considered. And I have said
that before.
But it is a complicated decision that involves other kinds
of assistance that we are giving, and the paramount fact, which
is that we need to support the Ukrainians politically and
economically. And in particular, our NATO partners and our
European allies need to support Ukraine economically.
In the end, that is going to be the key to keeping what we
all want, which is an independent Ukraine that can find its own
way, and isn't pushed around by the Russians.
The Chairman. Well, I don't disagree with you about the
importance of financial assistance. But what concerns me is
while we study to death, and thus do not provide them the means
with which to defend themselves against armor, among other
things, and artillery attacks and so forth, the positions in
the Eastern rebel-held area are strengthening.
And last point is countries around the world are watching
how reliable a friend we are. And I am concerned that this has
tremendous detrimental effects, encouraging Putin's aggression,
and discouraging countries from being friends of the United
States, because we are sitting here wringing our hands and
providing a few blankets and whatnot.
I don't think that is a good way to go. I realize that this
has turned into a White House call. Sorry. Last point is there
is tremendous bipartisan support in both the House and the
Senate for providing this assistance. And I really think the
administration is isolated on this issue. That is also
something that is not good for the country.
I will--unless you have something you want to add, I don't
want to cut you off, but----
Secretary Carter. I would simply say that, a sort of
personal observation, I was in Budapest in 1994 when the
agreement was signed, that the Russians have violated. So I am
very alive to the possibility that we had then, and I think
still need to stick up for, of an independent Ukraine able to
find its own way politically and economically, is the only
thing I would say in the first instance. It is terribly
important that that occur.
And the other thing I would say is nobody ought to mistake
that, you know, Ukraine is a very, very important country to
us. It is not a NATO ally. And I just want to make the point
that as far as NATO allies are concerned, that raises a whole
other set of issues that I hope anyone who is considering
encroaching upon a NATO ally takes very seriously.
The Chairman. Well, I hope so, too. I will be traveling to
that region shortly, and talking with some of those folks about
it.
Secretary Carter. Thank you for doing that.
The Chairman. Thank you all for being here. Mr. Secretary,
welcome back. General Dempsey, you are going to miss us when
you are gone.
General Dempsey. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you all for being here. With that, the
hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 18, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 18, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

March 18, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. THORNBERRY

Secretary Carter. There is very little in terms of the
legal framework applicable to the designation of funds for
``Overseas Contingency Operations.''
Section 251(b)(2)(A)(ii) of the Balanced Budget and
Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (BBEDCA), codified at 2
U.S.C. Sec. 901(b)(2), provides for an adjustment to the
discretionary spending limits specified elsewhere in the BBEDCA
for the security category. The adjustment corresponds to the
sum of appropriations for discretionary accounts that ``the
Congress designates for Overseas Contingency Operations/Global
War on Terrorism in statute on an account by account basis and
the President subsequently so designates''.
Section 251(b)(2)(A)(i) of the BBEDCA provides for the same
type of adjustment for appropriations for discretionary
accounts that ``the Congress designates as emergency
requirements in statute on an account by account basis and the
President subsequently so designates''.
There is no BBEDCA statutory definition of ``Overseas
Contingency Operations/Global War on Terrorism'' (OCO/GWOT). In
contrast, the BBEDCA does define the term ``emergency.''
Section 250(c)(20) of the BBEDCA, codified at 2 U.S.C.
Sec. 900(c), defines the term ``emergency'' as: ``a situation
that- (A) requires new budget authority and outlays (or new
budget authority and the outlays flowing therefrom) for the
prevention or mitigation of, or response to, loss of life or
property, or a threat to national security; and (B) is
unanticipated.'' Further, subsection (c)(21) defines the term
``unanticipated'' to mean that ``the underlying situation is--
(A) sudden, which means quickly coming into being or not
building up over time; (B) urgent, which means a pressing and
compelling need requiring immediate action; (C) unforeseen,
which means not predicted or anticipated as an emerging need;
and (D) temporary, which means not of a permanent duration.''
Although there is no definition of OCO/GWOT, OMB has
promulgated guidance regarding what costs can be budgeted for
in the OCO request. While most of the funds designated for OCO/
GWOT have been requested and appropriated to the Department of
Defense, funds designated for OCO/GWOT have also been requested
and appropriated for the Department of State, the United States
Agency for International Development, and Related Agencies. In
addition, there is no statutory cap on amounts that can be
designated for OCO/GWOT. Thus the Congress has broad discretion
as to what accounts and what amounts to designate for OCO/GWOT;
the sole check is that the President must also designate the
funds for OCO/GWOT. If the President does not so designate, the
funds are still appropriated and would be available for their
intended purpose, but they would count against the statutory
spending limits, which may result in or increase the magnitude
of a sequestration.
Finally, while funds designated for OCO/GWOT are not
counted against discretionary spending limits when determining
if a breach has occurred, if a breach does occur and accounts
are sequestered, funds designated for OCO/GWOT are subject to
sequestration.   [See page 55.]
------

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY DR. WENSTRUP

General Dempsey. The policy of the United States is not to
use lethal force when it is feasible to capture a terrorist
suspect, because capturing a terrorist offers the best
opportunity to gather meaningful intelligence and to mitigate
and disrupt terrorist plots. Capture operations are conducted
only against suspects who may lawfully be captured or otherwise
taken into custody by the United States and only when the
operation can be conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws and consistent with our obligations to other sovereign
states.
Throughout its history, the United States has held
detainees captured during armed conflict in various overseas
theaters as well as on U.S. soil. Historically, the
circumstances of each conflict have determined the appropriate
detention location. In similar fashion, decisions regarding
where to detain members of al-Qaida and associated forces will
be made on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with the
Department's interagency partners.
The Administration approaches new captures outside
Afghanistan based on the facts of the situation on a case-by-
case basis with a range of options, including:

LProsecution in our military commission system or
in the Federal courts;

LTransfer to another country for an appropriate
disposition there; or

LLaw of war detention, in appropriate cases.
When we do detain a suspect, we interrogate him/her. Both
the law of war and the civilian criminal justice system allow
for the questioning of unprivileged enemy belligerents.
If we are holding them under AUMF authorities, then we may
continue exploitation for strategic intelligence purposes, and
still maintain the options to transfer them to another
government for prosecution, or hold them in U.S. Government
custody for prosecution in military commissions or under
Article III in the U.S. Federal courts. Generally speaking, we
are not required to immediately turn them over to another
government.
If the detainee can be prosecuted, we decide whether to try
him in a civilian court or a military commission. A criminal
conviction could be a basis for incarceration even after a
cessation of hostilities.
The President has directed the Department of Defense to
designate a site in the United States where we can hold
military commissions.
The law of war allows the government to continue detention
until the cessation of hostilities. The end of armed conflict
against al-Qaida would terminate the United States' authority
to detain individuals based solely on their status as enemy
combatants. Detainees could be held until released under post-
conflict ``wind-down'' authority, subject to determination that
the risks they pose are mitigated; or if there is an
independent basis for continued detention. When the armed
conflict against al-Qaida ends, we will face difficult
questions about what to do with any detainees remaining in
military detention without a criminal conviction and sentence.
[See page 46.]
------

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. O'ROURKE

General Dempsey. Yes, we have the necessary resources to
achieve our tactical and strategic goals against ISIL, but our
strategy requires supporting indigenous forces in both Iraq and
Syria. We are enabling our ISF partners on the ground to take
the fight to ISIL, who have made advances and suffered
setbacks. In Syria, we continue to work diligently to develop a
capable and reliable partner on the ground in order to confront
ISIL. We have the resources to achieve our strategic and
tactical goals, but this effort takes time, and we are only 8
months into a long campaign to degrade ISIL. Air Strikes are a
key component of our kinetic support to these ground forces,
but as the SecDef stated in his testimony, only local forces on
the ground can impose a lasting defeat.   [See page 23.]
------

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. TAKAI

General Dempsey. As the President noted in his letter
transmitting the proposed AUMF to the Congress, the proposal
does not authorize long-term, large-scale ground combat
operations like those our nation conducted in Iraq and
Afghanistan. Such operations will be the responsibility of
local forces because that is what our local partners and allies
want, that is what is best for preserving our international
coalition, and, most importantly, that is in the best interest
of the United States.
The President has been clear, however, that there always
may be exigent or unforeseen circumstances in which small
numbers of U.S. forces may need to engage in limited or short
duration ground combat operations, for example, to protect and
defend U.S. personnel or citizens. The proposed AUMF would
therefore provide the flexibility to conduct ground combat
operations in other, more limited circumstances, such as rescue
operations involving U.S. or coalition personnel or the use of
special operations forces to take military action against ISIL
leadership. The proposal would also authorize the use of U.S.
forces in situations where ground combat operations are not
expected or intended, such as intelligence collection and
sharing, missions to enable kinetic strikes, or the provision
of operational planning and other forms of advice and
assistance to partner forces.
As the ground combat limitation is focused on major
operations--long-term, large-scale--the proposal would provide
the authority and the flexibility required to perform the
mission.   [See page 26.]
------

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. MOULTON

Secretary Carter. The Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 President's
Budget includes several initiatives that will retire force
structure, eliminate excess infrastructure, and reform
compensation and health care, and the budget reallocates those
savings to higher priority programs, such as improving
readiness and weapon system modernization.
The top examples of these initiatives include adopting
several recommendations from the Military Compensation and
Retirement Modernization Commission (MCRMC), slowing the growth
of military basic pay and housing allowances, modernizing the
military healthcare system, reforming commissary operations,
authorizing a new Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) round,
retiring A-10 aircraft, and permitting the Army Aviation
Restructure Initiative (ARI) to proceed.
MCRMC: The Department supports MCRMC's objective to improve
the military compensation and retirement systems, and
encourages Congress to support the recommendations for which
the Department has submitted legislation to Congress.

LFor instance, the Department recently submitted a
Blended Retirement proposal that would blend a 20-year cliff-
vested defined benefit annuity with a defined contribution plan
that would allow service members to contribute to a portable
Thrift Savings Plan account.

LThe Department's proposed Blended Retirement
System would ensure 85 percent of service members receive
Government contributions toward their retirement--compared to
fewer than 20 percent under the current system, provide DOD
with better tools to recruit and retain the All-Volunteer
Force, and produce significant savings over the long term.

LThe retirement changes were considered
holistically in the context of the recruiting, retention, and
retirement continuum that would best enhance the readiness of
the All-Volunteer Force in an increasingly competitive labor
market. The Department looks forward to continuing to work with
Congress and the MCRMC to meet our solemn responsibility to
ensure that any changes protect the long-term viability of the
All-Volunteer Force, improve quality-of-life for service
members and their families, and safeguard the fiscal
sustainability of the military compensation and retirement
systems.
Compensation Reform: The President's Budget provides
funding and common-sense reforms to ensure service members
receive competitive pay and benefits as well as critical
training and equipment. Within compensation reform, the
following initiatives are essential:

LSlow the growth of military basic pay--High
retention rates reflected within the military force allow the
Department to recruit and retain the requisite force and
continue to offer a competitive military pay and benefits
package. It is important to emphasize that even with a lower
basic pay raise, military compensation will still remain well
above the 70th percentile of wages for comparable civilians by
age and education, while achieving substantive savings. Given
the current Budget Control Act funding caps for Defense,
increasing the military pay raise in excess of the President's
Budget request would force the Department to displace critical
modernization and reduce readiness funding to finance the
increase.

LSlow the growth of basic allowance for housing
(BAH)--The Department's military and civilian leaders carefully
considered this option to generate savings--savings needed to
help close serious resource shortfalls in training,
maintenance, and equipment. The Department found that slowing
BAH growth until an average member's out-of-pocket expenses
reached five percent achieved an appropriate and reasonable
balance between the Department's need to achieve savings in the
BAH program and the need to continue to offer a generous,
competitive, and sustainable package of military pay and
benefits.

LModernize military healthcare--The proposed
Consolidated Health Plan structure would make it easier for
beneficiaries to focus on health (no cost shares for preventive
care), maintain a close relationship with their primary care
provider (zero to low copayments), and offer beneficiary
freedom of choice of providers. A proven utilization management
design would attract beneficiaries to Military Treatment
Facilities (MTF) for care as their provider of choice, thereby
maximizing utilization of investments in the MTF structure.

LReform commissary operations--Our proposals would
allow the Department to offset operating costs and develop
effective commissary business practices without significantly
affecting patron savings.
Conducting Additional BRAC Round: The Department is facing
a serious problem created by the tension of declining budgets,
reductions in force structure, and limited flexibility to adapt
its infrastructure accordingly and, therefore, urges the
Congress to provide the BRAC authorization as requested. The
Department needs to find a way to strike the right balance so
that infrastructure does not drain resources from the
warfighter. The Department's goal is a BRAC focused on
efficiency and savings, and it is a goal that is achievable.
A-10 Aircraft: Divestiture of the A-10 is critical. It
enables the Air Force to fund higher priority programs and
balance current readiness with future modernization
requirements. Such prohibitions limit or delay savings,
efficiencies, and operational capabilities necessary to meet
mission objectives in the current fiscal environment. In the
case of the A-10, DOD believes the Joint Strike Fighter and
other multi-mission aircraft will replace the A-10's singular
mission of close air support while also providing other
critical capabilities.
ARI: The DOD plans to transfer 72 Apache aircraft in FY
2016. The ARI, introduced in the FY 2015 President's Budget and
planned in the FY 2016 President's Budget, will position Army
aviation assets where they can best meet the combatant command
requirements and strategic priorities. The Army remains
steadfast in its conviction that ARI is the Total Army
enterprise solution given the mounting costs of aging aircraft,
growing operational requirements, and increasing fiscal
pressures. In FY 2015, the Army began to divest the oldest,
least capable aircraft while retaining the best, most capable
airframes. When fully implemented, this initiative will use
Army aviation forces more efficiently, increases the Army
National Guard's domestic response capacity, and optimizes the
Army's capability to meet combatant commanders' requirements.
[See page 32.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 18, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. BORDALLO

Ms. Bordallo. How important was the removal of the
restrictions on Government of Japan funds for the relocation of
Marines from Okinawa to Guam in last year's [National Defense
Authorization Act]? I felt the Guam Oversight Committee was a
helpful internal tool to the Department of Defense; are you
planning to reinvigorate the committee?
Secretary Carter. The Department appreciates the support of
Congress in lifting the restrictions on Government of Japan
funds for the relocation of Marines from Okinawa to Guam.
Removal of these restrictions will allow us to move forward on
this essential component of the rebalance to the Asia-Pacific
region, resulting in a more geographically dispersed,
operationally resilient, and politically sustainable posture in
the area.
Pursuant to Title 10, U.S. Code, subsection (e) of section
132, the Deputy Secretary of Defense chairs the Guam Oversight
Committee (GOC) and serves as the Department of Defense's
principal representative for coordinating the interagency
efforts in matters relating to Guam. The GOC convenes on a
quarterly basis and addresses issues specific to the
relocation.
Ms. Bordallo. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology and Logistics Frank Kendall recently testified
before the committee, ``What I am seeing in foreign
modernizations . . . is a suite of capabilities that are
intended clearly . . . to defeat the American way of doing
power projection, American way of warfare . . . And, without
saying too much about this, the Chinese, in particular and,
again, to a lesser extent, the Russians are . . . making
advances beyond what we currently have fielded.'' Many studies
have determined that the United States utilized a cost
imposition strategy that significantly contributed to the
downfall of the Soviet Union. I'm concerned that rogue nations
are now in the position to impose that strategy on the United
States by developing ballistic missiles that cost in the small
millions of dollars while we spend multiple billions on a
limited missile defense system. Can you comment on how the
fiscal year 2016 budget, or future budgets, will account for
the development of missile defense or others systems that
protect against this dynamic?
General Dempsey. We are very much aware of our potential
adversaries' intent to use a cost imposition strategy against
us, especially in the area of missile defense where it is
inherently cheaper to build missiles to hit ground targets than
to build missiles to hit other missiles. Our approach to this
problem is to find and develop innovative capabilities that are
both affordable and effective in achieving our goals in
integrated air and missile defense.
Our vision includes greater contributions to our missile
defense capabilities by encouraging our partners and allies to
share more of the burden for regional defense, particularly to
protecting their home soil. To this end, we are seeing an
uptick in foreign military sales of systems like Patriot and
Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD). Additionally, we
are looking at future innovative ways to mitigate air and
missile threats via advanced technologies like railguns,
directed energy, electronic attack, and even cyber. These hold
promise in the long term to reverse the cost imposition back on
our adversaries. Other techniques like dispersal of our assets,
hardening, and defeating missile systems before they launch via
kinetic or non-kinetic means are also in our plans.
Furthermore, we want to ensure the systems we already have are
properly modernized, ensure that our personnel are fully
trained to operate those systems, and fully integrate missile
defenses within the joint force and with our foreign partners
and allies.
For homeland defense, we remain committed to the cost of
fielding a reliable, effective system to defeat a limited
ballistic missile attack from a rogue nation. Here, deterrence
based on denial is essential because of the enormous
destruction if one of these countries were able to target our
population centers with ICBM [intercontinental ballistic
missile]-delivered weapons of mass destruction. We have also
budgeted for affordable sensor and shooter solutions to
deterring and defeating cruise missile attacks on the homeland.
All of these concepts are in the discussion for our Fiscal Year
2016 budget and beyond, and we will continue to reassess our
plans to ensure we are finding smart ways to outpace the threat
within realistic budget constraints.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SHUSTER

Mr. Shuster. We keep hearing that there is 20 percent
excess capacity in Department of Defense infrastructure, but
there is no guarantee that infrastructure will not be needed to
fight future conflicts. I believe there are ways to seek
efficiencies without a Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC), a
process that produces questionable cost savings. Within my
district, I have seen the flexibility that an installation,
Letterkenny Army Depot, gains through the use of leased land
and contract personnel to respond to ever changing demand
signals. What innovative solutions are available to address
excess infrastructure and are there benchmarks that can be
shared across the services to avoid the BRAC process?
Secretary Carter. The Department does not believe that
innovations such as leasing arrangements or similar measures to
repurpose excess space on installations would be sufficient to
offset the costs of maintaining the Department's excess
infrastructure. As is the case in the private sector, it is
more efficient to close an entire installation rather than
mothball or lease a portion of that installation. The majority
of BRAC savings come from civilian and military personnel
eliminations, reduced base operating support costs, and reduced
facility sustainment costs. Non-BRAC approaches do not achieve
these savings because they do not enable the Department to
eliminate the overhead personnel and sustainment costs
associated with running and guarding the base.
The Department believes the BRAC process could address
concerns of needed infrastructure to fight future conflicts.
The Department believes that the BRAC process provides
appropriate safeguards to ensure the Department retains the
capacity to respond to surge, accommodate a significant
reconstitution of the force, and support all forces, including
those currently based outside the United States. In fact, the
selection criteria contained in the previous BRAC language (and
the Department's current request), specifically criteria one
and three, capture the concept of surge capacity. Criterion one
requires the Department to consider ``current and future''
mission capabilities and criterion three assesses the ``ability
to accommodate contingency, mobilization and future total force
requirements.'' Moreover, in the execution of prior BRAC
rounds, and as verified in a 1999 study, the Department has
demonstrated that it will retain within the U.S. installation
infrastructure sufficient difficult-to-reconstitute assets to
respond to surge, accommodate a significant reconstitution of
the force, and support all forces, including those currently
based outside the United States.
Mr. Shuster. President Obama's proposal for a new
Authorization for the Use of Military Force ``does not
authorize the use of the United States Armed Forces in enduring
offensive ground combat operations.'' General Allen, the
Special Presidential Envoy on countering the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), testified before the Senate
Committee on Foreign Relations last month that the definition
of ``enduring offensive ground combat operations'' could ``be
two weeks, it might be two years.'' Please specifically define
``enduring ground operations.''
Secretary Carter. The proposed Authorization for the Use of
Military Force would not authorize long-term, large-scale
ground combat operations like those the United States conducted
in Iraq and Afghanistan. It would provide the flexibility to
conduct ground combat operations in more limited circumstances,
such as rescue operations involving U.S. or coalition personnel
or special operations to take military action against Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant leadership.
Mr. Shuster. Since the administration has not clearly
defined ``enduring ground operations,'' who will be responsible
for determining whether an action violated the stipulation
against ``enduring ground operations''?
Secretary Carter. Any requirement for U.S. ground combat
operations would be assessed on a mission-by-mission basis. I
do not believe there would be opportunities for the commanders
on the ground to engage in ``enduring ground operations''
without further orders from the President.
Mr. Shuster. The President has placed a three-year
limitation in his proposed Authorization for the Use of
Military Force. Do you believe that the current strategy will
defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in that time
window?
Secretary Carter. While the campaign to degrade and
ultimately defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) will not be over anytime soon, the proposed three-year
term will provide the next president, the Congress, and the
American people an opportunity to review progress and evaluate
the authorities in place. Execution of the current strategy is
the best way to ensure progress between now and then, while
remaining flexible to the dynamic situation on the ground.
Mr. Shuster. The United States manufactures a number of
weapons systems that our allies can utilize as a counterpoint
to the military advantages of hostile nations like Russia and
Iran. Countries like Poland are increasingly looking to proven
weapons systems, such as the Patriot Air and Missile Defense
System, which are maintained and modified right here in United
States at Letterkenny Army Depot in my district. In light of
this, how do you believe we can best utilize our organic
industrial base to assist our allies in hostile regions?
Secretary Carter. Our industrial base, both organic and
commercial, can and does provide weapons support to our allies.
For example, a number of foreign military sales (FMS) customers
have the PATRIOT Air and Missile Defense System in their
inventory, although Poland does not have an FMS case with the
United States for PATRIOT. Missile recertification for PATRIOT
can be/is performed at Letterkenny Army Depot for three FMS
customers with certain components recertified at Raytheon. The
organic and commercial industrial base will continue to support
the various weapons systems that our allies utilize.
Mr. Shuster. The Authorization for the Use of Military
Force (AUMF) gives the President authority to ``use the Armed
Forces of the United States as the President determines to be
necessary and appropriate against ISIL or associated persons or
forces.'' What impact does the use of the term ``associated
persons or forces'' have with regards to how broadly this AUMF
can be leveraged in areas of the world outside of Iraq and
Syria?
Secretary Carter. ``Associated persons or forces'' means
individuals and organizations fighting for, on behalf of, or
alongside the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or
any closely-related successor entity in hostilities against the
United States or its coalition partners. To be considered an
``associated force,'' a group must both be an organized, armed
group that has entered the fight alongside ISIL; and a co-
belligerent with ISIL in hostilities against the United States
or its coalition partners. Before a group is targeted, it will
be evaluated against this standard, its current activities, our
regional security priorities, and existing Presidential policy
guidance.
I do not currently envision using U.S. military force
against ISIL outside of Iraq or Syria. That said, the enemy in
this conflict has not confined itself to the geographic
boundaries of any one country, and I believe it would be a
mistake to signal to ISIL that there are safe havens for them
outside Iraq and Syria by limiting the authorization to
specific countries. The President's proposed AUMF would provide
the flexibility to address the threat as necessary.
Mr. Shuster. We have seen previously how the premature
withdrawal of American forces leads to destabilization and
future conflicts in places like Iraq. Indeed, terrorist groups
like the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) thrive and
grow in a power vacuum. Do you believe that President Obama's
Authorization for the Use of Military Force allows for adequate
planning for security operations after the defeat of ISIL?
Secretary Carter. Yes, I believe President Obama's
Authorization for the Use of Military Force allows for adequate
planning for security operations after the defeat of ISIL. The
immediate introduction of security and governance elements into
contested areas from which ISIL has recently been driven out is
essential to ensuring lasting success. This cannot be a
military-only solution. The Department of State, along with
General Allen in his role as the Special Presidential Envoy for
the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL, is leading efforts on
stabilization and is working closely with the Government of
Iraq. I refer you to the Department of State for additional
information about these efforts.
Mr. Shuster. General Dempsey, you stated ``sequester-level
cuts will lead to a hollow [Defense Industrial Base] that no
longer holds all of the critical design and manufacturing
capabilities our military needs.'' Do you believe that under
the burden of the sequester our industrial base still has the
capacity to support U.S. action in a major, large-scale
conflict?
General Dempsey. Passing the President's FY16 budget
request will best ensure our industrial base can provide the
military needs our warfighting men and women require to prevail
in a major, large-scale conflict. Conversely, the impact of
potential budget reductions--particularly sequestration--places
substantial pressure on the Defense Industrial Base (DIB),
creating a difficult environment for long-term planning. Firms
must plan and realign business activities while competing for
capital in competitive markets. In many cases, DOD comprises an
ever-smaller portion of much larger markets (Aerospace,
Electronics, IT/Telecom, Services, etc.). Companies are
skeptical that DOD will be able to fully fund even its prior
commitments. Since the 1990s, the DIB has seen erosion in
multiple sectors, including fixed-wing aircraft, missiles,
electronics, ground vehicles and materials, with some
associated decreases in design engineering and manufacturing
capability. While DIB arguably produces the best systems in the
world, in many cases, the defense department is requiring lower
quantities. Significant stress also exists in the lower sub-
tiers of the DIB as smaller firms, with limited access to
capital, deal with the downturn in the defense budget further
thinning the supply chain.
Mr. Shuster. General Dempsey, you state ``Our Nation cannot
sustain the world's finest military without also sustaining the
world's strongest and most innovative defense industrial
base.'' My district is home to Letterkenny Army Depot, and I
have seen firsthand the high level of technical skill that goes
into supporting our warfighter with the best equipment
possible. Do you believe the sequester will impact depot
workload, and how do you feel we can best support and preserve
our depots and industrial base?
General Dempsey. Passing the President's FY16 budget
request will best ensure our industrial base can provide the
military needs our warfighting men and women require to prevail
in a major, large-scale conflict. Conversely, the impact of
potential budget reductions--particularly sequestration--places
substantial pressure on the Defense Industrial Base (DIB),
creating a difficult environment for long-term planning. Firms
must plan and realign business activities while competing for
capital in competitive markets. In many cases, DOD comprises an
ever-smaller portion of much larger markets (Aerospace,
Electronics, IT/Telecom, Services, etc.). Companies are
skeptical that DOD will be able to fully fund even its prior
commitments. Since the 1990s, the DIB has seen erosion in
multiple sectors, including fixed-wing aircraft, missiles,
electronics, ground vehicles and materials, with some
associated decreases in design engineering and manufacturing
capability. While DIB arguably produces the best systems in the
world, in many cases, the defense department is requiring lower
quantities. Significant stress also exists in the lower sub-
tiers of the DIB as smaller firms, with limited access to
capital, deal with the downturn in the defense budget further
thinning the supply chain.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CONAWAY

Mr. Conaway. This committee is concerned with and focused
on improving bureaucratic processes such as acquisition to be
more efficient to better serve our warfighters. Personnel are
critical in making these improvements. We have learned the
Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) has nearly two times
as many contractor FTEs as they do military and civilian FTEs
combined. In fact, two Under Secretary offices have three to
nearly five times as many contractor FTEs as they do military
and civilian FTEs. As compared to the Services, OSD has more
than six times as many contractors. Given the role of execution
falls to the Military Departments, can you explain why so many
contractors work for OSD? How does this degree of bureaucracy
help the services execute programs?
Secretary Carter. The Office of the Secretary of Defense
(OSD) staff, like other elements of the Department, utilizes
contracted support to augment and complement its organic
government staff of military and civilian personnel. Contracted
support to the OSD staff provides, among other things, a wide-
range of professional, administrative, and management services
that do not necessitate government performance. This use of
contracted support allows the Department's military and
civilian employees to focus on inherently governmental tasks--
command & control; policy development; budget formulation;
program management; and oversight of the multitude of programs
and services across the Department that exist to support the
readiness, morale, and well-being of our uniformed service
members and their families.
As stated in the ``Plan for Streamlining Department of
Defense (DOD) Management Headquarters, Section 904 Initial
Report to Congress,'' the Deputy Chief Management Officer and
DOD Chief Information Officer are co-leading a business
processes and systems review (BPSR), and the supporting
information technology systems, within OSD organizations and
their associated Defense Agencies and DOD Field Activities. The
BPSRs will help OSD offices identify their primary mission and
outcomes, along with the necessary resources allocated
(including contracted support), identify obstacles to achieving
those outcomes (e.g., resource shortfalls, policy/legislative
issues, process obstacles), and identify activities that might
be improved or eliminated.
Senior leaders will continue to examine opportunities to
achieve additional efficiencies in OSD, as well as other
headquarters activities in the Department.
Mr. Conaway. In light of the fact that Acquisition,
Technology and Logistics has more than 2,600 contractor FTEs,
99 percent of their staff is GS-15 or higher, is the
organization too top heavy and contractor dependent to
eliminate unnecessary bureaucracy within the acquisition
process? If Military Departments are ultimately responsible for
executing acquisition programs, is it necessary, efficient, and
effective to have an oversight organization that is itself
larger than the Military Department acquisition organizations
they provide oversight to?
Secretary Carter. The Office of the Undersecretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics (OUSD(AT&L))
does not have 2,600 contractor FTEs.
The contractor FTE figure cited is derived from the
operations and maintenance (O&M) budget justification material
for the entire Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), which
includes the offices of the Undersecretaries for Personnel and
Readiness, Policy, and Intelligence, as well as the Cost
Assessment and Program Evaluation office, and the office of the
Deputy Chief Management Officer. In addition, OUSD(AT&L) itself
encompasses a far broader scope than oversight of the
acquisition process. OUSD(AT&L) duties also include
departmental oversight of logistics, nuclear and chemical/
biological activities, energy, installations, industrial base,
engineering, and science and technology.
The OUSD(AT&L) acquisition staff is a highly skilled,
technical staff aligned to the objective of guarding against
unwarranted optimism in program planning and budget
formulation, and to prevent excessive risk taking during
execution--all of which is essential to avoiding overruns and
costly delays. The Military Departments plan, manage, and
execute their acquisition programs, with reviews by the
Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology &
Logistics at discrete milestones associated with major
Department resource commitments. The reviews work to ensure
programs are affordable, executable, and follow sound business
and risk management practices. Routine execution monitoring of
programs by OSD also affords the opportunity to intercede well
before programs are at risk of failure. The Department is fully
committed to reducing unnecessary bureaucracy and continuing
the important work of improving the performance of the
acquisition system while delivering superior capabilities to
our forces.
AT&L's civilian workforce utilizes the Acquisition
Demonstration Project system. The civilian workforce is spread
across various pay bands comparable to multiple GS grades and
steps.
Mr. Conaway. Most of the discussion regarding the Defense
Department's efforts to achieve financial statement
auditability has focused on the Military Department's (MilDep)
plans. However, about 25 percent of the Defense Department's
budgetary resources are appropriated to defense organizations
outside of MilDeps. What is the current status of financial
statement auditability for each of these defense organizations
outside the MilDeps, and will each of them meet the goal of
full financial auditability by fiscal year 2017?
Secretary Carter. In December 2014, the Department issued
an audit strategy for the other defense organizations (often
described as the ``Fourth Estate''). This strategy includes a
focus on all funds and entities, not just the General Funds, in
order for the Fourth Estate to catch up with the Military
Departments and be ready for a full financial statement audit
by Fiscal Year (FY) 2018. Although, much of the dollar value of
the Fourth Estate Defense wide accounts is already under audit
and some individual organizations have asserted audit
readiness, the goal is to have the remaining organizations
under audit as soon as possible.
The Department of Defense (DOD) remains committed to
meeting the congressionally mandated FY 2017 goal for full
financial statement auditability. The Fourth Estate audit
strategy groups Fourth Estate entities into standalone audits
or examinations categories, to track and demonstrate progress
toward a full statement audit in FY 2018. The priorities begin
with the most material components that are large enough to
potentially impact DOD as a whole. These entities are referred
to as the DOD Designated Audit Entities, and are comprised of
entities such as the Defense Logistics Agency, the Defense
Health Agency, U.S. Special Operations Command, and U.S.
Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM). The next set of important
entities is the DOD Designated Exam Entities, such as the
Washington Headquarters Service which includes the Office of
the Secretary of Defense for audit purposes, and the Missile
Defense Agency. Per the Fourth Estate strategy, all remaining
Fourth Estate entities (except for USTRANSCOM and the Defense
Information Systems Agency) will or are already undergoing an
examination of their Schedule of Budgetary Activity by
independent public accounting firms. Current plans call for all
material entities to begin full financial statement audits or
examinations during
Mr. Conaway. Has a comprehensive plan been developed by the
staff of the Office of Secretary of Defense, in coordination
with the Services and other Defense agencies, to re-mediate the
internal control deficiencies impeding auditability in the
``Transportation of Things'' business area?
Secretary Carter. The Department has a comprehensive
Financial Improvement and Audit Readiness strategy for
remediating deficiencies, constructed on an enterprise-wide
initiative together with individual component initiatives. The
Military Services and Defense Agencies are focused on
corrective actions to remediate their Transportation of Things
internal control deficiencies. Led by an executive steering
committee, a Transportation Financial Auditability (TFA)
working group has been established to develop standardized
processes and procedures supported by policy guidance, system
integration, and enterprise-wide training, all in support of
the Department's long-term auditability goals and desire to
strengthen overall business processes. The TFA effort
complements the Military Services' audit efforts.
Mr. Conaway. When were these auditability weaknesses
brought to Office of the Secretary of Defense's attention?
Secretary Carter. The auditability weaknesses at the
Departmental level, as distinct from weaknesses limited to
individual components, were first acknowledged beginning in
June 2013. The nature of the weaknesses initially identified is
similar to other business processes where funding is managed
centrally but decentrally executed.
Mr. Conaway. What is an acceptable period of time for
Office of the Secretary of Defense to develop a corrective
action plan in this business area, i.e., from identification of
the weakness during auditability preparations until development
of a remediation plan?
Secretary Carter. The Department has implemented a
comprehensive Financial Improvement and Audit Readiness
strategy for addressing the challenges based on enterprise-wide
and component initiatives. The strategy relies on the Military
Services to address specific weaknesses and developing
corrective action plans to address their processes and systems.
The Office of the Secretary of Defense strives to be as
responsive as possible in addressing enterprise weaknesses.
More detailed plans that potentially impact field level
activities across the entire Department require collaboration
and tend to take more time.
Mr. Conaway. What is the likely impact of the
Transportation of Things deficiencies on the Services' audit?
Secretary Carter. Auditors apply the concept of materiality
to financial statements. Amounts for Transportation of Things
are less material compared to the amounts of payments to
military and civilian personnel and for purchases of goods,
e.g., weapons systems. Hence, Transportation of Things
deficiencies will potentially have less impact on the
auditability of the Military Services. The Department of the
Army's Transportation of Things materiality is slightly greater
than that of the Department of the Air Force's materiality or
the Department of the Navy's materiality.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. DUCKWORTH

Ms. Duckworth. Secretary Carter, one area in particular
continues to be problematic despite years of acknowledgments
from your predecessors, as well as yourself, and numerous
Government Accountability Office (GAO) and Inspector General
(IG) reports. Expenditures for service contracting continue to
be invisible in the Department's budget. Given the history of
senior leader commitments towards compliance, including
yourself, you can imagine my disappointment when I learned that
the acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness & Force
Management decided in September 2014 there is a lack of
specific factual evidence to proceed forward in this area and
appointed a Strategic Review and Planning Officer to look into
this matter. Work on the ECMRA has been suspended ever since.
Making matters worse, both GAO (GAO-14-491R) and Department of
Defense IG report (DODIG-2014-114) that the Department is not
resourcing the ECMRA effort. Despite the importance of an
inventory of service contracts that is integrated into the
budget process, particularly when the Department must make
significant spending reductions, P&R has suspended work on the
ECMRA, notwithstanding commitments from more senior-level
Department leaders. Why? What additional requirements must
Congress impose in order to ensure compliance? Will you commit
to lift the suspension that your office has imposed on the
ECMRA; use the accepted Army methodology; oversee compliance
with the ECMRA by the services and the defense agencies in
accordance with your office's statutory responsibilities as
well as overall responsibility for Total Force Management; and
ensure that the ECMRA is used to inform spending decisions on
service contracts in order to allow the Department to finally
be compliant with the laws that govern such spending?
Secretary Carter. The Department of Defense (DOD) is
proceeding deliberately to implement a solution that will meet
Congressional intent: to generate an improved Inventory of
Contracted Services (ICS), using ``instances'' of the
Contractor Manpower Reporting Application (CMRA). These
``instances'' are each separate and specific operating IT
systems of CMRA that are used across DOD to capture contractor-
reported data.
There are currently four ``instances,'' one for each
Military Department and the fourth for OSD and the rest of the
Fourth Estate, all modeled after a system developed by the
Army, being utilized and accessible through a common portal at
www.ecmra.mil. In the near term, all four ``instances'' of CMRA
will be co-located on a Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC)
server; DMDC will ensure system compliance with DOD security
and information technology policies. Because data collection
for the FY 2014 ICS has already been completed, it is expected
that this new operational model will be used to generate the FY
2015 ICS.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALZ

Mr. Walz. Secretary Carter, can you tell me the status of
the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy,
Plans and Capabilities? What is the office's staffing level
now? What should it be? What was it over the last five years?
Secretary Carter. Mr. Robert Scher was appointed as the
first Assistant Secretary of Defense for the new Office of
Strategy, Plans, and Capabilities and confirmed by the Senate
in December 2014. Mr. Scher is responsible for advising the
Secretary of Defense and the Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy on national security and defense strategy, the forces
and contingency plans necessary to implement defense strategy,
nuclear deterrence and missile defense policy, and security
cooperation plans and policies.
Mr. Scher oversees four Deputy Assistant Secretaries, and
the office has approximately 70 action officers. This level of
staffing is appropriate for the duties and responsibilities
assigned to the office. The office was created by
reorganization within the Office of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy and has assumed responsibilities that were
previously assigned to other organizations, so it is not
feasible to make a direct comparison to the level of staffing
of previous offices.
Mr. Walz. General Dempsey, with so much of our national
resources our nation invested previously in Iraq before we
terminated our ``advise and assist'' effort in Operation New
Dawn, and the apparent ineffectiveness of the Iraqi Security
Forces to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, why
is our ``train, advise, and equip'' effort expected to work
this time? What is different this time?
General Dempsey. There are three fundamental reasons why I
expect our train, advise and equip effort to succeed despite
the ISF's recent failures. First and for most, ISIL is an
existential threat to the GOI, this provides significant
motivation for the GOI and MOD to implement necessary reforms
as well as provides the catalyst for cooperation between all
groups, Sunni, Shia and Kurds. Additionally, though the
security forces that existed in 2011 were largely proficient,
years of neglect and mismanagement by the Maliki regime left
the security forces void of proficient leaders and equipment
degrading their morale and combat effectiveness. The current
security forces are part of a government that is under reform
and moving towards inclusivity. As PM Abadi incorporates Shia,
Kurds and Sunnis into his government, a non-sectarian driven
government will result in a more proficient military.
Mr. Walz. General Dempsey, please describe the planning
assumptions that went into the defense strategy outlined in the
2014 Quadrennial Defense Review and whether those planning
assumptions hold true today. For example, what were the
planning assumptions regarding Russia and our Department of
Defense footprint in Europe, or the assumptions about future
conflicts in the Middle East? General Dempsey, what key
strategy, posture, force size, and force structure decisions
resulted from these planning assumptions that you would
recommend be revisited today given what you know about how the
security environment has evolved?
General Dempsey. The 2014 QDR acknowledged the complexity
and uncertainty inherent in the international security
environment. Chapter I of the 2014 QDR outlines assumptions
regarding the future security environment by outlining expected
global and regional trends. With regards to Russia, the risks
associated with Russia's ``multi-dimensional defense
modernization'' and ``actions that violate the sovereignty of
its neighbors'' were acknowledged and integrated into the QDR
analysis. Regarding the security environment in the Middle
East, the QDR described the risks of regional destabilization
as a result of the ongoing crisis in Syria including the
potential for ``rapidly developing threats'' with the potential
to ``directly threaten US interests at home and abroad.'' As
the global security environment changes, we will continually
reconsider our planning assumptions and make strategic
adjustments to mitigate risks to US interests. In light of
changes in the European theater, we have already made decisions
to defer planned posture changes and are considering a range of
options for further strategy, posture and structure changes in
Europe. Recent developments in the Middle Eastern and Pacific
theaters will also necessitate a review of planning assumptions
and will likely have additional implications for our strategy
and posture. Our planning assumptions will also adapt as
resourcing levels evolve over time. The 2014 QDR strategy and
force sizing construct were based on the capacity of the joint
force at FY2015 Presidential Budget funding levels. Resource
reductions below the PB level will create additional tensions
above and beyond those generated by rapid changes in the global
security environment. We have an ongoing effort to reform our
global force management processes to ensure we adequately
mitigate risks across the broad range of demands on the joint
force. We are committed to ensuring our planning efforts adjust
to a continually changing security environment while also
adapting the joint force to successfully execute our national
security strategy.
Mr. Walz. General Dempsey, it has been reported that the
Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) remains largely an
infantry-based force and lacks, or has only an emerging
capability, many of the critical enablers that the United
States provided in the past, including close air support,
helicopter and fixed wing transport, medevac, and logistics
support. Moreover, the ANSF has limited institutional
capability and capacity for force generation and sustainment,
which is concerning given the high number of casualties that
the ANSF has suffered. A) If our primary mission responsibility
is the train, advise, and assist (TAA) of the ANSF at corps-
level in key locations in Afghanistan, and the recent stated
policy of the President to transition the TAA mission from a
corps-level effort to one at the ministerial level, how can
there be an expectation that the ANSF will be able to exist as
an established competent security force in the future? B) Data
indicates that the ANSF took as many as 5,000 causalities in
2014. Is this sustainable from force generation and morale
perspectives? If not, what are your predictions for the future
regarding the ANSF and security environment in Afghanistan? a.
If our primary mission responsibility is the training,
advising, and assisting (TAA) of the Afghan National Security
Forces (ANSF) at corps-level in key locations in Afghanistan,
and the recent stated policy of the President to transition the
TAA mission from a corps-level effort to one at the ministerial
level, how can there be an expectation that the ANSF will be
able to exist as an established competent security force in the
future? b. Data indicates that the ANSF took as many as 5,000
causalities in 2014. Is this sustainable from a force
generation and morale perspectives? If not, what are your
predictions for the future regarding the ANSF and security
environment in Afghanistan?
General Dempsey. In general, the Afghan National Defense
and Security Force (ANDSF) are better trained and equipped than
the insurgent forces, and continue to demonstrate tactical
proficiency as they work together across security pillars. When
they collaborate, they have proven that they can overmatch the
insurgents whenever challenged. Afghan soldiers continue to
demonstrate courage and resolve on the battlefield.
Afghanistan's increasingly proactive approach to finding and
eliminating threats to Afghan security and governing
institutions is an important step in offensive operations to
retain control of Afghan soil and to protect the population.
The focus of ongoing coalition advisory efforts is to close
gaps in ANDSF capability and foster Afghan self-sustainment.
Good leadership is key to the ANDSF being a competent Security
force in the future. President Ghani has made security his
number one priority and is focused on maintaining the trust of
the Afghan people while demonstrating resolve against the
enemies of Afghanistan. Maximizing their ability to employ,
sustain and maintain critical equipment, coupled with the
identification and promotion of capable leaders, will be a
near-term focus for Afghan and coalition leadership to maximize
ANDSF effectiveness in the 2015 fighting season and beyond.
Although ANDSF attrition has been a concern, recruitment
and retention efforts have ensured that the growth of ANDSF
forces has outpaced attrition since November 2014. The ANA
leadership, from the ministerial to the tactical level, tracks
force generation and attrition data. ANA end strength has been
increasing since Nov 2014 and ANDSF leaders are implementing
appropriate and effective measures to reduce attrition. The ANA
currently has approximately 174,000 soldiers, airmen, and
civilians serving in the MoD and are projected to recruit 4000-
6000 per month over the next few months. The ANDSF assumed the
lead for security operations during the 2013 fighting season
and increased their operational tempo by a factor of four in
the 2014 fighting season. As such, there was a corresponding
increase in ANDSF casualties. Casualties and attrition rates
remain challenges but the ANDSF leadership is taking the
following measures to address casualty rates:
1. The AAF CASEVAC system has gone from flying 291 missions
in 2012 to more than 1300 missions in 2015. 2. The ANA
continues to field MRAPs, which offer enhanced mobility and
protection as they move into FS 2015. 3. The AAF has also added
significant aerial fires capabilities. They armed their Mi-17s
with 23mm guns and honed the ability to fly and shoot at night
under NVGs. They will also bring several MD-530s armed with .50
caliber machine guns to the 2015 fighting season.
In addition to casualties, ANDSF are working to address the
issue of soldiers leaving their units--without authorization--
and being dropped from rolls (DFR). The most routinely cited
reasons for leaving without authorization are poor leadership
and quality of life. President Ghani and ANDSF leaders are
taking steps to address the DFR issue to include making
leadership changes in the ANDSF, enforcing leave policies, and
looking at retention incentives. Some personnel that leave
without authorization eventually return to their units. Over
the course of 2014, the ANA did not set recruiting goals at
levels sufficient to outpace attrition--which resulted in a
decline in end strength. In November 2014, the ANA
significantly increased its monthly recruiting targets and
began work on a 14-month recruiting and training surge plan--
and ANA end strength has increased steadily since.

[all]
