- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-36]THE RISK OF LOSING MILITARY TECHNOLOGY SUPERIORITY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. POLICY, STRATEGY, AND POSTURE IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-36]

THE RISK OF LOSING MILITARY

TECHNOLOGY SUPERIORITY AND ITS

IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. POLICY,

STRATEGY, AND POSTURE IN

THE ASIA-PACIFIC

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 15, 2015

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado                   Georgia
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
PAUL COOK, California                MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               PETE AGUILAR, California
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Kari Bingen, Professional Staff Member
Mike Casey, Professional Staff Member
Michael Tehrani, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Sanchez, Hon. Loretta, a Representative from California,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Locklear, ADM Samuel J., USN, Commander, U.S. Pacific Command....     6
Scaparrotti, GEN Curtis M., USA, Commander, United Nations
Command, Combined Forces Command, and U.S. Forces Korea........     7
Wormuth, Hon. Christine, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy,
U.S. Department of Defense.....................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Locklear, ADM Samuel J.......................................    49
Scaparrotti, GEN Curtis M....................................    81
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services........................    41
Wormuth, Hon. Christine......................................    42

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Forbes...................................................   103
Mr. Rogers...................................................   103
Mr. Scott....................................................   103

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
THE RISK OF LOSING MILITARY TECHNOLOGY SUPERIORITY AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
FOR U.S. POLICY, STRATEGY, AND POSTURE IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, April 15, 2015.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. Let me
thank our members, witnesses, and guests for being here today.
Before we start on the topic of today's hearing, let me
just take a moment to welcome formally the newest member of the
House Armed Services Committee. Steve Russell represents
Oklahoma's Fifth District. A retired lieutenant colonel in the
Army, Steve has deployed to Kosovo, Kuwait, Afghanistan, and
commanded the 1st Battalion's 22nd Infantry in Tikrit. His unit
played a key role in the capture of Saddam Hussein. So he has
already, in our briefings and so forth, made an important
contribution to the committee. We are very glad to have Steve
join our numbers.
Today, we hold a hearing on the risk of losing military
technological superiority and its implications for U.S. policy,
strategy, and posture in the Asia-Pacific. We probably need to
get a little better about succinct titles for our hearings, but
it does bring together a lot of what we have been examining
over the past couple, 3 months.
And I appreciate the senior-level attention within the
Department on the Asia-Pacific region, as well as technological
superiority. I realize that there are a number of serious
security issues around the world all happening at the same
time, the reason that we have had some people testify that it
is unprecedented in our country's history to have so many
serious security issues all happening at the same time. But we
cannot, either on this committee, the Department of Defense, or
the country in general, cannot allow limited bandwidth to have
us ignore what is happening in the Asia-Pacific.
Among the issues that come to the fore, I think, in the
region for which you all have responsibility is the
technological superiority issue, which has been a key focus of
this committee. We have had Under Secretary Kendall, for
example, testify about our eroding technological superiority,
especially in light of some of the key investments that China
is making.
It also brings together some individual unconventional
warfare tactics. We focused a lot on what Russia has been doing
with little green men, but it wasn't that long ago I read a
paper about the three warfares of China, including
psychological, media, and legal warfare. They have their own
unconventional tactics.
And of course we have in the region North Korea and its
asymmetric attempts both with its cyber, its missile and
nuclear programs, just to keep everyone off balance.
So this region brings together a lot of what we have talked
about so far this year. And, again, we appreciate everybody
being here.
Mr. Smith is not able to be with us this week, but I would
yield to the distinguished gentlelady from California, Ms.
Sanchez, in his place for any comments she would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. LORETTA SANCHEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, to our panel, thank you for being before us.
Obviously, the Indo-Asia-Pacific arena is an incredibly
important one to our United States and to security in our
world. I am always a little amused with the fact that everybody
talks about pivoting towards that direction. I am a
Californian. We have always been on the Pacific.
So, to a large extent we have had the opportunity to look
across that Pacific and work with the nations and accept a lot
of people who are originally from those countries to our
California. So I think that we are well-positioned, in
particular, as Californians, with respect to understanding and
having ties to those regions.
The collective security of our world is not only one of
defense and high-tech solutions to some of that, but it is also
about culture and the economy. And so I believe that we should
continue to work in the many myriad of ways to--as we look
towards that region. Maintaining a significant U.S. military
capability advantage is clearly a top priority for us from a
national security perspective. And it is entirely appropriate
to take a look at the capabilities, especially with high
technology that these countries in that region are doing.
Again, we should not presuppose, I think, that there is
malice involved when somebody is beefing up their military or
working towards higher military capabilities. And we shouldn't,
I think, presume that conflict is inevitable. Rather, we should
be geared toward working together in good faith of preservation
of our international order.
And I think that the most significant thing that Congress
can do to help bolster the U.S. military's technological edge
and to help advance strategic objectives in the Indo-Asia-
Pacific region is to eliminate sequestration. And I am talking
not just here in the defense committee, but across the Federal
board. As I remember Secretary Gates once said, if we don't
educate our people, if our economy is not good--and I am
paraphrasing, I am not saying directly--then we don't have to
worry about our military because it is about our economy and
about our people.
So I am looking forward to hearing the testimony today.
And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit Mr. Smith's statement
for the record. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. Without objection, it is so
ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith can be found in the
Appendix on page 41.]
The Chairman. And without objection, the witnesses'
complete written statements will be made part of the record.
We are pleased to have with us today the Honorable
Christine Wormuth, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy;
Admiral Samuel Locklear, Commander of U.S. Pacific Command; and
General Curtis Scaparrotti, the Commander of U.S. Forces Korea.
Again, thank you all for being with us. As I said, your
complete statements will be made part of the record. And we
would appreciate you summarizing in your opening comments
before we turn to questions.
Ms. Wormuth.

STATEMENT OF HON. CHRISTINE WORMUTH, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Secretary Wormuth. Thank you very much, Chairman Thornberry
and distinguished members of the committee, for having us here
today. We are looking forward to the conversation. And I am
sending my best wishes to Ranking Member Smith for a speedy
recovery. I know he is not enjoying that process.
The Chairman. Madam, excuse me. Would you mind getting that
microphone right in front of you?
Secretary Wormuth. Sure. That better?
The Chairman. That is better. The only way it works is
talking right into it. So thank you.
Secretary Wormuth. It is a pleasure to be here to talk with
you about certainly a top priority for Secretary Carter and
myself, which is our rebalance to Asia-Pacific.
I am also very pleased to be here alongside Admiral
Locklear and General Scaparrotti. We work closely together on a
lot of different issues. They are doing a tremendous job, and
the men and women who are out there working in Pacific Command
and at U.S. Forces Korea are really the day-to-day face of our
rebalance for a lot of countries in the region. So we really
appreciate the work that they do.
Both Secretary Carter and I have recently come back from
Asia, different parts of the region, but I think we both heard
in a very resounding way a lot of support from the countries
out there for the rebalance that we have undertaken, and also a
lot of desire to have even greater U.S. leadership and
engagement with the countries that are there.
In the past 70 years it has obviously been a time of
tremendous change and opportunity for the Asia-Pacific region.
As nations there rise and become more prosperous it has created
a lot of opportunity. At the same time, the dynamism in the
region has also created a much more complex security
environment in which we are now operating.
In particular, China's very rapid military modernization,
its opaque defense budget, the--its actions in space and
cyberspace, and its behavior in places like the East and South
China Seas raise a number of serious questions for us. Though
China's expanding interests are a natural part of its rise, it
does continue to pursue activities and to make investments that
lead many countries in the region, including the United States,
to have some serious questions about its long-term intentions.
China's behavior in the maritime domain, I think, in
particular, has created significant friction for its neighbors.
The government's efforts to incrementally advance its claims in
the East and South China Sea, and its extensive land
reclamation activities, particularly the prospect of further
militarizing those outposts, are very concerning to us. We have
urged China to show restraint and to refrain from further
activities that undermine regional trust.
We also have continued to urge China to clarify the meaning
of its ambiguous ``nine-dash line'' claim as a starting point
as a way to start reducing tensions and provide greater
transparency to countries in the region.
While the United States and China are not allies, we also
don't have to be adversaries. I think both of us, both the
United States and China recognize that a constructive U.S.-
China relationship is essential for global peace and
prosperity. We are therefore not only talking to China about
actions they undertake that concern us, but we are also talking
to them and undertaking activities to build transparency and to
improve understanding, particularly through our military-to-
military engagement with the PLA [People's Liberation Army].
We also face a number of other challenges, obviously, in
the region. Particularly I think of greatest concern to us in
DOD [Department of Defense] is North Korea's dangerous pursuit
of ballistic missiles and its weapons of mass destruction
program. North Korea, as you all know, has repeatedly
demonstrated its willingness to use provocations as a means to
achieve its ends. And just in the last year, we saw a very
significant cyber attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment.
There are also other challenges in the region that are
magnified by a growing range of nontraditional threats, such as
the increased flow of foreign fighters both to and from Asia,
the trafficking of illegal goods and people, and devastating
natural disasters such as the cyclone we saw last month in
Vanuatu.
So in response to these shifting dynamics, DOD has
consistently worked to implement President Obama's whole-of-
government strategy towards rebalancing in the Asia-Pacific.
One of the most important pieces of the administration's work
in the area of the rebalance is to finalize the Trans-Pacific
Partnership [TPP]. Our military strength ultimately rests on
the foundation of our vibrant and growing economy, so we
believe strongly that TPP is not just part of our economic
agenda, but is also a very important part of our national
security agenda. And I would urge Congress to pass Trade
Promotion Authority and allow negotiators to conclude this very
important agreement.
In DOD, we are really focused in terms of the rebalance on
a couple of key lines of effort. First is strengthening our
security relationships with allies and partners in the region.
In Japan, for example, we are very close to completing a
historic update of the defense guidelines, which really
wouldn't have been possible a decade ago. We are also working
with the Republic of Korea to develop a comprehensive set of
alliance capabilities to counter the North Korean threat. And
in Australia and the Philippines, last year we signed
important, groundbreaking posture agreements that will give us
enhanced access for our forces and also allow us a lot of new,
combined training opportunities for our partners in Australia
and the Philippines.
Our strong friendships in the region also go beyond
traditional alliances to some of our new relationships,
particularly in South and Southeast Asia. In addition to our
very strong partnership with Singapore, where I just visited a
couple weeks ago, we also are strengthening our relationships
with countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam. And
finally, we are investing, of course, in our partnership with
ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations], which is really
leading the way in terms of trying to build a more robust
security architecture in the region.
And lastly, in terms of relationships, the U.S.-India
relationship is a very important and very exciting partnership.
As you all know, just this January, President Obama and Prime
Minister Modi signed a Joint Vision Statement. We also
completed the first update in 10 years to our Defense Framework
with India, and we concluded four ``pathfinder'' projects for
technology development with India under the Defense Trade and
Technology Initiative.
In tandem with our efforts to modernize relationships in
the Pacific, the Department is also updating our forward
presence. And this isn't just about putting more assets into
the region. It is also about using those assets in new ways.
For example, we have developed a more distributed model for our
Marine Corps that is reducing our concentrated presence in
Okinawa through relocating marines to Australia, Guam, Hawaii,
and mainland Japan.
The Navy is also working more on its rotational presence
concept to include being on track to have our goal of having
four Littoral Combat Ships [LCS] rotating through Singapore by
2017. We have had two of our LCS ships go to Singapore already.
And the Army will be initiating its first rotational deployment
of a brigade combat team to the Korean Peninsula later this
spring.
Finally, and I think going very much to the issue of the
technology concerns that the committee is interested in, we are
also bringing our best capabilities to the Asia-Pacific region.
We are making significant investments to sustain our American
technological edge into the future in the air, land, sea, and
undersea domains. We are investing in precision munitions that
will increase our ability to strike adversaries from greater
standoff distances and we are working on new capabilities to
allow us to continue to operate freely in space and cyberspace.
All of these efforts demonstrate the seriousness of our
Department's commitment to protecting U.S. military primacy in
the Asia-Pacific theater. And our focus on technology is really
the impetus for our Defense Innovation Initiative, which is a
long-term, comprehensive effort to make sure that we enhance
our military competitive edge even as we face budget
constraints.
The Department's rebalance efforts, as well those of our
interagency colleagues, are part of a long-term project that
reflect, I think, the enduring interest the United States has
in the Asia-Pacific region. We look forward to continuing to
work with Congress on the rebalance. And I look forward to
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Wormuth can be found
in the Appendix on page 42.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Admiral.

STATEMENT OF ADM SAMUEL J. LOCKLEAR, USN, COMMANDER, U.S.
PACIFIC COMMAND

Admiral Locklear. Mr. Chairman, Congresswoman Sanchez, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today with Secretary Wormuth
and General Scaparrotti, who I work very closely with both of
them. Before we begin I would like to ask that my written
testimony be submitted for the record.
For more than 3 years I have had the honor and the
privilege of leading the exceptional men and women, military
and civilian, of the United States Pacific Command [USPACOM].
These volunteers are skilled professionals dedicated to defense
of our Nation. They are serving as superb ambassadors to
represent the values and strengths that make our Nation what it
is: great. I want to go on record to formally thank our service
members, civilians, and their families for their sacrifices.
USPACOM continues to strengthen alliances and partnerships,
maintain an assured presence in the region, and demonstrate
U.S. intent and resolve to safeguard our U.S. national
interest. When I spoke to you last year I highlighted my
concern for several issues that could challenge the security
environment across the Indo-Asia-Pacific. Those challenges
included responding to humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief events; dealing with an increasingly dangerous and
unpredictable North Korea, a challenge that General Scaparrotti
and I remain aligned in addressing; a continued escalation of
complex territorial disputes; increasing regional transnational
threats; and the complexity associated with China's continuous
rise.
In the past years these challenges have not eased. They
will not go away soon. But the Asia rebalance strategy is and
has taken hold. It is achieving its intended goals.
However, the greatest challenge remains the continued
physical uncertainty resulting from sequestration. If the
Budget Control Act remains in force, the greatest challenge in
the Indo-Asia-Pacific will be dealing with the consequences to
the security of our national interest as we respond to a
rapidly changing world. I echo the Secretary of Defense, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, and the service chiefs' testimony
before Congress. Our Nation is being forced into a resource-
driven national security strategy instead of one properly
resourced and driven by our enduring national interest.
In the Indo-Asia-Pacific we are accepting more risk, not
less. Sequestration will force harmful reductions in force
size, structure, and readiness that will reduce my ability to
manage crisis space and provide options to the President and
the Congress, and diminishes United States prestige and
credibility in the region and around the globe.
In the last year, at great expense to the readiness of the
surge forces' position in the continental United States,
USPACOM has maintained its forward forces, focused on
protecting the homeland, deterring aggressors, such as North
Korea, strengthening alliances and partnerships, and developing
the concepts and capabilities required for us to remain
dominant in a world that is growing in complexity with threats
that continually increase against a seemingly unending stream
of constraints.
Without adequate resources, we will be forced to make
difficult choices today that will have strategic consequences
to our future.
I would like to thank the committee for your continued
interest and support. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Locklear can be found in
the Appendix on page 49.]
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
General.

STATEMENT OF GEN CURTIS M. SCAPARROTTI, USA, COMMANDER, UNITED
NATIONS COMMAND, COMBINED FORCES COMMAND, AND U.S. FORCES KOREA

General Scaparrotti. Mr. Chairman, Congresswoman Sanchez,
and distinguished members of the committee, I am honored to
testify today as the Commander of the United Nations Command,
Combined Forces Command, and United States Forces Korea, and
also alongside Admiral Locklear and Under Secretary Wormuth. On
behalf of the service members, civilians, contractors, and
their families who serve our great Nation in the Republic of
Korea, one of our most important allies, thank you for your
support. I have prepared some brief opening remarks and I thank
you for submitting them to the record.
Last year, I testified that the combined and joint forces
of the United States and the Republic of Korea were capable and
ready to deter, and if necessary, respond to North Korean
threats and actions. Due to our accomplishments in 2014, I
report to you that our strong alliance is more capable of
addressing the rapidly evolving and increasingly asymmetric
North Korean threat.
In recent years, North Korea has aggressively developed and
utilized asymmetric capabilities, such as cyber warfare,
nuclear weapons, and ballistic missiles to advance its
interests. To put this in perspective over time, in 2012, my
predecessor noted North Korea's advancements in cyber and
nuclear capabilities during his opening statement to this
committee. A year later, North Korea conducted cyber attacks on
South Korea's banks and broadcasting stations. And in 2014,
they boldly projected their cyber capabilities against Sony
Pictures in the United States, in an effort to inflict economic
damage and suppress free speech.
This example represents a trend that is persistent across
several North Korean asymmetric capabilities. My top concern is
that we will have little to no warning of a North Korean
asymmetric provocation, which could start a cycle of action and
counteraction, leading to unintended escalation. This
underscores the need for the alliance to maintain a high level
of readiness and vigilance.
Last year, the alliance took significant steps in improving
its capabilities and capacities that deter aggression and to
reduce its operational risk. But our work is not done. In 2015,
we will maintain this momentum by focusing on my top priority,
sustaining and strengthening the alliance, with an emphasis on
our combined readiness. This includes ensuring the rapid flow
of ready forces into Korea in the early phases of hostilities
and improving our ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance] capabilities and critical munitions.
Based on the national security strategies of both our
nations, the United States will continue to be a steadfast
strategic partner to South Korea, and South Korea is poised to
be a long-lasting and important ally to America. Our enduring
military partnership in South Korea is the preeminent example
of bilateral security cooperation and a visible element of
American leadership and our Nation's commitment to the Asia-
Pacific region.
The men and women serving on freedom's frontier, defending
the Republic of Korea remain thankful for this committee's
unwavering support in prioritizing resources that enable us to
defend our national interests in Asia, while advancing
universal values and international order.
I am extremely proud of our service members, civilians, and
their families serving in the Republic of Korea, who never lose
sight of the fact that they are at freedom's frontier,
defending one of our most important allies and vital American
interests.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Scaparrotti can be found
in the Appendix on page 81.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
I want to ask, Admiral and General, each of you, about this
issue of technological superiority. I mentioned Under Secretary
Kendall has testified that our technological superiority that
we have enjoyed for years is eroding, and we have had many
other witnesses support that. There are a variety of factors
that have played into it, what we have done to ourselves with
budget cuts, a procurement process that cannot keep up with
changes in technology, the fact that some of our competitors
have stolen incredible amounts of information from us and
benefitted from it. I mean, all of these things, and probably
others, contribute to it.
But, each of you are responsible for dealing with the world
today as we find it and being prepared with plans and
contingencies and using the forces that we have today. So I
would be interested, as a combatant commander, as a commander
responsible for a key area of the world, are you concerned
about these trends in technology and our ability to keep up?
Are there some areas that concern you more than others given
your area of responsibility? And are there suggestions you have
about how we, the United States, could and should adjust to
meet these changes? Kind of a broad picture of what it is like
from your end, as warfighting commanders.
Admiral.
Admiral Locklear. Well, thank you, sir.
Over my career, my observation is that when we were dealing
with the Soviet Union in the Cold War, that we had a concerted
effort as a military to have that technological edge that
really provided a great, a tremendous amount of benefit and
allowed us to prevail, I think, during that time.
As we entered the last part of this past century and we
started efforts in the Middle East, we predominantly were
dealing with wars and events that--where we had such a large
technological superiority, that it didn't--we had air
dominance, we had undersea dominance, we had dominance in every
area. And that was good, I think, and we used that dominance.
But during that time I think that our priorities for
watching what the rest of the world was doing as countries came
along that had the ability and the desire to want to improve
their militaries and improve their technological capabilities,
that we kind of took a little bit of a break and didn't make
the types of investments that we needed to make. So during that
time our relative superiority, I think, has declined, and
continues to decline.
Some of the reasons for that I think are because countries
have more money to spend. There is a greater proliferation of
technology. Some of it has been stolen through intellectual
property. Some of it has been sold around the world in
different venues that you are all aware of.
The other thing that makes it challenging for us is our
general vulnerability. I mean, when it comes to the Asia-
Pacific, we are a Pacific nation, but we are also an island
nation. So we rely very heavily on power projection, which
means we have to be able to get forces forward, to sustain them
forward, and we rely heavily on systems that several decades
ago weren't even known about or thought about too much, and
that really exists now in the cyber world and the space world,
which unveils, if we are not careful, will unveil
vulnerabilities that we have to pace with technological
advancements.
To the degree of how we address these, what is important
for me is making sure that the forces we have, number one,
can--are dominant. You never want to go into any crisis or even
in deterrence to try to manage a situation where the force is
not dominant. It needs to be technologically superior across
multiple domains. So if you start at the top and you go from
space, to cyber, to air, to integrated air and missile defense,
to sea, maritime, to subsurface maritime, there is
technological challenges as all of the militaries in the world
get better in these domains, that we must continue to pace for
us to be able to be relevant in the domains that allow us to
project U.S. power in defense of U.S. interests.
Now, in the buildup to this Presidential budget submission,
I made it clear through a series of processes in the Pentagon,
the types of key areas where we need to maintain our focus on
technological advancement, and I think most of those were
adequately--accurately--represented in Secretary Kendall's
testimony. And I think that if the President's budget is
supported in those areas, that it will continue to get at the
types of technological advances that are critical for us to
stay forward and to protect U.S. interests in the Asia-Pacific.
General Scaparrotti. Mr. Chairman, I would echo what
Admiral Locklear had to say, particularly on the peninsula. You
discussed earlier the asymmetric capabilities that are being
developed by North Korea. Really, as they develop those
asymmetric capabilities, they are specifically orienting on
what they consider to be some of our vulnerabilities, and
through their development they are trying to close our
dominance, basically. And so we have to continue to develop our
capabilities, to change our posture, our concepts, our
employment in order to ensure that we maintain dominance.
The last thing I would say in a peninsula is because we are
operating on a peninsula, it is a relatively small theater. Air
and naval dominance is very important to the agility that I
have on the peninsula itself if we have a crisis. So all of
those things are things that I think about quite often.
And finally, the specific asymmetric capabilities that I
think about the most is the ballistic missile capability North
Korea possesses and our continued ability to be able to counter
that.
And then finally, on ISR. Many of our adversaries are
becoming more proficient in determining how to work inside of
our capabilities, our intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance capabilities, and also how to use deception and
other means in order to limit that advantage that we have
today.
The Chairman. It seems to me in no area of the world is it
more true that a loss of technological superiority means
increased risk to American lives than on the Korean Peninsula.
So I think that is another way to keep in mind.
Ms. Sanchez.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you again for your testimonies.
I represent the largest Vietnamese population outside of
Vietnam in the world sitting right there in Orange County,
California. As I said, we have always had our view to what is
going out in the Asian countries and the Pacific region. And
last year, Vietnam and the United States agreed to ease its
lethal weapons embargo on Vietnam in order to improve the
maritime security and to address the ongoing conflicts in
regards to the islands in the East Sea.
You know, but on the other hand, I have worked enough on
the Vietnamese issues to understand that Vietnam still is
lacking so much with respect to its human rights issues. In
particular, in 2000, when I went with President Clinton for the
bilateral trade agreement, and then later when we took the,
took Vietnam off of the Countries of Particular Concern list
with respect to religious infractions, in order for them to be
able to go into the World Trade Organization. So we continue to
see that things don't get better with respect to the human
rights issues, or marginally at times, and then worse.
So can you address for me the roadmap for weapon sales to
Vietnam and what types of lethal weapons your--would be
precluded if Vietnam continues on its road of not changing its
human rights record. Even with respect, for example, for Human
Rights Watch and our own State Department. They are
consistently marked very, very low with respect to human
rights.
So what do you see, or what can we expect from this
administration and this Pentagon with respect to weapons sales
to Vietnam? And are we going to tie any conditions to lifting
that embargo?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman Sanchez, thank you very
much for that question.
We are still in the process now of working with the
Department of State, our colleagues there, to work through how
best to leverage the partial lifting of the lethal weapons ban.
But certainly a part of those consultations is looking at the
human rights picture in Vietnam. And we are very much, even as
we in the Department of Defense are very interested in
deepening our relationship with Vietnam, we also are committed
to pushing for greater progress on the human rights front. So
that is something that we are very much taking into account as
we look at how best to work with Vietnam.
I think it is fair to say that, broadly speaking, the kinds
of capabilities that we think that would be most useful for
Vietnam in terms of its security needs are those that are--that
would be helpful to them in terms of maritime security, in
terms of maritime domain awareness, in terms of helping them
strengthen their ability to provide humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief.
So those are the kinds of areas that we are focused on with
them and looking at what kinds of arms might be relevant to
that. But we are still in the process of figuring out how best
to approach specific items they might be interested in.
Ms. Sanchez. And, Madam Secretary, we have also seen,
obviously, a pretty aggressive stance by China with respect to
territorial rights or claimed territorial rights in the East
Sea. What types of help could we give to Vietnam to ensure its
sovereignty over the islands that it believes are part of their
integral country?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, I think, first, as you know, we
don't take a position on the territorial claims, but we are
very much committed to wanting to see countries in the region
work through diplomacy to try to resolve those territorial
disputes. So we are focused on encouraging all of the countries
to seek peaceful means for resolution and to use diplomacy and
use available mechanisms.
At the same time, I think helping countries in the region
like Vietnam, but other countries as well, strengthen, again,
their own maritime security capabilities and their own maritime
domain awareness capabilities is helpful to them in terms of
them being able to, again, maintain some visibility over their
territorial waters, for example. And I don't know whether
Admiral Locklear would want to add on that.
Ms. Sanchez. And might you also explain to me the timeline
or how we could work together to ensure that this partial
release of the weapons ban is not detrimental with respect, in
particular, to our, I believe what should be, and it is for me
at least, a requirement that we see better human rights from
Vietnam? What is the process in which you are going through to
take a look and figure out how we will help militarily?
Secretary Wormuth. First and foremost, we are working with
the State Department, again, I think, to try to make sure that
we have agreement on what are the basic policy parameters for
how we would approach how best to leverage the partial lifting
of the ban. We are then in consultations with Vietnam about
what their needs are.
So the State Department really has the lead on the--on
talking with them about human rights and the importance of
making progress in that area. We reinforce that message. But we
have a process internal to our government to sort of lay out
our basic parameters, and then we have an ongoing dialogue with
Vietnam about what their needs are.
And that is a very active dialogue. My Assistant Secretary
for Asia-Pacific Affairs is actually a former ambassador to
Vietnam, so we have a very active conversation with them.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
And, I want to--Madam Secretary, I took down some notes,
what you had said in your prepared remarks, and also what you
said today: We urge the Chinese, actions that concern us, we
bring this to the Chinese's attention. I am one of the
individuals in the Congress that for years have been speaking
out publicly back in my district, the Third District of North
Carolina, about the growing debt of our Nation because I
believe sincerely that that is the biggest threat to our
national security, is the growing debt.
Admiral, that is why we passed the bill--I did not vote for
it, to be honest about it--the sequestration.
And then I see we continue to play a shell game with the
budget and with the American people's money and find ways to
continue to pump up the needs for our military.
I believe in honesty in budgeting. I don't believe in
dishonesty, but, anyway, in budgeting. But I am for honesty in
budgeting.
This is my question to you. I have long thought, maybe it
is because I was raised in eastern North Carolina, that if you
owe someone money and you can't pay them back, they just don't
have the same respect for you. And I look at the fact that
President Bush raised the debt ceiling 7 out of 8 years that he
was the President. Mr. Obama has raised the debt ceiling 7 out
of 6 years that he has been the President. And you know, when
we raise the debt ceiling what we are saying to the world is we
can't pay our bills; that we have to sell our financial
instruments and somehow finance our debt. Okay.
The Chinese buy a lot of our debt. So I really would like
to know, when our representatives of our government, whether it
be military or non-military, are sitting there facing the
Chinese, if it is a respect, because we continue to have to
borrow money from the Chinese to pay our bills. And they see
all of the news articles of how we are spending billions and
billions in Afghanistan, that much of it, according to John
Sopko, is wasted. And yet, we are taking the billions and
billions that we are spending overseas that is wasted, taken
away from rebuild--from building our military, which needs to
be rebuilt.
And I get to a point that I just don't understand an
administration--and I would say this if it was a Republican
administration--how in the world can we continue to play this
game of spending, spending, spending, and borrow, borrow,
borrow, and then we think we have got equal placement to talk
to the Chinese about we are concerned about this and we urge
you to do that. Do they really listen to us?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I certainly agree that, as
I said in my opening remarks, the foundation of our vitality as
a country is a strong economy, and that underpins our ability
to have a strong military. And, again, I think that is one of
the reasons why we in the Defense Department have been
expressing our support for important agreements like the Trans-
Pacific Partnership, for example.
I think China, again, you know we have a very independent
global--interdependent global economy at this point, and we are
very important customers for China, as are many other countries
around the world. So I think having a robust and growing
economy in the United States is important and the Chinese see
the value of that for them. We have--and I also think they
recognize very much that even as they modernize their military,
the United States military remains the premier military force
in the world.
And then, in addition to our very strong technological
track record, we also have an operational track record that is
unmatched. I mean, our military's combat experience is
unmatched by almost any country in the world, and it has been
honed over the last more than 10 years. And I think China very
much respects that as we, as we talk to them about our
concerns.
Mr. Jones. Well, I also found it very interesting that you
mentioned Trade Promotion Authority in your comments. There are
many of us who believe sincerely that any President, Democrat
or Republican, if you give them Trade Promotion Authority, then
you are damaging our constitutional ability to maintain
fairness in trade, so.
But thank you for your testimony.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses for your testimony today. In
particular, Admiral Locklear, I want to thank you for your
leadership at PACOM [Pacific Command] for the last 3 years. I
thank you for your service and I wish you all the best of luck
in your future endeavors.
If I could start with you, Admiral. You mentioned China's
aggressive shipbuilding program in addition to their
significant advances in electronic warfare capabilities,
Admiral. How do our forces in PACOM compare in those aspects?
And where do you believe improvements need to be made, besides
continued and sustained investment in the U.S. nuclear
submarine force, as you mentioned?
I am particularly concerned and interested. I think that
the Chinese at this point are--have confidence that they could
potentially turn the lights off on our use of cyber
capabilities on our fleet and our ability to respond, both
figuratively and literally.
So I want to know where you--what your views are and how we
stand.
Admiral Locklear. Well, thank you, sir. It is my assessment
that we remain the most dominant military power in the world
from all aspects. And I think that there is hardly a country--
there is not a country in the world that would disagree with
that today, even though I think they would recognize that the
relative parity of our relative gap between how good we are
versus how some of the other forces may be developing is
shrinking.
In the case of the maritime forces that you have talked
about with the PRC [People's Republic of China], they are on an
aggressive strategy, an aggressive shipbuilding campaign. They
seem to have limited restrictions on how fast they can produce
systems, how fast they can produce ships, submarines. And they
are producing what I would consider to be pretty good ships and
submarines.
But I still believe that we remain and we have the best
ships. We have clearly the best ships, the best submarines, the
best aircraft carriers, and the best people running them in the
world. So I am generally pretty good in that case.
But when it comes to dealing day to day in the Asia-
Pacific, what I require, first of all, we have a forward-
deployed force that operates with our host nations--Japan,
Korea--operates extensively in that region. And that force
needs to be ready, because it is not only ready for day to day
to maintaining the deterrent oversight security of the region,
but it is also critical to ensure that we are prepared for a
quick reaction if we have to do something in North Korea.
So those forces need to be ready. They need to be the best
that we have. They need to be of the highest technical
capability that we have. And to the degree that we can get
host--continue to get good host nation support, which I think
we have today, we need to pursue that.
Mr. Langevin. But I want to speak specifically to
electronic warfare capabilities if you could, Admiral.
Admiral Locklear. Yeah. In the electronic warfare arena, I
think that we are, because we have operated in environments, as
I have said in earlier statements, around the globe that--where
we have limited denied area through electronic means, I think
our electronic warfare capability has diminished, has not kept
pace with where we need to be in the future. And we are taking
some steps to take a harder look at how we get at electronic
warfare.
Of course, as you talk about electronic warfare then it
starts to get into the whole cyber issues, which are now
being--we are working hard to try to determine how we best
defend our cyber assets, how we organize ourselves to do that,
how we train a workforce to be able to do that. And that is all
part of the President's budget that has come forward that gets
at those particular issues.
Mr. Langevin. Good. Well, I share your concern there,
Admiral.
With regards to North Korea, both you and General
Scaparrotti mentioned in your testimonies that their cyber
actors continue to conduct cyber actions against South Korean
military and civilian networks. How confident are you that this
isn't happening to our U.S. Forces Korea infrastructure as
well? And additionally, how are we defending ourselves, as you
mentioned in your testimony, China generating insights into our
U.S. security policies, defense networks, logistics and
military capabilities through their cyber program?
General Scaparrotti. Thank you.
In regards to Korea and the threat from North Korea, I am
confident of our ability to defend our military networks. We
work very closely with the Republic of Korea, our partners and
allies, to ensure that, because we have a combined command and
control system, that we close any vulnerabilities there. And we
have been working in the past year very hard to develop our
cyber capabilities as a team.
However, you know, that is an ongoing challenge that we
have to stay on top of. North Korea is getting better every
day.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Madam Secretary, General, Admiral, thank you so much for
your service to our country. Thank you for being here today.
We have had a couple of milestones in the last few weeks.
One, the Japanese have now exceeded the number of planes they
have had to scramble against Chinese and Russian planes since
the Cold War, as I understand it. We also had the Office of
Naval Intelligence print this report, first time they have done
it since 2009, talking about a compelling concern about Chinese
activity in the disputed waters off the East and South China
Sea.
I also concur with your comments about sequestration as it
relates to national defense, although I really question anyone
on this committee or the administration that would suggest that
we shouldn't remove defense sequestration unless we can also
give the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], the IRS
[Internal Revenue Service], and the GSA [General Services
Administration] all the money they want or unless we can quench
the thirst of every other agency that drinks from every Federal
trough. To hold defense sequestration hostage against that
would be unconscionable.
My concern today as we talked about it, Admiral Locklear,
in this committee, we talked about the high-end technological
superiority. But I am also concerned about what we are seeing
happen at the lower end. You mentioned, I think correctly,
China launched more naval ships than any other country in 2013
and 2014, and they expect the same for 2014 and 2015. But I am
also concerned about what they are doing with their Coast
Guard. They now have 95 large cutters, 110 small cutters. That
is a total of 205. That is 68 ships less than the entire U.S.
Navy, and they have more ships in their Coast Guard than Japan,
Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore have combined.
We don't always rate those as naval ships, but you have
seen this picture, I am sure. This picture is of a Chinese
Coast Guard vessel. They have labeled on here Tugboat number
25. It is painted white. This is one of their amphibious naval
ships. It is number 908. It is painted gray. Other than being
painted gray and the number on there, there is virtually no
difference, I don't think, between these two ships. And that is
something that is really concerning me, because we don't always
measure those.
[The pictures referred to were not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Forbes. So my question for you today is not the high-
end technological superiority, but when we are seeing Iranians
in Yemen, we are seeing Russians in the Ukraine, we are seeing
Chinese on the Senkakus and the artificial islands they are
building up, what strategies, concepts, forces, and
capabilities do you think we need to counter this kind of gray-
zone aggression we are seeing in Asia?
Admiral Locklear. Well, thank you, sir. Your--the two
pictures you showed I think were accurate, the way I understand
it. The Chinese are engaging in a comprehensive military
modernization program that wants to transform not only the PLA
into a high-end kind of network-centric military capable of
large-scale operations--we have talked about that--but they are
also working on the lower end to ensure that they have a
maritime security force, which we would equate to a Coast Guard
or a fisheries patrol, that by numbers, you add up all their
numbers and everybody else's in Asia, in that category they
exceed everybody else's put together.
And I think that they went down that path after they saw
what was happening in the Senkakus. They took some of the gray
hulls, and we observed them, shipped those over to be what they
would call noncombatants or maritime patrol ships by maybe just
changing the color of them.
They show no slowdown in the pace of their military
modernization, particularly in their Navy, even though their
economy has dropped a little bit. They are still on about a 10
percent increase in 2014; 2015, it will be a little bit more.
That is the fifth straight year we have seen them do double-
digit increases.
Of course, their military is, on the high end prepares for
issues around Taiwan and what they would call their near seas.
Their maritime security are put in a position to be able to
gain influence, particularly in the South China Sea and in the
East China Sea, to further their, what they consider their
national interests there.
Now, they are doing this in combination with what we have
seen to be a fairly massive land reclamation in the Spratly
Islands and upgrades to facilities in the Paracel Islands,
which are the two regions in the South China Sea.
Now, the implications of that for us are that it provides
an ability for them to deploy more of these lower-end ships
down there, provides ability to base them down there, to
resupply them. It allows them to exert basically greater
influence over what is now a contested area. Its expanded land
features down there also could eventually lead to the
deployment of things such as long-range radars, military and
advanced missile systems, and it might be a platform for them
if they ever wanted to establish an air defense, an ADIZ [Air
Defense Identification Zone], an air defense zone down there
for them to be able to enforce that from.
Up to this point in time, the nations around them, the
Southeast Asian claimants have really had little success in
formulating an effective response to the PRC actions down
there. None of their efforts have slowed the PRC in the South
China Sea. And they recognize that stopping the PRC would
require a change in the strategic environment down there.
So what are the types of things that we need to do down
there? First, the forces we need to stay forward. We need to
have the types of intelligence and search, ISR assets that
allow us to maintain our knowledge of what is going on. These
are globally stressed because of the things that we are doing
in Afghanistan and in Iraq and in Yemen, and those--many of
those assets are similar in type to ones we would use in that
arena. So we need to ensure that we can sense and see what is
going on because it allows me to optimally use the forces that
we have.
Mr. Forbes. Admiral, my time has expired, but would you
mind submitting that to us for the record? It is important that
we have it as a committee.
Admiral Locklear. Absolutely, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 103.]
Mr. Forbes. And I am sorry, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Wormuth and Admiral Locklear and General
Scaparrotti, I want to thank you for coming today.
And as the representative from Guam, I appreciate, Mr.
Chairman, your calling the committee together, for taking time
to further examine our posture in the Asia-Pacific region.
Admiral Locklear, I have a question for you. As the ranking
member of the Readiness Subcommittee, I would like to focus on
training capabilities in the Asia-Pacific region. Our Marines
in Okinawa have degraded training capabilities, and the Army
and the Air Force have significant degradation of training
capabilities elsewhere in the region.
Can you comment on how the Department is looking at
improving these capabilities? We are moving forward with a
live-fire training range on Guam, but what about larger
training exercises and the need for improving training
capabilities in the Northern Marianas Islands? I think that the
committee has questions about the cost, and I understand PACOM
has a handle on many of these matters. So could you answer that
for me?
Admiral Locklear. Well, thanks for the question.
It is clear that for us to be as far forward as we are,
that we need to have adequate facilities to be able to train
and keep our forces ready at the high end. So it requires, I
think, a multipronged strategy. One is, you mentioned first, is
your home, is in Guam, is ensuring that the Guam plan that we
have for the relocation of the Marines there stays on track,
and we really appreciate the support of this committee in doing
that as we go forward. And it is on track.
As we look at the entire Guam complex and bringing those
Marines there, we envision, with the support of the Marianas
Islands, the Northern Marianas Islands' governments up there to
be able to put in place a range up there that allows not only
us to keep our marines that are there ready, but also could
bring other nations into play in that strategic part of the
world for us to be able to learn together and train together
and maximize the opportunity for interoperability between our
militaries.
It is also very important that in Alaska, that we get the
range systems in Alaska correct and we maintain those, because
that is where we get much of our high-end training, in those
ranges in Alaska.
As you know, we are also working very closely with our
allies in Australia, and in Northern Australia for having
access to those really magnificent, broad ranges that are there
so that we can work together with them.
So I think that we have a good plan if we can bring it all
together.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Admiral, I have another question for you. Can you comment
on the progress of the U.S.-Japan defense guidelines, and what
do you envision occurring to implement these guidelines in the
near term?
Admiral Locklear. Well, the guidelines process is ongoing,
and we anticipate that later this year that the guidelines will
be completed and signed.
Ms. Bordallo. I was going to ask, yes, the Secretary as
well.
Admiral Locklear. And what we--the real key to the
guidelines is making sure that, first of all, that we
militarily, both countries recognize the importance the
alliance. This is one of the most important alliances in the
world, for not only Japan, but for the United States, but also
for the region, and ensuring that we get this right and that we
are able to go forward in a military way that provides the
peace and security and prosperity for the region for both
countries is important. And it starts to get at more specifics
of how we are going to do that. And it also forces, I think in
this case, or encourages the Japanese to kind of look at how
they view the alliance and how they are going to participate as
we go forward.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you.
Madam Secretary.
Secretary Wormuth. Just to add on that, I think we
anticipate finishing up the defense guidelines right around the
time that Prime Minister Abe comes to Washington later this
month.
Ms. Bordallo. Very good.
Secretary Wormuth. And a couple of things I think that are
really notable and important about the defense guidelines are,
first of all, that there will be a whole section that really
speaks to the collective self-defense vision that Japan has for
the role of its Self-Defense Forces. But it also will have a
new alliance coordination mechanism which will again further
our ability to work with Japan, to help Japan with its security
needs, but also to look at our security needs.
There will be a section on peacetime cooperation in the
areas of ISR, maritime domain awareness, missile defense. We
will also have a whole section that looks at international
activities, as well as additional cooperation in space and
cyber.
So I think it will be, you know, a really important
document to bring the alliance to the next level.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I have just one quick question.
Admiral Locklear, what will be the impact of our rebalance
strategy if sequestration remains in place?
Admiral Locklear. If it remains in place, in general, in
short, you will have less force, that are less ready, that are
less technologically capable in an increasingly technological
environment.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes [presiding]. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair recognizes the distinguished gentleman from South
Carolina, Mr. Wilson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank each of you for being here today.
I just really have been impressed, Ms. Wormuth, your
comments.
And, Admiral, I am just grateful that I have a son who is
currently serving in the Navy, and I have got three in the
Army.
And my visits, General, to the DMZ [demilitarized zone],
again, such extraordinary people that you serve with, and
making such a difference, indeed, for the Republic of Korea and
their protection. And that is why, as I am thinking about the
cyber offensive of North Korea, General, how is that being
countered, and, with the efforts that they have made to disrupt
the banks of South Korea and other activities? How is this
being addressed?
General Scaparrotti. Well, sir, I think, first of all, we
are working very closely with our allies as a multinational
community in this regard. And we have a very good cyber
capability in the United States that is growing as well. This
is a domain that we don't necessarily have superiority in. I
think there is a lot--there is a lot of simultaneity out there
in this domain.
So we are working very hard. I think we stayed ahead of it
well, but it will take that kind of effort and resourcing in
order to continue to develop our capability. That is about what
I would say here. It is difficult to get into that much
without, you know, in an open hearing.
Mr. Wilson. Well, again, we just appreciate your efforts so
much.
Additionally, Ms. Wormuth, I am really grateful to be the
chairman of the Emerging Threats and Capabilities Subcommittee.
The unconventional warfare tactics are a great concern to the
entire committee and to myself.
Could you please characterize your assessment of the
unconventional strategy and tactics being used by China and the
challenge these pose to the DOD's ability to counter them?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
I think, as Congressman Forbes talked about in terms of the
Coast Guard capabilities, for example, or the maritime law
enforcement capabilities that China has, China has been--China
uses those assets to assert, to try to assert additional
control over what it sees as its territorial claims. And I
think that is a way where they are sort of using assets in an
unconventional way.
We are really focused, I think, on the building partner
capacity side in trying to help partners in the region. Some of
the smaller countries in Southeast Asia, for example, work on
their own maritime security capabilities to try to counter that
kind of unconventional use of assets.
We also, though, are looking at, on the more technology
side, we are looking at certainly our intelligence capabilities
and are trying to strengthen our information operation
capabilities, for example. And those capabilities are relevant,
obviously, not just in the Asia-Pacific theater, but in many
theaters around the world. I think, you know, we have seen a
considerable use of unconventional techniques in Europe
recently, given Russia's activities in Ukraine, for example.
Mr. Wilson. And certainly that is to me such a tragedy, the
invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation. I know that I
had just so hoped for a modern European-inclined Russian
Federation and that doesn't seem to be developing.
Additionally, I am very concerned about North Korea's
nuclear weapons policy. And, Ms. Wormuth, what does North
Korea, the regime, what is their, what do you see as their
capability of enhancing nuclear weapons delivery capabilities?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, Congressman, we are certainly
concerned, obviously, about North Korea's weapons of mass
destruction capability, and its nuclear program in particular.
You know, we--North Korea has not tested some of its
capabilities, and we don't yet fully know what they are able to
do in terms of their ability to miniaturize, for example, a
nuclear weapon. But it is our assessment that it is prudent to
plan for the worst-case scenario, which is why we are so
focused on our national missile defense program, for example,
and why we have made the investments to expand the number of
Ground-Based Interceptors from 30 to 44, to try to make sure
that we are keeping track with that, with that threat.
I think fundamentally the North Korean regime believes that
having a nuclear capability under--basically guarantees their
regime survival, which is why they see it as so important. I
would ask, I think, General Scaparrotti to elaborate.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman's time has expired, so would ask
the General if he could do that for the record.
[The information referred to is classified and retained in
the committee files.]
Mr. Forbes. And the chair recognizes Ms. Gabbard from
Hawaii for 5 minutes.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I will continue along the same topic here, and I think it
is important for us to recognize that North Korea remains the
most immediate military threat, not to only our interests
within the region, but really to the U.S. directly, and
important for us to focus on this immediate threat, especially
within the context of the greater conversation that is taking
place now and seeing how we can prevent Iran from getting to
the point of having this nuclear capability.
General Scaparrotti, I am wondering if you can speak to Mr.
Wilson's question, but also specifically to the status of
ballistic missile defense policy within the region and the
level of cooperation that you are getting from our partners
there, within the Republic of Korea and Japan specifically.
General Scaparrotti. Well, thank you.
First of all, to the North Korean nuclear capability, I
would state it this way, that they claim to have a capability
to deliver a nuclear-tipped ballistic missile. They have
paraded it, they have shown it to us. But they haven't tested
it, as the Under Secretary mentioned, and that is very
important in something that is as complex as this. But as a
commander, I have to be prudent and assume that they can
deliver one and act on that basis.
Secondly, in terms of ballistic missile defense, we bring
our best systems to the peninsula. We work very closely with
the Republic of Korea. This year, just this funding year, they
committed in the last couple of months to upgrade their PAC-2
systems to PAC-3, and they will be doing that over the next
couple of years, And we are working closely with them over the
next year or so to increase our interoperability and the
ability to have a common operating picture.
So I think we are moving in the right direction, given the
threat. We have to keep pace with that, we have to continue to
keep our focus on that.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Admiral Locklear, in your written statement you stated that
currently there are roughly 1,300 ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria] foreign fighters who are coming from the Indo-Asia-
Pacific region. Can you speak to specifically which countries
predominantly they are coming from? What is drawing them to
ISIS specifically? And how do you characterize the threat of
these foreign fighters coming back and returning to their home
countries in the region and continuing these activities there?
Admiral Locklear. Well, thank you, Congresswoman.
We are working closely with our fellow COCOM [combatant
command] in CENTCOM [U.S. Central Command] to actually have a,
try to get a better sense of this phenomenon of foreign
fighters that would be moving out of predominantly Asia,
Southeast Asia.
They come from a broad range of countries. It wouldn't--you
know if you took a look at the list, it would surprise you, it
wouldn't be what you thought. They come from a number of
different places. We are not sure how many of them are
dedicated fighters that go forward or are they just kind of
wannabes that kind of trundle over there and decide they want
to sign up for a new cause.
And the numbers that are coming back, we don't have good
fidelity on that at this point in time. But what it has done,
it has opened up our information-sharing with all the countries
in the region that are concerned about this problem, which all
of them are. And this isn't just a mil to mil [military to
military], this is a whole of government, agency, FBI [Federal
Bureau of Investigation], those types of agencies are working
hard on the problem.
So the implications for Asia, in this, is if you just kind
of just add up the number of Islam that is in Asia, it greatly
overwhelms the number that are in the Middle East. So there is
probably 400 million-plus, I would just say, just kind of
making an estimate off it.
Now, the difference is that they are generally moderate and
they are less, I think, susceptible to violent extremism. And
they have good governments, most of them do. They have better
security environments that can monitor what is going on in the
countries. So I think these are advantages that the Asia-
Pacific has that might not be available in all countries in the
Middle East.
So what we have is an opportunity here. We have an
opportunity to assist them, to assist each other, to improve
our information-sharing networks to see where this type is
going, and then to be more predictable rather than reactive
should it occur in the theater, and we are making good inroads
in that.
Ms. Gabbard. Do the governments of some of these countries
recognize this threat? And are they reaching out to work with
us in partnership to make sure that it doesn't grow?
Mr. Forbes. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Mr. Forbes. So, Admiral, if you could answer that for the
record, we would appreciate it.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 103.]
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Rogers, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Scaparrotti, I know that we are in discussions with
South Korea's government about the deployment of a THAAD
[Terminal High Altitude Area Defense] battery on the peninsula.
Can you tell us why that would be important for the protection
of our deployed forces in South Korea to have put on that
peninsula?
General Scaparrotti. Well, the employment of a THAAD would
give us a high-tier defense. And so, therefore rather--we would
have a layered defense and those systems would enhance the
capability of our present Patriot systems that are on the
peninsula today.
Mr. Rogers. Okay.
Admiral, how many Chinese land-based cruise and ballistic
missiles are located in your area of responsibility? And can
you give me an estimate in the dozens or hundreds to keep it
unclassified? And how many of these are between 500 and 5,500
kilometers in range?
Admiral Locklear. If you let me take that for the record, I
would, and I will provide you a complete answer.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 103.]
Mr. Rogers. Okay.
Ms. Wormuth, when will the administration make a decision
on INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty] violation
responses? And has the Principals Committee even met on this
issue?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we are again, I think, at
this point in time of the view that it would be beneficial to
remain in the INF Treaty if possible if Russia comes back into
compliance, and we continue to have conversations with Russia
about that.
There will come a point in time where, if Russia continues
to be noncompliant, I think we will have to take action to deal
with the military capabilities that they are potentially
putting in place that are not compliant with the treaty. This
is something that is discussed at very senior levels. You know,
there are any number of Principals Committee meetings where
this type of conversation may come up.
Mr. Rogers. They have been noncompliant for years. How much
longer is this going to go on?
Secretary Wormuth. I think, Congressman, again, this is
something that we are looking at very carefully. I think, you
know, our view is it would be beneficial to keep them in the
treaty if possible. So we have not yet made that decision, but
we recognize that we cannot let the current situation go on for
an indeterminate period.
Mr. Rogers. Yeah, in order to keep them into compliance, we
have to get them in compliance, and they haven't been for years
and they are not going to be. I hope that you all will start
talking more seriously about some consequences.
Admiral, with China increasing its capability in nuclear
attack submarines, ballistic missile submarines, and even
aircraft carriers, how do those developments and deployments
affect U.S. force structure and planning?
Admiral Locklear. Well, certainly any increase of military
forces by the PRC require us to think through: Are the forces
we have adequate to be able to understand what is going on day
to day?
In the case of their SSBN [ballistic missile nuclear
submarine] forces, it becomes a homeland security, homeland
defense issue, that will require resources for us to try to
understand it and try to ensure that our country remains safe
under all scenarios.
In the case of aircraft carriers, I believe primarily they
will use aircraft carriers for--just like we do, to project
power. That is one of the deficiencies I think they are trying
to overcome now, is the projection of power, and that may have,
down the road could have global implications, and it will just
put further stress on the ISR assets we have and it will change
the calculus on how we might deal with any contingencies down
the road.
Mr. Rogers. Do you believe that the U.S. Government should
be making it a priority to ensure that China is not able to
obtain U.S. technology in our defense capabilities?
Admiral Locklear. I do.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
That is all I have got, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Hawaii, Mr. Takai, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Takai. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you also for
focusing today's hearing on the Asia-Pacific as you know, that
is very important for people from Hawaii.
I wanted to welcome our witnesses. Under Secretary,
Admiral, and General, thank you very much for coming.
Admiral Locklear, it is my understanding that the Pacific
Fleet and the Atlantic Fleet are funded through separate budget
offices. Can you speak to what advantages that has and how it
supports the geographical combatant commander?
Admiral Locklear. Well, I would refer specific questions of
that back to the Navy, because it is their internal workings.
But my observation, it is of a historical nature. It was put
that way because of the way that our fleets are laid down
globally, and the significant influence that the Pacific Fleet
has in the power projection of U.S. interest into what is over
half the world. And I believe that there have been historic
benefits to having that divide be there.
Mr. Takai. Great. I appreciate that answer.
And then are there any efforts underway to expand the use
of training areas in the Pacific to support engagements of our
regional partners and allies and more broadly connect ranges
throughout the AOR [area of responsibility]? And can you speak
specifically to the Pohakuloa Training Area on the Big Island
and the Pacific Missile Range on Kauai, some of the
infrastructure needs there, and more importantly, how resources
are being allocated to support upgrades at training ranges in
the PACOM AOR?
Admiral Locklear. Thank you.
As I previously laid out, you know we have a series of
ranges that we need to support our forward forces. During that
dialogue I did not mention Hawaii and I should have because
that is where I live and where I breathe and where we have
tremendous requirements.
So in the case of the ranges on the Big Island, I am a
supporter of moving forward with those ranges. We are in need
of those if we intend to maintain a forward footprint of
Marines and Army personnel in Hawaii, which I very fully
support a robust presence there.
The PMRF [Pacific Missile Range Facility] missile facility
or missile range out there is a premier facility in the world
as far as I am concerned, and that the investments will need to
be made to keep it such. It has access to open space and open
airways and open sea space that allow us to do, from Missile
Defense Agency to all the other services, to be able do the
right testing and evaluation of those systems that allow us to
be relevant in the 21st century.
Mr. Takai. Thank you.
And, you know, this last question is something very
important for people, especially on Oahu, and it is in regards
to our groundwater supply.
So it is my understanding that recently meetings were
conducted between PACOM and the DLA [Defense Logistics Agency]
Energy regarding the Red Hill underground fuel facility. And
though we know that fuel storage is necessary and important to
support strategy and posture of your AOR, what is the plan to
upgrade the aging infrastructure to ensure that communities
that surround Red Hill, in addition the Halawa Aquifer that
supplies about half the island with their water, are safe from
contamination of, are safe regarding the water supply?
Admiral Locklear. Yes, sir. This is a high priority for me
because we very much respect the opportunity to be in Hawaii
and to have these facilities there.
The need for fuel--I mean, the PACOM commander and the
forces that are under me, I think, are the largest user of
petroleum products probably in the world on any given day, and
they have to be distributed throughout a vast area on only a
very small number of nodes to be able to get at it.
And, historically, the Red Hill facility has provided a
huge strategic reserve in case something happens out here. And
I anticipate we are going to need that strategic reserve for a
number of decades. I can't put an end state on it, but it will
be a number of decades before we have visibility on how we
might address that with different types of fuels or different
types of forces.
So what we have done is, once we discovered that there was
a potential leak in a couple of the tanks, we took immediate
action to ensure there wasn't any damage to the water systems,
and we have a comprehensive plan that both DLA and my staff
have brought back to the legislature in Hawaii. I am happy to
have somebody come brief you on that if you desire.
But I think at this point in time we are in general
agreement on the way forward that it is a good sound plan and
it does what you indicated, it protects the environment of such
a beautiful State.
Mr. Takai. Thank you.
And, thank you Mr. Speaker. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman yields back the balance of his
time.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Wormuth, my question is for the admiral and general,
but I would like to say I am interested in any language
suggestions that would cut this ridiculous appeals process that
I think is one of the problems with us fielding the equipment.
And some of these games that get played, if you will, from the
people who are purchasing the equipment from--that slow down
our ability to field the equipment I think is one of the
reasons that the other countries are able to catch us, if you
will. They don't have to deal with that bureaucratic process.
And that is a pretty simple thing I think we could put an end
to that would help national security.
Gentlemen, I represent Robins Air Force Base and the airmen
and the women that fly and operate the JSTARS [Joint
Surveillance Target Attack Radar System] aircraft. Last year we
had worked with the Air Force, there was a proposal to retire
six of the E-8, since you know they are old aircraft, with old
technology, and to begin the recapitalization of a new plane
with a more modern radar that would give you more information.
There was a proposal for a business class jet. I understand
there has been a new analysis, a demand from the combat
commanders, a decision is made to keep the entire fleet
operational at this point. I would like for you to speak to the
value of the JSTARS, how it benefits each of your missions.
And then the Air Force's analysis of the alternatives for
the JSTARS and the recapitalization concluded that a manned
aircraft was necessary and absolutely essential. And the Korea
Command and Pacific Command both have benefitted from this
manned platform and the on-board battle management provided by
the JSTARS. And can you discuss the extent to which your
command's ISRs or requirements are being met?
General Scaparrotti. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question.
My top priority in terms of my requirements and requests
through Department of Defense has been ISR. And specifically
that aircraft, the JSTARS, is one that I need greater
capability in terms of JSTARS, primarily because it provides us
the MTI, Movement Target Indicator, and it allows us to queue,
my other assets. So it doesn't work alone, it works in tandem
with the other assets that are airborne. And I could use more
than I have today.
I appreciate the fact that the Air Force, because of the
budgeting, needs to get a newer aircraft, but I appreciate the
fact that they are retaining what we have, because even the
loss of hours of the one that I have today would make a
difference in my indicators and warnings on the peninsula.
Admiral Locklear. It is a critically important capability
in the ISR world, also in the battle management world,
particularly when you operate in potentially contested
environments, where other parts of your command and control may
be under cyber attack or space attack. Having an aircraft that
is manned that has that ability to have that functionality and
thinking work is good.
I understand the Air Force's need to recap [recapitalize],
and so we have to manage the risk on how they bring the new
systems forward. Manned versus unmanned. I think there--my
concern right now is that we don't have the technology able to
put everything we need to in an unmanned system. I think that
is what the Air Force is probably grappling with. So what would
not be beneficial to me or to General Scaparrotti would be a
replacement system that didn't replace it.
Mr. Scott. One of my concerns is, as you are forced to
make, through all of the DOD and the agencies, as you are
forced to make decisions based on the sequester instead of
based on what the national security needs are, is that we end
up with Army standing up for Army, and Navy standing up for
Navy, and Air Force for Air Force. And we just need to make
sure that those platforms, those ISR platforms that we use that
operate across those what should be imaginary lines, if you
will, don't get sacrificed.
And, I just, I appreciate all of you and what you do for
our country and look forward to continuing to work with you to
provide those JSTARS and that ISR platform.
And, ma'am, if you have suggestions on language that will
stop that bureaucratic problem, we would happy to work with you
in the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] to put it in
there.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you. I will take that back and we
will get back to you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 103.]
Mr. Scott. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman yields back the balance of time.
Mr. Ashford, you are recognized for 5 minutes. No
questions.
Mr. Nugent from Florida is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
our panel for being here today.
And, General, having been to South Korea, I think I was
there in 2005 or 2006, not--I was not in this job, but I
visiting my son who was stationed there, that is a special
area. And you certainly are at great risk there, all of our
service men and women and civilians that are there are
certainly at great risk, particularly close in Seoul and on up.
So I certainly do appreciate that.
I had the opportunity here just recently to go out. I did
not get back out that far, nor did I get to Guam, but I got out
to Hawaii and San Diego in regards to visiting our naval forces
and some of our Marines that are stationed out there. And I was
impressed with, I guess, the leadership.
And, Admiral, I met with you in Hawaii. I was impressed,
though, not only with your leadership, but the leadership of
those that are in your command, from a destroyer skipper, to an
LCS-4 skipper, and others, in regards to how they take their
mission and how they accomplish it, and also at the BUD/S
[Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL] training facility in
Coronado with our SEALs [Sea, Air, Land]. We have, and we talk
about this all the time about equipment, but it is the
personnel that man that equipment that makes the difference, I
think.
But what I am concerned about as we move forward, and you
have talked about it, that we have had to accept more risks and
we are concerned about having adequate resources. Could you
explain to us, and maybe we can do a better job of explaining
this to the American people, first of all, why is the Asia-
Pacific area so important to us? And (b), what are the
additional risks that we are accepting because of the lack of
providing the proper resources?
Admiral Locklear. Well, thank you, sir, and thanks for your
visit to PACOM. It was good for us.
If you take a look at the Asia-Pacific today, my AOR is
about 52 percent of the world, 36 nations. Of those nations,
there's--seven of them are key allies. I mean five of them are
key allies. We only have seven defense treaties and five of
them are there, and they--we believe that they are historic and
they will go forward and be important for the future.
Today, about 6 out of 10 people alive live in the Asia-
Pacific. My AOR, if you just characterize it as 83 percent
water, 17 percent land, and on that 17 percent of the land, 6
out of every 10 people alive live there. Eventually, if the
population goes to 10 billion like we expect it to, roughly,
before it caps out, it will go to about 7 out of every 10
people. That is going to be the economic engine of the world. I
think Secretary Carter in his speech to, the other day in
Arizona pointed out, I think there is about half a billion
middle-class consumers in the Asia-Pacific. And by 2030, he
predicted in his speech, it would go to 3 billion.
So this is where the people who are going to have money are
going to be spending it in a global economy, and that global
economy is where I want my four grandsons to be able to compete
in. And I want American systems over there, systems that are
similar to the value systems we have, systems of law and order,
systems of economic, economic systems that they understand and
then they can compete in.
So what we have to do I think is to ensure that, number
one, that we, to the degree we can, that we maintain a security
environment that is similar to what we have enjoyed for the
last 70 years, one that reflects the security of this country
and the values of this country.
To do that, you have to be there. You have to be there in
many ways. It is not just about the military, but the military
is a big component of it. Military forces have to be there,
they have to be part of those nations there, they have to be in
there working with them. They have to be shaping the day-to-day
environment and the landscape.
And so as the world changes, and as the military
capabilities in this AOR over the countries change, we have to
ensure that we have the right relevance there to ensure that we
can compete in the Asia-Pacific for the next century.
Mr. Nugent. One of the things that we really haven't
touched on is Russia is playing in that area also. And I know
we have talked about China and we talk about all those things.
But is Russia not playing in that area or starting to exert
more?
Admiral Locklear. Well, Russia in the last few months has
returned to, I would say, nearly a Cold War level of activity
that goes towards our homeland, with long-range attacks, you
know, exercises, and those types of things. We also know that
Russia will improve their strategic nuclear deterrent on what
is their East Coast, which is in the Northern Pacific.
They also are improving their submarine force that operates
in that area and are exerting increased influence not only in
the Arctic, which they will tend in that direction from my AOR
in, but also in Northeast Asia. And we see a greater presence
of them in, just this year in Southeast Asia as well.
So it just adds to the amount of interesting things that a
PACOM commander has to think about every day, and the amount of
ISR that I need to track them, the sophistication of the
systems I have to be able to deal with them. I mean, the key is
for us to manage the security environment on our terms, not
have to respond to someone else's.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nugent. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the indulgence, but,
and the Chairman mentioned this about the INF Treaty. I think
that is an important issue for us as we move forward,
particularly as it results to Russia now playing again in a
Cold War atmosphere in the Pacific.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you.
And the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Bridenstine, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question for Admiral Locklear and General
Scaparrotti. When you think about the assessment of the
technological imbalance between specifically us and China, and
us and North Korea, can you share what your assessment is right
now as it concerns cyber and space, those two elements, for
each one of you as it relates to China and North Korea?
Admiral Locklear.
Admiral Locklear. Well, my observation is I am a firm
believer that anything we choose to be dominant in we can be.
So we just have to make that decision.
Mr. Bridenstine. Are we currently dominant?
Admiral Locklear. Yes. That is my assessment.
Mr. Bridenstine. Is the trajectory going to sustain that
dominance, the trajectory that is going on right now?
Admiral Locklear. No.
Mr. Bridenstine. Okay.
Admiral Locklear. Now, in the case of cyber, clearly PRC is
a big actor, Russia is a big actor. I would say they are
probably at the top tier. You drop down it would probably be
North Korea and Iran. And then certainly we are in the top tier
of cyber capabilities and probably lead the way in cyber
defense capabilities, cyber understanding. But it is, as
General Scaparrotti pointed out earlier, it is an interesting
environment, it is an interesting domain that is changing
rapidly.
In the case of space, I think what we have seen with the
PRC that concerns us the most is their willingness to do
offensive things in space, counter-space activity with the ASAT
[anti-satellite] missile they fired a while back and some of
the other programs I think they are developing that to, that
would limit our ability to use those space assets in our favor,
which we do need to stay forward globally.
Mr. Bridenstine. General Scaparrotti, will you address
cyber as it relates to North Korea?
General Scaparrotti. Yes. In terms of cyber, as I said, I
agree with Admiral Locklear, I think they are probably the B
team right now. But they, since 2009, have said they are going
to develop that capability, and we have seen even in the past
year that capability improve.
So as I said, it is a dynamic domain. We are building
teams. We are using our intelligence to develop our skills, the
types of skills we need every day, and we are going to have to
stay on that. And that has to be resourced. As you know, in DOD
we are resourcing CYBERCOM [Cyber Command]. They train those
teams that come out and help in PACOM's headquarters and mine.
And that would be difficult to do under sequestration, I think.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you for that.
One of my concerns is that, and I have heard General Hyten
talk about this, that, you know, satellites and networks, they
don't have mothers. And so when we think about defending our
forces, those satellites and those networks directly affect the
people, those of us who serve in our country's uniform. We do
have mothers. And so from my perspective, we need to maybe
think about space a little differently.
Ms. Wormuth, would you like to address this?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, if I may. I think, a, you
are absolutely right, and both the admiral and general are
right, that China in particular I think has identified space as
a potential vulnerability area. They see that--they see being
able to hit us in space as an important way to try to come
after us if that were ever to come to pass.
Given the importance of space to all of our joint force,
that is one of the areas in the PB16 budget [President's budget
for fiscal year 2016] where we made some very specific and
significant targeted investments to try to make sure that we
stay ahead of that curve. And I think it was very much coming
from the place of recognizing that that is an important
capability that sort of underpins all of our ability to be
effective.
Mr. Bridenstine. So as a Navy pilot we have rules of
engagement and we have hostile intent and then hostile act. And
depending on where you are in the world and what is happening
you can respond different ways.
When it comes to our space communication architecture, when
it comes to our GPS [Global Positioning System] architecture,
when these come under attack, whether it is jamming or kinetic,
this directly impacts those of us who fight war. And to the
extent that we are not fighting a war, it directly impacts the
safety of those of us who happen to be on the other side of the
world where there are hostile countries.
From a policy perspective, can you share with us, what is
the position of the administration on how we treat, say,
dazzling of an intelligence satellite or potentially, what is
our, can we do kinetic affects if they jam GPS or if they jam
our communication architecture in space? Can you share with us
kind of the policy on that?
Secretary Wormuth. I think, Congressman, what I would say
here is that, again, we very much recognize that one of the key
advantages we have is the networked space-enabled force that
our military has. And we want to make sure that we protect that
capability and that we continue to have the ability to keep our
forces able to operate in that networked environment, and we
know that there are potential adversaries that are trying to
break that capability.
If it is all right with you, I would be happy to have a
team come up and brief you about our space policy in a
classified setting. I think that would be able to address your
concerns.
Mr. Bridenstine. Absolutely.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair recognizes the other gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Russell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Russell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, Admiral, General.
Part of the concerns that I hear, Madam Secretary, about a
policy push on the trade Pacific authority, the trade
partnership authority and the move to the Pacific is that if
you look at history, when Commodore Perry went in and said we
are going to open up Tokyo, and did, they immediately adopted
our ways. We saw within two generations incredible industrial
capability, military doctrine, to the point where they even
defeated a world power.
John Hay at the turn of the century then developed an open-
door policy with China as a hedge on Japan, almost using the
same terms, hegemony. And now we see this push into the
Pacific, and while we have had briefings here in the last
couple of years with the same talks of how we are going to
expand or change our posture or do different things, now it
does not seem that the diplomatic or military advances are
keeping pace with the trade advances.
Unfortunately, in 15 years we went from ally, making ships,
signing naval treaties, to having to melt Japanese out of
pillboxes and drop atomic bombs on their cities. I would hope
that as we make an advance and a pivot into the Pacific, that
we would not make those same policy errors.
My question would really be to the admiral or to the
general. Missile defense seems to be the greatest short-term
threat that we could possibly face. You have limited AN/TPY-2
[Army Navy/Transportable Radar Surveillance] radars. The
funding for those and the building of those does not seem to be
a priority, and yet they may be the very things that stand
between us and this incredible threat. How is that being
addressed?
Admiral Locklear. Well, Congressman, I would refer the
specific timelines to the Missile Defense Agency and the
services who buy them. But let me just talk about missile
defense in general.
I am faced with two problems, and General Scaparrotti is
part of the second one. One is I have a homeland defense
support requirement where not only do I have to defend Guam and
Hawaii from potential missile attacks, but also have to support
NORTHCOM [Northern Command] as NORTHCOM were to transition to
where we would have to defend the homeland from maybe a rogue
attack from North Korea. And so we moved rapidly to put things
in position in the last decade that I think give us a relative
assurance on our homeland defense.
We have guided missile destroyers that operate in the
north. We put a--the THAAD radar, we put that in there in about
less than a month into Guam when we knew that there was a
potential for a launch from North Korea, which was really
fabulous that the Army could move that fast and make it happen.
We fast-tracked the TPY-2 radar that was put in Shariki in
Japan, so now we have two of those going, and we are having
dialogues about where a third THAAD may go.
The second part of our problem is defending forces in the
theater and defending forces in an ever-increasing environment
of ballistic missiles. And these can be short range, they can
be directed at aircraft carriers, directed at ships, they can
be directed at land bases. And you can't defend against all of
them. There are just too many of them. You can't buy enough
interceptors. So what you do do is you buy enough to give you
confidence that you can deter and that when conflict were to
start, to give you enough time to be able to get the rest of
your war plan going.
Mr. Russell. And I appreciate that, Admiral, and thank you.
I--In fact, it brings up the larger concerns of power
projection and even long logistical lines for reinforcement
even if we can project power. This month in history over
100,000 Americans had to surrender at Bataan, not for a lack of
fight, not for lack of leadership, but for lack of capacity to
get to them. And with a lot of these things, I realize the
constraints that each of you live under. And the policy has
shifted, but we don't necessarily see the resources coming your
way.
How would you--what counsel or what advice would you give
to Members of the Congress of how we correct that as we look at
a complete pivot in changing the economies globally and the
friction points that that will create, and yet not have a
Bataan-like future or an inability to project power and to also
sustain it? Either one.
General Scaparrotti. Yes, sir, thank you.
I think, in terms of the projection of power, I am probably
the best example of that requirement. I have 28,500 service
members on the peninsula, sufficient for today, but certainly
if we begin to escalate, specifically to BMD [ballistic missile
defense], I will ask for additional ballistic missile defense
assets very quickly in order to safeguard not only our military
installations, but the American civilians we have there and
along with our ROK [Republic of Korea] allies.
So when we look at resourcing, the impact of sequestration
in 2013, et cetera, it reduces the readiness of the force. And
what I will need on the peninsula are forces that arrive ready
to fight in a high-intensity conflict. And then also the impact
of sequestration or reduction of resources, as you mentioned, I
will need them on a pretty specific timeline, because I have a
large adversary in close proximity to the capital of South
Korea.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. McSally is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for your time and your testimony.
General Scaparrotti, I want to talk about the potential
impact of divesting in the A-10 and the impact that that is
going to have on our capabilities with your mission. And then
also, Admiral Locklear, in general in the theater.
The depleted uranium on the 30 millimeter, specifically the
antitank capabilities, I know you have shared in your testimony
about how North Korea is going more towards asymmetric
capabilities, but there is still a very real conventional
threat, as you know. And should we have to deal with that,
having been a part of units that were supposed to be heading
your way to be reinforcements to those that are stationed right
there, it is a pretty tight timeline to be able to react in a
very short geographic area, as you know.
So gaining and maintaining air superiority and then making
sure that we have the anti-armor capability against North
Korean capabilities is really important.
So if the President's budget were to be fulfilled and the
A-10 would be divested in, you would lose the capability of the
depleted uranium, and the A-10 squadron is right there at Osan.
What capability gap does that provide for you and what are the
plans to fill that gap in order to address this particular
threat?
General Scaparrotti. I thank you. As you said, the A-10 was
designed for a specific capability and it is very good at that.
Being an infantryman, I have high regard for its ability to
support ground troops. And in the region that I am in,
particularly in mountainous region, it also can get low and it
can turn in tight spots.
Having said that, I recognize too the Air Force's
difficulty in terms of the funding and the need with an aging
aircraft, with reduced funds, to perhaps move away from that
and go to a multirole ship. And I have been assured that if the
A-10 were to come out there would be a multirole aircraft that
would replace that squadron on the peninsula. And I would need
that. I would need additional air.
Ms. McSally. Okay. But the F-16 doesn't have the depleted
uranium or the antitank. I want to focus specifically on
antitank. We are often talking about close air support in Iraq
and Afghanistan and other areas where the A-10 brings unique
capabilities. But if we are talking about piercing armor and
the antitank capability that the 30-millimeter with depleted
uranium brings, and the F-16s, F-15s, they don't have that
capability. So what gap does that create for you and what do
you think is going to be replacing that?
General Scaparrotti. Well, I don't know from the Air Force.
I mean, frankly, I would use air in different ways, the
multirole aircraft, and then use the systems that I have on the
ground primarily against their armor threat. And, so it would
open a gap in terms of having that aircraft for that specific
capability.
Ms. McSally. Right. And I think the last thing that we want
to be doing is be relying on having to have a tank battle,
right, in a day and age where we have the capabilities to, and
we have the plans, to be able to take out those capabilities
from the air. We certainly wouldn't want to roll back that
capability and have our guys on the ground having to fight that
when we do actually possess the capability in the air to be
doing that with the A-10.
So you agree that it would create a gap.
General Scaparrotti. It would, yes.
Ms. McSally. Okay.
And, Admiral Locklear, do you agree just in the larger
plans, we have been very much focusing on near-peer,
conventional, potential scenarios in the future. So the close
air support and the antitank capabilities that you would be
lacking without the A-10, is that something that you think is
also a gap for the greater mission that you have?
Admiral Locklear. Well, it is certainly nice to have
everything you could have when you need it. I would say that in
general in the Asia-Pacific, other than the Korean Peninsula,
that the close air support mission is of a lesser concern to me
in general. But as the Air Force moves forward with the systems
they have to move forward in the future, I think you are going
towards a close air support model with airplanes that have
improved precision-guided missile weapons that can go against
tanks and can deal with a broader array of them.
Ms. McSally. Okay. Thank you.
Again, we talked about the F-35 yesterday in a separate
hearing, but the munitions capabilities on the F-35 actually
are not an armor-penetrating capability, and survivability is
in question, especially when you do get into that close fight.
I mean, I agree, you have got a high-end challenge that you
have to deal with for sure, and we have got to be able to meet
that both with air and naval forces. But if we do have men and
women on the ground in harm's way in any potential scenario, we
do want to make sure that obviously we can protect them with
the best capability that we have.
So I appreciate your responses. Thanks for your service as
always.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. The gentlelady yields back.
And Mr. Courtney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Forbes.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
Yesterday morning Under Secretary Kendall was sort of a
featured speaker at the sea, air, and space gathering over in
Virginia, you know, packed room. Talked about a lot of the same
issues that are being discussed here, that narrowing gap that,
Admiral Locklear, you referred to earlier this morning.
But what is interesting is at the end of his remarks he
actually pretty passionately used a pretty good chunk of his
time talking about STEM [science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics] education in this country as really a critical
component of our national security long term, and particularly
with the narrowing gap that Admiral Locklear mentioned.
The STEM Education Council, which is a pretty extraordinary
coalition of Microsoft, National Association of Manufacturers,
you know, all the hard-science professional educators, American
Farm Bureau, released a report recently where they talked about
23 percent of the graduate degrees in STEM in the world today
are China and 10 percent are the U.S. And that kind of, I
think, particularly when we talk about Asia-Pacific and the
challenges, and again looking beyond just today's budget year,
that point that I think Under Secretary Kendall was making is
pretty powerful.
And we talk about sequestration and trying to balance
defense and nondefense. I mean the fact is that education is
one of those that could ``pay the price,'' quote, unquote, if
we just had a sort of lopsided approach to dealing with
sequestration. But long term, in terms of our defense, that is
just adding to that disparity that is pretty disturbing right
now.
So, Ms. Wormuth, then just wonder if you maybe wanted to
comment on that, anyone else, about what you see out there in
terms of where China's investment in education and the increase
in capabilities that we are seeing emerging domestically from
their country.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman.
I think that Under Secretary Kendall, as he often does, was
making a very good point. And we are very much looking at the
strides that countries in the Asia-Pacific region are making in
terms of science and technology and mathematics. And it is
clear that in our country we don't--have a harder time, for any
number of reasons, convincing our young people to go into those
areas, but it is critical. And making sure that we have the
educational policy and funding for those types of skills is
what we are going to need very much to be able to remain
competitive in those fields in the future.
And I think Secretary Carter has talked about this issue as
well. And not only do we need to find ways to get more folks
into those areas as they pursue their higher education, but
also we are looking at how in the Department of Defense do we
find ways to bring more people with those types of skills into
our system, because part of what we need to do to be able to
remain competitive and to be innovative and to get after some
of these technology challenges is to be able to bring in those
sort of fresh people with new, fresh ideas. And that is
something that our Department probably needs to be a little
more agile about.
Admiral Locklear. I would agree. I mean, how we recruit the
force of the future has to be part of a national dialogue. I
mean, 1 percent of the American people day to day defend it.
Some of them are the most highly technical people that this
country can produce. And if we don't have a system underpinning
it that produces enough for us to lead the world, we will not
be as successful. I know the service chiefs are all engaged on
this thought process. Where does that future force come from?
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. I mean, this is the 60th
anniversary of the launching of the Nautilus. And Admiral
Rickover in his final days actually almost stopped talking
about the nuclear Navy and was really focused on U.S. education
policy for precisely those reasons.
And, again, the threat in Asia is where I think this
imbalance is really the most acute. And, again, I think as we,
this committee should look at the big picture here in terms of
just what is national defense really, what are the building
blocks of it. And having an educational system that is prepared
to provide the workforce for both the military and obviously
the people who develop our weapon systems and weapons platforms
has really got to be part of that discussion.
So thank you for your testimony today.
I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman yields back.
And the chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio for 5
minutes.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have talked a lot about the region today, and I want to
focus a little bit on our allies in the region. And maybe touch
on a little bit, if you would, about their efforts of
increasing their capabilities, not only in traditional warfare
aspects, but, say, cyber and space and how we are coordinating
with them, if you would.
General Scaparrotti. Sir, if you would, I will go first
with the Republic of Korea. First, overall within their defense
budget over the past 4 years or so they have been averaging
about 4 to 5 percent increase in their defense budget. This
past year it was 2.5 percent of their GDP [gross domestic
product], which is very good compared to, say, our NATO [North
Atlantic Treaty Organization] allies, et cetera.
And so they have been focused on meeting the capabilities
that they need, given the evolving threat in North Korea, but
also in order to meet the commitments that we made together as
an alliance. An example being the funding of the PAC-3 upgrade
and the missiles for those, this year Global Hawk, last year to
assist in ISR, an improvement in their C4 systems, command
control communications, computers, to enable them as we go to
OPCON [operational control] transition, to ensure that they can
lead a combined force in a high-intensity conflict.
So overall I think they are focused on that. Within their
budget they have the same challenges that we do in terms of the
social demand and the competition with defense and the expense
of the systems that they have to put in place in order to
increase their military's capability and to deal with the
threat that is evolving in the north.
Dr. Wenstrup. And what about Japan?
Secretary Wormuth. I am happy to speak a little bit to
Japan. Again, I think we have an incredibly strong relationship
and alliance with Japan, and that will be renewed and I think
brought to the next level with the completion of the defense
guidelines that are going to be completed by the end of this
month.
They, as you know, are buying a large number of F-35s. They
have expressed an intent to buy the V-22. They also are working
on upgrading their Aegis platforms. They are working with us on
Global Hawk. So they are also, I think, doing a tremendous
amount to upgrade their capabilities. And then we also have a
very significant cooperative production project with them for
the SM-3 II missile. That is a $3.2 billion cooperative program
with Japan.
Dr. Wenstrup. Admiral.
Admiral Locklear. Well, in addition I would say that the
Philippines, who is another key ally of ours, we have in
negotiation for an Enhanced Cooperative Defense Agreement. That
is currently being debated inside the Philippines on the
political side. But that has an opportunity to help them
improve to get them to a better minimum credible defense. It
also has the opportunity for us to strengthen that alliance and
strengthen our position in Southeast Asia.
Our other ally, Australia, making good strides. I mean, it
is a great alliance. As far as I can tell, they are increasing
defense spending. They are having a good dialogue about how
they will partner with us. They are thinking about extending
their capabilities in submarine warfare and some other areas,
amphibious warfare.
So in general I would say the trend of our allies across
the board is that they are investing more in their defense and
in their security rather than less, and they are investing more
in directions that are complementary to our capabilities, so
that we all enjoy the same mutual benefits of that security
architecture.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman yields back.
And with that, Madam Secretary, General, Admiral, thank you
so much for being with us today. We are getting you out right
on time. And we appreciate, as you heard all of our members
express, their appreciation to you for your service to our
country, but thank you for being willing today to educate,
advise, and consult with us as we try to be a component part of
the national defense of this country.
And with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 15, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 15, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 15, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FORBES

Admiral Locklear. The solutions to many of the ``grey zone''
challenges in the region are not military in nature. As I stated during
my testimony, the military needs enough persistent, deep-look ISR
assets to better understand the activity in the region; however, the
solutions to such challenges largely reside in other areas of
government. Diplomacy, not aggression, is the regional trend and still
the best course of action. PACOM, together with the Office of the
Secretary of Defense and the Department of State, are working with our
allies and partners in the region to create multilateral mechanisms to
maintain peace and security in the region. One positive example of a
multilateral effort that deserves continuing U.S. support is ASEAN's
role in addressing common security concerns and non-traditional
threats. ASEAN is doing this through confidence building measures,
preventive diplomacy, and its leadership on the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea and the
development of a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea. [See page 17.]
Admiral Locklear. Regional governments largely acknowledge the
threat from ISIL and the potential return of Foreign Terrorist
Fighters. In response, several countries have either passed new
Counter-Terrorism (CT) legislation or reinterpreted existing
legislation to hinder Foreign Terrorist Fighters activities. Some
efforts are underway to impact on-line recruiting and radicalization
activities. There are a variety of partnering opportunities in the
region available to counter ISIL. Most have been built over the past
decade as nations have worked diligently--individually and
collectively--to address the problem of violent extremism. These have
been strengthened and reinforced since the rise of the ISIL threat.
Regional organizations like ASEAN recognize terrorism as a top concern,
and counter-terrorism cooperation is a component of most of our
bilateral relationships.   [See page 22.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS
Admiral Locklear. The People's Republic of China (PRC) has
approximately 1,900 land-based cruise and ballistic missiles. Of these,
about 1,540 have ranges of between 500 and 5,500 kilometers in range.
[See page 22.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Secretary Wormuth. Regarding specific NDAA language proposals on
streamlining the acquisition process and on improving the handling of
contract award bid protests, I defer to the Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Mr. Frank Kendall. From a
policy standpoint however, I share your concern that DOD needs a
faster, more efficient, and more responsive acquisition process in
order to retain our competitive technological edge and bring critical
capabilities to our forces. This is the goal of DOD's Better Buying
Power 3.0 program, announced in 2015. This program is intended to
implement best practices to strengthen DOD's buying power, achieve
greater efficiencies, and eliminate unproductive processes and
bureaucracy, while promoting competition.   [See page 26.]

[all]
