- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-11] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2016 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-11]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2016

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES HEARING

ON

DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY FISCAL

YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST FOR

SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

__________

HEARING HELD
FEBRUARY 25, 2015

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-098                      WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia, Chairman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               RICK LARSEN, Washington
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Vice      HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
Chair                                Georgia
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             SCOTT H. PETERS, California
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Katherine Rember, Clerk
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Glueck, LtGen Kenneth J., Jr., USMC, Deputy Commandant for Combat
Development and Integration, and Commanding General, Marine
Corps Combat Development Command...............................     4
Mulloy, VADM Joseph P., USN, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations,
Integration of Capabilities and Resources......................     6
Stackley, Hon. Sean J., Assistant Secretary of the Navy
(Research, Development, and Acquisition), Department of the
Navy...........................................................     1

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection
Forces.....................................................    29
Forbes, Hon. J. Randy, a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces...    27
Stackley, Hon. Sean J., joint with VADM Joseph P. Mulloy and
LtGen Kenneth J. Glueck, Jr................................    31

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Ms. Bordallo.................................................    71

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Ms. Bordallo.................................................    75
Mr. Hunter...................................................    76
Mrs. Walorski................................................    76
Mr. Wittman..................................................    75
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST FOR SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, February 25, 2015.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:30 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. J. Randy Forbes
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. J. RANDY FORBES, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES deg.

Mr. Forbes. What we are going to do in the interest of
time--because, as we mentioned to you, we may have another set
of votes called--Mr. Courtney and I both are going to waive our
opening remarks, and we are simply going to put those remarks
in the record.
[The prepared statements of Mr. Forbes and Mr. Courtney can
be found in the Appendix beginning on page 27.]
Mr. Forbes. We are going to waive any introductions we
might have had for our panel members because each of the
members have those in their packages. And so what we would like
to do is go ahead and start with your opening remarks.
Mr. Secretary, are you going to start us off? So if you
will do that. Then are we going to go to, General, or, Admiral,
next after you? Ok, so why don't we do that?
And, Mr. Secretary, we will let you start us off. Thank
you, the three of you, for being here. Again, without
objection, we are going to include all of our speakers' written
remarks in the record.
So Mr. Secretary, we turn the floor over to you.

STATEMENT OF HON. SEAN J. STACKLEY, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY (RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND ACQUISITION), DEPARTMENT OF
THE NAVY

Secretary Stackley. Chairman Forbes, Ranking Member
Courtney, distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today to address
Department of the Navy acquisition programs.
Joining me today are Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Vice
Admiral Joe Mulloy; and Deputy Commandant, Marine Corps, for
Combat Development Integration, Lieutenant General Ken Glueck.
With the permission of the subcommittee, I propose to
provide brief opening remarks and submit a separate formal
statement for the record.
We are in the fortunate position of having received the
national defense authorizations and appropriations bills in the
first quarter of this fiscal year. I cannot overstate that
escaping the extraordinary disruption of government shutdown,
furloughs, extensive continuing resolutions, sequestration, and
the budget uncertainty experienced in prior recent years gives
us a measure of stability that enables far greater efficiency
and effectiveness in carrying out our mission this year.
In fact, the Department of the Navy fared extremely well in
this year's bills. And we greatly appreciate your efforts for
not only has Congress fully supported our request, the
committee's increased procurement in our most critical programs
sending a strong signal of support regarding the role of our
Navy and Marine Corps. However, the greater reality is that
across fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015, the Navy's budget has
been reduced by $25 billion compared to the funding that we had
determined was necessary to meet the Defense Strategic Guidance
or the DSG. As a result, quantities of ships, aircraft, and
weapons have been impacted. Development programs have been
stretched. Modernization has been slowed. Deployments have been
cancelled. Deployments have been stretched, placing greater
strain on the force. Depot and facilities maintenance has been
deferred, all adding to a growing backlog.
And, with a significant portion of the reductions levied
against investment accounts, the resultant procurement quantity
reductions had the perverse impact of driving up unit cost for
weapons systems at a time when cost is one of the great threats
before us and, too, weakening our strategic industrial base.
In building the 2016 budget request, we have had to wrestle
with the clash between the needs of our military to meet the
requirements of the DSG, the implications of the threats posed
by the increasingly technologically capable adversaries or
potential adversaries, and the implications of the Budget
Control Act.
We have been faithful to our fiscal responsibilities,
leveraging every tool available to drive down costs such that
alongside range and speed and power and payload, affordability
has become a requirement.
Independent of the fiscal environment, the demand for naval
presence, in the words of the CNO [Chief of Naval Operations],
being where it matters when it matters, is on a steady rise.
Near half our fleet is routinely at sea, and of that number,
about 100 ships and more than 75,000 sailors and marines are
deployed. Therefore, we have placed a priority on forward
presence, near-term readiness, investment in those future
capabilities critical to our long-term technical superiority
and stability in our shipbuilding program.
Our shipbuilding program is, in fact, very stable. The
fleet under construction is about 65 ships strong. As
highlights, America LHA-6, commissioned this past fall with the
keel of her sister ship, Tripoli LHA-7, laid earlier in the
year. These ships' tremendous aviation capabilities when
coupled with the Marines' version of the Joint Strike Fighter
open a new chapter in naval aviation. At Newport News, as we
complete construction and testing of our first new design
carrier in more than 40 years, CVN-78, the Gerald Ford, we
start construction of CVN-79, the John F. Kennedy. In doing so,
we are strongly partnered with industry to control cost in the
lead ship and to leverage lessons learned and to make the
necessary investments to reduce cost on follow ships. Likewise,
DDG-1000, the first new design destroyer in 30 years, is being
brought to life readying for her sea trials later this year.
DDG-51 construction is progressing well with the first restart
ship, DDG-113, on track to deliver at Ingalls Shipyard in 2016.
Equally important is the Flight III DDG-51 destroyer
upgrade. The Navy relies on your continued support for this
capability, which is so critical to countering increasing
cruise and ballistic missile threats.
Littoral Combat Ship continues to march smartly down
learning curve at both building yards, and as was announced,
the Navy will commence a new frigate-class design based on
modifying the current LCS, with an over-the-horizon surface
missile, antisubmarine warfare capability exceeding that of
today's surface combatants, enhanced radar, electronic warfare
capabilities, enhanced survivability features, and other
upgrades significantly expanding the ship's range of
operations.
In submarines, we continue to leverage learning on the
Virginia program. And the next major upgrade, Virginia Payload
Modules, is on track to provide increased undersea strike
capacity. And we are rapidly ramping up design activities on
the Ohio replacement program to support her critical schedule.
In other ship programs, we have requested the balance of
funding for a 12th LPD [Amphibious Transport Dock] class. We
thank the Congress for its support in prior years, and we are
going to leverage the benefits brought by that ship to our
amphibious force.
And we are proceeding with three new major shipbuilding
programs: the Fleet Oiler T-AO(X) in 2016; the next big deck
amphib [amphibious assault ship], LHA-8, in 2018--excuse me,
2017; and the replacement for the LSD-41, the LX(R) at the end
of the FYDP [Future Years Defense Program]. Each is critical to
our force. Each is critical to the industrial base. And
affordability is critical to each. So we have constructed an
acquisition strategy to meet these objectives. Of interest to
this subcommittee, we have awarded the planning contract for
the refueling overhaul, CVN-73 George Washington, and likewise,
we are proceeding with the execution of the cruiser and LSD
[Landing Ship, Dock] modernization programs in accordance with
Congress' approval in 2015.
Major aviation programs under this subcommittee's purview,
the Navy's game-changing maritime patrol aircraft, the P-8A
Poseidon, is today on deployment, and we are on track with
planned follow-on incremental capability upgrades to that
aircraft. And the Navy's next-generation early warning
aircraft, the E-2D Advanced Hawkeye, has entered the fleet and,
in conjunction with other fleet assets, will be providing an
air defense capability far beyond that available in the Navy
today.
Meanwhile, the third leg of our Naval Air-Ground Task
Force, the Marine Corps' tactical vehicles is at the front end
of much needed recapitalization. In 2015, we commence
procurement of the joint light tactical vehicle to replace the
Humvee. We press forward with survivability upgrades to the
amphibious assault vehicle to ensure their viability for future
combat. And we are moving forward with acquiring a highly
capable, highly survivable wheeled vehicle in the first phase
of the amphibious combat vehicle program. The strategy for
procuring this vehicle is striking a necessary balance between
requirements and affordability.
And separately, we commence procurement of our newest ship-
to-shore connector to provide high-speed transfer of Marine
Corps tactical vehicles from the sea.
In summary, the Department's 2016 budget request is sized
and shaped to provide that measure of capability, capacity, and
readiness, to uphold national policies and to protect us
against potential enemies.
In response to sequestration in 2013, the Bipartisan Budget
Act level funding in 2014 and 2015, and the reductions across
2016 through 2020, the Department has been judicious in
controlling costs, reducing procurements, stretching
developments, and delaying modernization. However, these
actions necessarily add cost to our programs, add risk to our
industrial base, and add risk to our ability to meet the
Defense Strategic Guidance. If we are forced to execute at BCA
[Budget Control Act] levels in fiscal year 2016 and beyond,
these cuts will go deeper, and we fundamentally change our Navy
and Marine Corps and the industrial base we rely upon.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today. We look forward to answering your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary Stackley,
General Glueck, and Admiral Mulloy can be found in the Appendix
on page 31.]
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Admiral, are you up next, or, General? Which one is going
to--General, I think you are up next then.
Thank you for being here, and we yield you the floor.

STATEMENT OF LTGEN KENNETH J. GLUECK, JR., USMC, DEPUTY
COMMANDANT FOR COMBAT DEVELOPMENT AND INTEGRATION, AND
COMMANDING GENERAL, MARINE CORPS COMBAT DEVELOPMENT COMMAND

General Glueck. Thank you, Chairman Forbes, Ranking Member
Courtney, distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for this opportunity to testify before you today.
The Marine Corps' ability to serve as our Nation's premiere
crisis response force is due in a large part to this
subcommittee's continued strong support. And, on behalf of all
Marines, I would like to say thank you.
The current situation is chaotic. This committee has heard
from numerous witnesses this year who have characterized the
global security situation as one that is rapidly changing,
increasingly complex. These multidimensional challenges
highlight the increasingly broad range of warfighting
capabilities our military must possess to ensure success on the
battlefield. While these challenges are global in nature, they
increasingly occur in areas that have a maritime component.
Increased competition for limited natural resources,
demographic shifts to the coastal urban centers, territorial
disputes over maritime borders, will continue to contribute to
future conflict. These conflicts will require a robust naval
force that can respond rapidly from the sea.
Your Navy and Marine Corps team provides the means to
ensure our national interests remain protected. Forward-
deployed, forward-stationed forces enable us to respond to
today's crisis with today's force today. These forces are
characterized by their flexibility and their ability to loiter
indefinitely to provide a deterrent and, when required, to
project power ashore at the place and the time of our choosing.
They provide our Nation's leadership decision space necessary
to make informed decisions during rapidly evolving situations.
Amphibious warships with embark Marines are crucial enablers to
these capabilities. Referred to as the Swiss Army knife of the
fleet, they are versatile, interoperable warfighting platforms
capable of going into harm's way and providing diverse
capabilities unlike any other naval platform.
However, demand for these ships and embark capabilities far
outpace the available inventory. Because of inventory
shortages, the Marine Corps has invested in land-based,
special-purpose Marine Air-Ground Task Forces and is exploring
how to best leverage existing alternative sea-based platforms
to generate enhanced littoral mobility, maneuver capabilities
for our Marine Corps forces positioned in Europe, Africa, and
Pacific areas of operation.
Due to the generosity and foresight of Congress, our Nation
will greatly benefit from LPD-28, the 12th ship in the San
Antonio class, which is now programmed. When that ship comes on
line, your naval forces will have an additional capability to
respond to crisis. This remarkable line of amphibious ships has
proven itself since 2006, and has provided tremendous
capability to deployed amphibious ready groups and our embark
Marines. The recent decision to base the dock landing ship
replacement, or LX(R), on the San Antonio hull form will
provide a much improved capability and capacity. And in
particular, enhanced command and control, aviation operations,
and maintenance capabilities will enable this ship to conduct
independent operations and further expand the operational reach
of our forward deployed forces. The future amphibious fleet is
one that is characterized by its rapid flexibility and
interoperability with the joint force. No one platform will
prove transformational. It will be the combination of existing
amphibious warships, alternative platforms for Military Sealift
Command, and the maritime preposition force, with ships, such
as the Joint High Speed Vessel and the Mobile Landing Platform,
with the Advanced Forward Staging Base that will enable us to
achieve our full potential.
Your Navy and Marine Corps team is committed to conducting
the experimentation, war-gaming, and dedicated planning to
ensure that we invest wisely in our future force to generate
the most value for every platform in the inventory. Our
forward-stationed and deployed Marines remain our Nation's 911
force in readiness, and the investments that we are making in
the future will ensure that they remain poised to do so. In
partnership with the Navy, the Marine Corps looks forward to
working with you to address these issues.
I thank you for this opportunity and look forward to your
questions.
[The joint prepared statement of General Glueck, Secretary
Stackley, and Admiral Mulloy can be found in the Appendix on
page 31.]
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, General.
Admiral.

STATEMENT OF VADM JOSEPH P. MULLOY, USN, DEPUTY CHIEF OF NAVAL
OPERATIONS, INTEGRATION OF CAPABILITIES AND RESOURCES

Admiral Mulloy. Sir, thank you. Chairman Forbes, Ranking
Member Courtney, and distinguished members of the subcommittee,
I am honored to be here today to testify on behalf your Navy
seapower and projection forces.
I welcome the new members of the subcommittee. I look
forward to working with you all as we work on the 2016 budget.
In developing this 2016 President's budget, we carefully
analyzed the needs of our Nation and Navy in order to meet the
missions of the Defense Strategic Guidance in the most recent
Quadrennial Defense Review. This analysis looked at ends, ways,
and means necessary to fight and win today's wars while
building the ability to win tomorrow's; to operate forward to
deter aggression; and to be ready to fight and responsibly
employ our diverse force.
We remain committed to the rebalancing of the majority of
our naval forces to the Asia-Pacific with 60 percent of our
ships and planes in that region by 2020. However, with the
reality of the current Federal budget limitations and our
commitment to do our part in bringing our Nation's fiscal house
in order, we have made difficult choices to best balance
capability, capacity, readiness, and our industrial base, and
still meet the mission of the defense strategy, albeit with
some risk.
Our 2016 budget represents what we feel is the minimum
necessary for our Navy to continue to be where it matters when
it matters. It reflects difficult choices and actions we had to
take due to shortfalls over the last 3 years. Thus any
reduction in 2016, whether it be from sequestration or action
by Congress at some level of funding in between, would be
extremely challenging.
I would like to reiterate what Secretary Stackley said: The
Navy is down $25 billion over the last 3 years due to
sequestration and the bipartisan budgets acts. That has
required us to adapt and modify what we are doing. At the same
time, this needs to stop. We are hanging on. We are making do,
but the threats we face trying to defend this country, they
don't have to make do. If we are limited to sequestration level
funding, the Nation would need to think about what kind of
military we can afford and how we would need to reprioritize in
that situation. That analysis would need to factor in the
global environment, the Nation's defense priorities, America's
role in the international security system, and the capabilities
and threats of our adversaries, as well as timing of
sequestration and the method of implementation. That analysis
will dictate what kind of cuts will be required. You have to do
that analysis first, revise our defense strategy, before
talking about specific impacts. We fight as a joint force. We
must adjust as a joint force.
We ask for your support in providing the strategy-based
Navy that our 2016 budget will sustain and avoid the budget-
based Navy that sequestration will give us. I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Admiral Mulloy, Secretary
Stackley, and General Glueck can be found in the Appendix on
page 31.]
Mr. Forbes. Admiral, thank you.
As I mentioned earlier, I am going to defer my questions to
the end so that members can get their questions in.
I would like to go to Mr. Courtney and yield to him for any
questions he may have.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for your patience and your testimony.
Secretary Stackley, you talked about some of the
modifications last year that Congress made to improve the
initial submission that came over last January. And I think it
is important to note that this subcommittee actually kind of
led the way in terms of those modifications just for no other
reason that we go first in this whole process.
But, again, if you look at the authorizing committees and
Appropriations Committee, they pretty much followed the path
that we started here. So we look forward to continuing that
collaboration that made the best of a bad situation last year.
The chairman deserves a lot of credit actually for the great
work that took place last year.
Secretary Stackley, just to zoom in on one issue that you
mentioned, and I will let, again, the other members jump in.
The Virginia Payload program, which, again, is an attempt to
try and as quickly as possible replace the strike capacity that
we are going to lose when the SSGNs [cruise missile submarines]
go off line, the plan came over, again, talks about
implementing that modification program in 2019 and 2020. The
Joint Resources Oversight Council had talked about, again,
trying to do that maybe even more robustly. And I was just
wondering if you had any thoughts about possibly trying to
accelerate that process in terms of the ability of the
industrial base to handle it and, again, just sort of whether
the Navy thinks that that is a plausible change that we can
make to, again, fill that gap that is going to happen when
the----
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. I appreciate the question.
First, the SSGNs, the four SSGNs, retire in the 2026 through
2028 window. When they retire, each of those boats carries
missile tube capacity for 154 missiles. So you look at about
600-missile-tube capacity exiting the fleet in the mid-2020s.
The Virginia Payload Module approach is to buy back that
capacity, but in doing so, it is adding 28 missile tubes per
submarine, 28-missile capacity per submarine. So it is going to
take a long time to recapitalize the capacity that goes out
with the GNs [shorthand for SSGNs] in the mid-2020s.
The program plan is to commence installation of VPM, the
Virginia Payload Module, with a next multiyear procurement in
2019. The design and development has all been paced to that
milestone. If we are going to try to really hammer away at what
will be a shortfall to undersea strike capacity, the more we
can do, the earlier we can do, the better for our Nation.
So what I have, frankly, committed in earlier discussions
with your staff and in discussions on my side with the PEO
[program executive officer] for submarines and the industrial
sector is to take a look at, can we, in fact, complete those
design and development activities earlier than the 2019
timeframe to give the Navy and the Nation the option to
determine whether or not we want to advance Virginia Payload
Modules earlier in the submarine build cycle. So we are doing
that work right now, and we are doing that in the context of
the other submarine work that is all coming together at the
same time. So we have Virginia Payload Module design, and then
we would have the build that comes with that, that increases
the capacity throughput that would have to take place in our
submarine build yards, on top of the sea-based strategic
deterrent, the Ohio replacement program that is a 2021 start,
but well before 2021, we are deep into design today, and we are
going to be doing advanced construction activities at the same
time.
So we have to manage the total workload at the submarine
yards. We have to determine can we, in fact, accelerate the
design and development activities to support an earlier
introduction to Virginia Payload Modules, and then look at
balancing the workload across the two yards to do that. We are
doing those studies right now in concert, frankly, with an
overarching study that we are doing which is looking at how, in
fact, are we going to build Ohio replacement in concert with
the ongoing Virginia submarine construction, in concert with
the introduction of Virginia Payload Modules all within a
couple of year window.
So the answer is we are looking at it. We have the right
people looking at it. I would ask you to give us a couple of
months to complete our review. And we will be ready to come
back and give you more specifics in the March-April timeframe.
Mr. Forbes. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Secretary, we don't have a couple of months, so if you
can narrow that scope down, it would be very, very helpful to
us as we are looking to try to just accelerate a little bit of
that. If it is not doable, it is not doable. But we have got
some big gaps that are sitting out there. We just want to help
you try to close those gaps. So anything you could get for us
in a quicker timeframe, at least for this year, might be
helpful to do that. So I know you can only do what you can do,
but we just make that request to you.
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir.
Sir, I will tell you, just to complete the thought, though,
I don't expect there is going to be--I don't anticipate change
to the early activities. It is really to take a look at the
back end of the FYDP because that is where the mountain of the
work is.
Mr. Forbes. That is good. We recognize at this time Mr.
Knight from California for 5 minutes if he has any questions.
No questions.
The gentleman from Montana is recognized for 5 minutes if
he has any questions.
Mr. Zinke. I do not, sir.
Mr. Forbes. Then the vice chairman, Mr. Hunter, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, good to see you. Thank you for being here. This
is the first question. MLP [Mobile Landing Platform], AFSB
[Afloat Forward Staging Base], you mentioned that, General. I
think we asked last NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act]
to have some kind of a gap procurement from the Navy. It didn't
go through. So if Congress finds the means to do that again to
provide the moneys, is that good? I mean, do you want that? Do
you need that, and can you put it to good use?
Secretary Stackley. Sir, I think you are specifically
referring to advance procurement.
Mr. Hunter. Yes.
Secretary Stackley. To be able to close the production gap
at NASSCO [National Steel and Shipbuilding Company] associated
with building the fifth of the MLP class, the third Afloat
Forward Staging Base. The answer is, yes, it is desirable. You
don't see it in our budget because, frankly, the appropriators
have marked it out each time we have tried to put it in. So,
for us, it is a challenge to put funding in if we know the
appropriator is going to mark it out. So any assistance in that
regard would be helpful to the industrial base, helpful to
getting the capability earlier, but we recognize the challenge
associated with the appropriators' view on that.
Mr. Hunter. So I guess that kind of ties in too with
amphibs, going from 38, which is the number that the Marine
Corps and the Navy agreed upon that is needed to conduct the
missions and the requirements from the combatant commanders
throughout the world. Right? So you went down from 38 to 33. We
really only have 31. You don't have MLP and AFSB on track right
now because there is no advance procurement funding for it.
Right? So they are semi on track. We have now closed three
embassies in the last 6 years, had to evacuate them using
Marines. You have less land-based places where you can now
stage out of. Is that not a priority for the Navy and the
Marine Corps to be able to operate? You can't operate out of
the embassies. You can't operate off the land. You have to
operate out of something. So what is the something? It can't be
hope and good will. Right?
Secretary Stackley. Let me start that the AFSB we just
talked about is the third of the three that are planned. So the
first two are on track. The third one is on track in terms of
its full funding. The advanced procurement would allow that to
effectively be brought to the left a year. So that capability--
--
Mr. Hunter. For the shipyard?
Secretary Stackley. For the shipyard, yes, sir. That
capability, we place increasing value on it, particularly as--
you have walked the ship--particularly as you see all the
opportunity that it brings, all the lift capacity that it
brings. I will let General Glueck describe exactly how the
Marine Corps is looking at that in terms of forward operating
base effectively to support Marine Corps operations. But it has
held a high priority in terms of the Navy's budget since we
started with the MLP program.
Mr. Hunter. Let me ask it this way. Does it offset the
number of amphibs that you need, having it, having a forward
staging base like that, where you can lift and move? Does that
offset the number of amphibs? Is that one reason for the lower
number, or are they two totally separate things?
Admiral Mulloy. No, sir, it doesn't offset it. As a matter
of fact, if you look at it, it is that the Force Structure
Assessment will now actually go up to 34 ships because the LPD
is being bought, and it actually modified that we have the
third AFSB in. So they are not a substitute. What they are is
enabler or other alternatives to put a special purpose MAGTF
[Marine Air-Ground Task Force] on or other national mission
forces. In fact, when the AFSB was initially designed, it was
going to be to amplify mine hunting, and it actually was
initially designed for two MH-53s and mine-hunting gear. And
there were going to be two of them. The value of that has now
made itself very clear is that now what it can--we have
designed to work with NAVAIR [Naval Air Systems Command]--can
take four V-22s on the same flight deck. And it is much more
readily able to take the Marine Corps on it and also and/or
National Mission Forces. So it doesn't offset the need, and we
view it now as it puts the third--with the 33rd--or, pardon me,
the 12th LPD and the statement of now that is 34, we are
closing that gap. It comes back to being, how much money do we
have? We looked at it was AFSBs plugged into the workload of an
industrial base of NASSCO and, as Mr. Secretary pointed out,
was AP [advance procurement] would help. The ship will still
execute. The first ship is christened on time, and we are
looking forward to the AFSB getting out there, and where it
goes it's still under review. It could be in Africa. It could
be in the Middle East. But we know it will be helpful. Last
summer, we took New York City [USS New York (LPD-21)] out of
cycle to go to the Mediterranean to embark on a National
Mission Force to catch a terrorist. Very quickly they used a
ship of opportunity. That ship is now in the Middle East. So
what did we have to do? We double-pumped that crew. They went
over, embarked the special people, landed, took that individual
back, who is now in court in New York City awaiting trial. The
ship came back, did a maintenance period, and now it is on
deployment.
The AFSB would give us the opportunity of having those
AFSBs out there. You would still be able to embark Marines for
rescue or special mission forces, and so that is how we view
that ship in this important nest. And we are not detracting at
all from the Marine Corps' requirement for amphib, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Perfectly done on time in two, Admiral. Thank
you.
I yield back.
General Glueck. Congressman, if I could add to that. What
you, your numbers were correct, as you said, on the front, but
the combatant commanders actually say the requirement is closer
to 54. And I believe CNO has actually stated that, that is
probably--he knows it is over 50. So when you only have--today,
we are sitting with 31 amphibious ships, and you get a delta
between 31 and 54, you know, we look at the AFSB and the MLP as
ships that can help to fill that gap on the lower end of the
military operational spectrum--not on the higher end. They have
to be in a permissive environment.
Now, the first AFSB, the Chesty Puller, was actually just
christened about a week and a half ago. In fact, General
Dunford was out there for the christening ceremony. And we see
a lot of capability, potential in that ship, but once again, it
is going to have to be in a permissive environment. You know, I
have worked up actually a CONOPS [concept of operations] for
the Commandant; that is something we could possibly use maybe
in the Gulf of Guinea to be able to expand our reach of the V-
22s down in the southern region of Africa. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. The gentlelady from Guam is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It is nice to be back on the Seapower Subcommittee.
Secretary Stackley, Admiral Mulloy, and General Glueck,
thank you for your testimony today and for being here with us.
Vice Admiral Mulloy, I remember your service as Commodore
of the Submarine Squadron 15 in Guam and your leadership during
the successful dry-docking of the submarine tender USS Frank
Cable in Guam in 2004, and it is good to see you again. Last
year, MSC [Military Sealift Command] sent the submarine tender
Emory S. Land from Guam all the way back to the United States
West Coast for its overhaul.
Admiral, what is the impact on fleet readiness of sending
ships from their West Pac [Pacific] AGRs
back to the
U.S. mainland for dry-docking?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ms. Bordallo submitted a correction for the record
changing ``AGR'' to ``AOR [area of responsibility].''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Admiral Mulloy. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for your question and
your introduction, and also good to see you again. The impact
ends up being essentially in time. It takes about 2 to 3 weeks
to transit, get the crew acclimated and back, so we lose a
month or two of that one. It is a constant balance of what we
have to do. Our goal, as stated by the CNO, is to commit and
maintain a robust ship repair and maintenance capability in
Guam. They all look at the spectrum of ships. And as you
pointed out, the tenders have done maintenance in Guam. In some
cases, we send them back. It really depends upon the sheer
amount of work that has to be done about a life extension on a
ship. That is what we are studying right now, is what capacity
we have to have forward versus back. But the actual loss of
time is probably about 6 weeks of total time. It is really just
the transit time it requires.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Admiral, for the
information.
And, Secretary Stackley, in 2013, this committee raised
serious concerns about the Navy's acquisition strategy to split
pier-side ship repair from dry-docking depot-level capabilities
in Guam. However, we understood that the dry-docking depot-
level capabilities would be restored as quickly as possible.
In your July 2014 report on ship repair, you stated that
this Navy is conducting a business case analysis [BCA] to
develop options for providing a dry-docking capability in Guam.
The results of this dry-docking capability BCA will be provided
to Congress later this fall. Commander of U.S. Pacific Fleet
has an operational requirement for a dry-docking capability in
Guam. When can we expect to see the BCA, and when can we expect
to see the dry-docking capability restored in Guam?
Secretary Stackley. Let me first describe that the BCA that
was--the first go at the BCA, in fact, did not address whether
or not the business case for a dry dock in Guam makes sense.
What the BCA did was started with the assumption that there is
a dry dock in Guam, and now, what do we get out of it in terms
of value? So it did not answer the first questions that,
frankly, the CNO needs answered, which is, what will it cost to
recapitalize the dry-dock capability in Guam? What is the
extent for usage? And there is going to be planning, and we
also have to consider emergent need for the dry dock. And then,
in that case, does that argue for the investment in that dry-
dock capability? So, right now, that analysis is being reworked
by Pac [Pacific] Fleet. It is owed to the CNO so that we can
make the right investment decisions regarding the dry-dock
capability.
Ms. Bordallo. When will we see the analysis? What is the
timeframe here?
Secretary Stackley. I will have to get back to you for the
record, ma'am.
Ms. Bordallo. All right. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 71.]
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Stackley, Vice Admiral Mulloy, and Lieutenant
General Glueck, thank you so much for joining us. Thanks for
your leadership.
Secretary Stackley, traditionally, as you look at aircraft
carrier buys, we have done them in two-ship procurements. And
as you know, in the President's budget for 2016, the proposal
is for advanced procurement on CVN-78 in a 1-year timeframe and
potentially moving CVN-79 to the right. We have seen with
Arleigh Burke-class destroyers, as we purchase ships in groups,
we have seen about a 15 percent savings when we do that just
because of certainty, especially for suppliers for those ships,
especially aircraft carriers. Is there any consideration given
to grouping advanced procurement on CVN-80 and CVN-81? And give
us your perspective, too, potentially on movement to the right
of CVN-79.
Secretary Stackley. Let me start with the advanced
procurement for CVN-80 and CVN-81. There is strong argument for
why that makes great sense. When you are procuring an aircraft
carrier about once every 5 years and you are relying on a very
unique industrial base to do that, what you don't want to do is
go through start-stop-start-stop cycle over a stretched period
of time, and that is a big cost impact. The challenge is, by
the same token, the build cycle for a carrier is greater than
10 years. So CVN-79, for example, she started her advanced
procurement in 2009, and she will be delivering to the Navy in
2022. So that is a 13-year period. So when you talk about
doubling down on buying the material to support two carriers 5
years apart that have a 13-year build span, you are trying to
buy material as much as 18 years ahead of when the carrier went
to the fleet. It makes great sense looking at it just from the
program's perspective on why we want to do that to drive the
cost of the carrier down. There is risk associated with things
like not necessarily obsolescence but change associated with a
carrier because the threat changes and that brings change and
then the investment that far in advance of when the asset
actually enters the fleet. As the acquisition guy, I will argue
for why we need to do that, but getting through, carrying that
argument all the way through to say that we are going to take
the 80, which is the 2018 ship, the 81, which is a 2023 ship,
buy material early for that 2023 ship delivering to the Navy in
the mid-2030s, that is going to be hard for me to carry the day
in terms of our budget process. So we have to have the
compelling case for the specific things from an industrial-
based perspective, from a move-the-needle--move the needle from
a cost perspective--to justify the combined buys of 80 and 81
together.
Mr. Wittman. Well, it seems like, even if the scale is an
issue as far as how much you would have to expand to do that
and manage that within the budget, you could at least then
identify those critical suppliers that look for certainty to
make sure that they can continue providing those specialty
parts, and if you could at least pare it down, again, at a
critical mass to where you can demonstrate economies of scale
of saving, that you could at least say these are the areas we
need to maintain this industrial base, especially for small-
scale suppliers that rely on certainty to continue that effort.
So have you all given any thought to be able to scale it at
least within that area, maybe not to get 15 percent savings,
but still create certainty and make sure the suppliers are
there but also----
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. We have a very concerted
effort going on between the Navy and Newport News on all things
cost-related to the CVN-78 class for all the right reasons. We
are looking ahead at 80, which is a 2016, the advance
procurement starts in 2016 for the 80. Most of that is going to
be nuclear material. But Newport News has brought the
initiative to the table in terms of combined buys for material.
And now we have to sort out, can we, in fact, come up with the
right list of material that makes sense to buy early, to buy
combined, to get the savings, and not just people promising
savings in the end, but to actually be able to book the savings
so we can drive down the cost of those carriers? So I would say
that we are working with industry on that. We have got a long
way to go to be able to carry the day inside the budget
process; first, inside the building, and then, again, I will
tell you, we are going to have some challenges convincing some
folks on the Hill that this makes sense to invest this early in
a future aircraft carrier.
And the other question you had about the CVN-79 schedule.
CVN-79 is the replacement for the Nimitz. We have two things to
struggle with. One is we want to build it earlier from the
standpoint of efficiency with the shipyard. However, if we
build it early, deliver it early, then we have an overlap
between the 79 and the retirement of the CVN-68. What we can't
afford to do is ramp up one extra aircraft carrier crew for a
couple-year period. So what we are doing is we look at that as
schedule flexibility. We are going to try to drive the CVN-79's
construction to the left for efficiency purposes, but then we
are going to look for a window, a second phase in the build
process for the carrier, where we are going to bring in
electronics, the electronics systems that will be obsolete if
we were to buy them early. So we are going to buy them as late
as possible, install them as late as possible, so that that the
systems that we install are, in fact, state-of-the-fleet at the
time that the carrier delivers.
Mr. Wittman. I think that is the key to make sure that the
overlap is there so as Nimitz retires and the CVN-79 comes on
board, we don't good through the situation we were with Ford
and Enterprise, to make sure we don't have a gap there.
Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Langevin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Stackley, Admiral, General, thank you all for
your testimony and all that you do to protect our Nation. I
would like to start by expressing my appreciation for the
significant efforts that the Navy has made to really push the
art of the possible when it comes to cutting-edge technologies,
be it directed at energy where the Ponce's deployment is
teaching us so much right now or the work being done to test
railgun at sea and possibly integrated into the third Zumwalt
destroyer or the UCAS-D [Unmanned Combat Air System
Demonstration] program's work on pushing the state of the art
in unmanned carrier aviation. These are exactly the sorts of
investments that we absolutely have to have to protect and
allow to mature to enable the Navy that we will need in the
future. I know this is something the chairman and the ranking
member care deeply about, about giving us our future Navy today
wherever possible. To our panel, let me just in particular ask,
the Navy has projected a significant shortfall of land-attack
cruise missiles capability with the retirement of the guided
missile submarines in the 2020s. To address this shortfall,
Navy has proposed to expand the Virginia-class submarines to
accommodate additional land-attack cruise missiles capability
beginning with Block V. However, even this effort in assuming
that all the payload space is used for land attack will leave
us significantly short relative to today's at-sea capacity. My
questions are what options exist to mitigate the shortfall and
accelerate the introduction of the Virginia Payload Module
[VPM] capability? And can you also please describe industry's
ability to potentially accelerate the design, production, and
the fielding of Virginia Payload Modules should additional
resources be provided. What would be the earliest boat that
could include VPM if it we were accelerated?
Secretary Stackley. Let me start by describing that our
design activities were all geared toward the first boat of the
next multiyear, which is in 2019. We have posed to the design
team, come back and tell us, is it possible to accelerate that?
That is an answer that I owe you later this spring in terms of
what that would comprise. You have hit it exactly in terms of
the capacity that leaves when we lose the four GNs [SSGNs].
More than just the possibility of accelerating VPMs by a year,
the other thing we have to work through is the total volume of
work that the submarine industrial base will be taking on
during the decade of the 2020s to determine between our build
rate for Virginias side by side with our build rate of Ohio
replacement, alongside the Virginia Payload Modules. In that
equation, is there the ability to, in fact, increase VPM
production because right now we are planning on one Virginia
per year with VPM beginning in 2019. So we are looking at,
first, can we pull that to the left a year, and then the other
thing, the other aspect is what would be our ability to
increase the rate of production of VPMs beyond one per year,
which is in our current long-range plan. Affordability comes
into play. Industrial-based capacity comes into play, and it is
too early yet to call that.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Going back to the subject of
directed energy, obviously these systems have numerous
applications on a variety of different ship types. Which PEO
will be the lead organization for oversight and execution by
shipboard laser systems?
Secretary Stackley. Right now, laser systems right now are
being developed under the direction of the Office of Naval
Research. They will get up to a certain level of technology
maturity. Inside of the Naval Sea Systems Command, we have a
program organization called Electric Ship's Office, which
includes a power system to support directed energy. Ultimately,
a PEO for Integrated Warfare System would take on a
responsibility for directed energy, and then the shipbuilding
program would have responsibility for the shipboard side of
integrating that weapons system just like we do today with
other conventional weapons. So, Office of Naval Research today,
working with our Naval Surface Warfare Center down at Dahlgren,
Virginia, transition technology, when it is mature, to PEO IWS
[Integrated Warfare Systems], working with PEO Ships, most
likely, for integration on a future ship program.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentlelady from Missouri, Ms. Hartzler, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
And before you, if you would just suspend for a moment, to
our panelists, we are going to have votes, and we are going to
have to recess for about 40 minutes. Are you guys okay with
coming back? We have two of our members that have questions
they would like to ask if you don't mind doing that.
So Ms. Hartzler will be our last questioner at this time.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just quickly, you
said in your testimony that with the shift to the Pacific, by
2020, did you say there would be 60 percent?
Admiral Mulloy. Approximately 60 percent of the fleet.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. I also read that if sequestration
happens, you won't be able to have an aircraft carrier in the
Mediterranean. Is that correct?
Admiral Mulloy. Right now, ma'am, the Mediterranean is
covered on transit protection. We are still looking at, as I
mentioned in my opening, the full extent of the Budget Control
Act [BCA] impacts on Navy would require an adjustment of the
entire joint force. So right now we are able to supply what we
call 1.0 presence in the Central Command in the Persian Gulf
area around Saudi Arabia and approximately a 1.0 presence in
the Pacific. What we provide presence in the Mediterranean and
the Atlantic is what we call transit presence if we are moving
through. But in a world situation--when Crimea was invaded, the
carrier delayed in the Mediterranean before it went into the
Middle East, and we then did a 2-week extension of the carrier
in the Med--pardon me, in the Central Command so that we still
had that overlap. Our plan would still remain the same. For a
long-term operation in a BCA level, I cannot tell you what
carrier presence would be. We are taking a look at what
opportunities are out there, but what I will tell you is it
remains bleak unless there is a fundamental change in strategy
to what we have to do for the carrier presence around the
world.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
Can you give me an update on the refueling of the George
Washington?
Admiral Mulloy. Do you want to start that, sir?
Secretary Stackley. I would just say we signed the planning
contract with Newport News in February. There is a 30-month
planning window. So this is all the design activities. We start
the material procurement to get everything in line so that when
the GW [George Washington] shows up at the shipyard, she would
start her nominally 44-month refueling complex overhaul [RCOH].
So that would be notionally the July 2017 timeframe would be
the start of the RCOH, and it is pretty important we track to
that schedule because what we want to do is minimize the extent
of overlap with the next aircraft carrier, which is the
Stennis. So if that RCOH starts much beyond July of 2017, then
we get concerned about the combined 73/74 RCOHs at Newport News
during that period.
Mrs. Hartzler. And lastly, can you compare the building of
our submarines compared with what China is doing as far as
building submarines, the numbers and capability?
Admiral Mulloy. I would have to come back to you with a
correct answer about how many they built per year, but on
whole, they are producing submarines. They may not be the same
quality, but their submarine forces are growing over at a
tremendous rate. They now have more diesel and nuclear attack
submarines than we have. So they have passed us in total
quantity, but in quality, they are still not there. But they
are producing some fairly amazing submarines, and they are
actually deploying them. They have now had three deployments
into the Indian Ocean. They are expanding where their
submarines go. And of great interest, we know one SSBN
[ballistic missile submarine] was on an equivalent--we don't
think they have nuclear weapons on board, but we have seen them
producing the missiles and testing them. One SSBN did a 95-day
period at sea, equivalent of a long patrol. So we know they are
out experimenting and looking and operating and certainly want
to be in this world of advanced submarines.
Secretary Stackley. I would highly recommend a classified
threat brief for the members of the subcommittee so we can go
into detail so we can see beyond just submarines the level of
activity that China has in terms of modernizing its force.
Mrs. Hartzler. Absolutely. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. And, with that, we are going to recess for
about 40 minutes until these three votes are over, and we will
come back and finish up with our last two questions.
[Recess.]
Mr. Forbes. Gentlemen, first of all, thank so much for your
patience in working with us on this. As you know, they don't
call us and ask if these votes are convenient, but we
appreciate you working with us.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Cook, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cook. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you very much for coming back. My question
relates to what you are talking about, but I just got back
from--we went to NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], and
we had a brief over there, and then we were in Turkey. And I am
concerned about, you know, whether we are--and the number of
platforms that we have, you mentioned how they are going to be
diminished and yet the tempo of ops [operations] and the op
plans and everything else, it is one after another after
another. And it is like, can we actually cover all these
contingencies or all these spots? When I was in NATO and they
put the fear of God in me about Putin and, quite frankly,
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and whether we have the
platforms. Obviously, we discussed the Med [Mediterranean], but
I was thinking of the Baltic, which I thought was a very, very
shallow area that is limited in terms of what you could bring
in there. But they have been running operations. And, of
course, as somebody that is involved in NATO, the big threat is
the attack on one of those smaller countries way at the end,
close to Russia.
Do we factor that into the platforms or maybe I have the
misconception that we are building everything for--everything
all over the world and whether we have to be more selective in
our future plans based upon the contingency or the threats as
they are evolving? You know, I don't mean to dwell on it too
much, but 5 years ago, 10 years--you know, the Berlin Wall came
down, and it is safe there. We are doing Kumbaya; everything
has changed in a remarkably short period of time. So could you
address that, please?
Secretary Stackley. I will start and ask for Admiral Mulloy
and General Glueck to add.
Let me first describe that when we design our ships, when
we set the requirements and do the design, we are looking at a
ship with a service life that is going to extend 30 to 40 years
on average. It is impossible to anticipate all the types of
operations that any ship is going to be called upon in that
service life. So, to the extent practical, we look for general
purpose designs to be able to configure and be employed to deal
with the full range of operations that the ship will be called
upon.
With specific regard to the regions that you have just
described, where you have to deal with shallow water,
restricted areas, and what we refer to as the littorals, in
fact, earlier, about 10 years ago, we embarked on this thing
called the Littoral Combat Ship, specifically a shallow draft,
a modular design so you could have payloads that you could flex
and adjust to depending on what the mission was to deal with
those regions where our larger capital ships, from destroyers,
cruisers, carriers, et cetera, would not be able to penetrate.
In general, we look for general purpose ships that you can
adjust their mission as the threat moves with specific regards
to those regions where our larger bluewater Navy was not
designed for operations. We did add to our fleet the Littoral
Combat Ship that has that shallow draft, modular payload
capability and, frankly, speed, which is your ally in those
close-in regions.
Mr. Cook. Didn't we cut back on those though? In terms----
Secretary Stackley. No, in fact----
Mr. Cook. Are we going forward with the----
Secretary Stackley. We capped the modular version of the
LCS at 32 ships. Frankly, the Secretary of Defense was
concerned that we were going to build out to 52 LCSs, that
would be one-sixth of our entire battle force being this
modular configuration. So he tasked us with coming back with
something that is, quote-unquote, more frigate-like, more
multimission. And so, in fact, what we have going forward,
first 32 ships will be the modular Littoral Combat Ship; the
last 20 will be a multimission--still some modularity, but a
multimission modified version of the LCS that gives it a wider
range of operations.
Admiral Mulloy. The only other part I would add, sir, as we
look at the changing demographics of the world, the threat does
morph in where we have to go, but as Mr. Secretary Stackley
pointed out was the ability of our ships to flex in terms of
payloads and weapons. So the concern on deployability and the
combatant commanders, you are absolutely right. And that is one
reason why, as I mentioned earlier, PB-16 [President's budget
request for fiscal year 2016] is the minimum to be able to do
this. We need the funds to go take our 285 ships right now and
build them to 308 by the end of FYDP to be able to continue to
support that.
Ten years ago, we had 300-something ships, but we only had
about 70 deployed. Now we have 100 deployed out of 300--or 280
ships. So we are at the point of a ship comes back and
immediately it rests, it does maintenance, and it just recycles
back again to deploy. And so all the combatant commanders want
them. So it is important that PB-16 reflects we need to keep
building ships; we need to continue to maintain them; and we
need to be able to make them available. And that is so really
the combatant commanders to develop war plans or option plans
with them, but the response is there. Within a short period of
Crimea attack, we had a DDG [destroyer] in the Mediterranean.
Within a short period on ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant], we responded with an aircraft carrier. And for the
first 54 days until we had country clearance, the only people
bombing and attacking were American airplanes off of an
aircraft carrier. So the flexibility of Navy and naval
research, naval support vessels is so the Navy and Marine Corps
team can respond very flexibly.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
General Glueck. About 10 years ago, we used to have a
Marine Expeditionary Unit that was deployed with their
Amphibious Ready Group to the Mediterranean, but due to lack of
capacity now, they are no longer stationed there. About the
only opportunity you get is when they pass through, perhaps on
their way to CENTCOM [Central Command]. I mean, that is a great
opportunity; having been a new commander during that period of
time, that is a great opportunity to build partnerships with
our coalition partners over there, members of NATO, to exercise
with them, to check our interoperability and be able to
demonstrate that cohesive team that we have.
Mr. Cook. Thank you.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Gabbard is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thanks for your service and for being here today
with us.
I just wanted to ask about a problem that I think is well-
known and well-recognized, as we try to find the appropriate
and effective solution to bring our Marines to shore safely,
quickly, and from farther distances than I think ever before.
As we look at some of the solutions that are being offered, I
know there are many people who are working towards that. So
far, it seems to be done on a little bit of an ad hoc, kind of
scattershot way where certain people may be bringing solutions
to one element or another, but really are not focusing on
overall integration.
I know of some who are working to go solve the high water
speed problems specifically in working with the Marine Corps in
order to figure out how to do that. But my question is, how can
the Marine Corps leverage existing research and investment in
existing capability, specifically talking about the ACV
[Amphibious Combat Vehicle] to help design the next generation?
Lieutenant General, please.
General Glueck. Thanks for the question. It is really about
the integration of all these capabilities. It is a family of
systems is what we are talking about, and that has been our
approach as we have come up with our capstone concept of
Expeditionary Force 21. It is about that family of systems out
there that is going to give us that leap-ahead capability.
If you remember in my opening comments, I made a point
about there is not going to be any one transformational
capability that we are going to see over the surface. It is
going to be the capabilities that exist today and how we better
integrate them together to be able to give us that leap-ahead
capability.
So, for example, in a sea base, as you talk about where,
due to the A2/AD [anti-access/area denial] threat, the sea base
is actually getting pushed out further. And it is going to
depend on the time and place as to how far that sea base will
have to go. Within that sea base, not only will it have naval
surface combatants, but you are also going to have members of
the Maritime Prepositioned Fleet. So the AFSB, the MLPs, the
Joint High Speed Vessels, and those are all going to be
integrated because they are going to have a capability that we
need at the sea base, where we are able to do at-sea arrival
and assembly of the force in the sea base and be able to
transfer those loads between combatant ships and some of the
Maritime Prepositioned Ships. That is a real leap ahead. We are
pushing full speed ahead on that and working into
experimentation.
Our concept is really, has been for the past 25 years,
ship-to-the-objective maneuver. So your sea base can move
around. You launch your vertical assault and your surface
assault from wherever you move the sea base to. So, as we move
to the future, actually, when we came up with the concept,
there were actually three--it was called the triad. And it was
the LCAC [Landing Aircraft Cushion]; it was the V-22; and it
was the AAAV [Advanced Amphibious Assault Vehicle also known as
Expeditionary Fighting Vehicle, EFV] is what we were looking
at. Those were the three capabilities that we needed to be able
to perform that.
As you know, today, the V-22 is a success story. And so
that, from a vertical perspective, we can go ahead and insert
forces hundreds of miles behind enemy lines and be able to do
that.
On the connector side, on the surface side, it is really
going to come down to connectors--connecting from the sea base
to get to the shore. So how we best integrate those
capabilities to get the greatest effect. Once again, we are not
going to go ahead and try to find where the enemy is strongest.
We are going to find where the enemy is weakest, and that is
where we exploit it. So, I mean, when you look at the family of
systems over the surface, you are talking about the LCACs, the
LCUs [Landing Craft Utility]; you have got the Joint High Speed
Vessel, which we are doing some research on right now to be
able to put a ramp on it so that we could potentially launch
vehicles while at sea with the Joint High Speed Vessel. And
then, of course, we are going to modernize our AAVs, about 392
of them. And the ACVs will take up the rest of our--not the
amphibious lift but provide us the armored lift we need once we
get ashore.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Do you have any additional comment on that?
Secretary Stackley. I think General Glueck covered it
pretty well. The only thing I would add is he touched on the
LCACs. In fact, we have gone through a service life extension
for the LCACs, and this year, we are moving forward with the
next--what is referred to as ship-to-shore connector. And that
features prominently in our budget across the FYDP as we ramp
up production for that new connector.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Forbes. Gentlemen, once again, thank you so much for
being here. I know we are living in some very, very dangerous
times, very frustrating times. We appreciate you guys hanging
in there and doing the work that you do.
I also note, sometimes in a hearing like this, as you know,
the important thing for us is preparing this transcript so we
can use it for our markups. Our members are wonderful members,
but they each run in different lanes, and they may have
unintentionally left out something that you think is very
important that we need to get on that record.
So I would like to give each you a few minutes to wrap up
in any way that you need to anything that you feel you need to
clarify or that we didn't get on the record.
Just in that process, the only thing I would ask you to do
is share a little bit about the cruisers and where you see us
going with those. We have expressed a concern that perhaps we
may--we don't see that in the POM [Program Objective
Memorandum] and that gives us a little bit of concern. But I
would like to make sure that we are committed to that
modernization to do it.
Admiral Mulloy, if we could start with you, and thank you
once again for being here, and any closing comments you would
like to offer.
Admiral Mulloy. Well, first, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
would like to close with--and I will get to the cruisers--is
that, as we pointed out, was sequestration or any attempt to
adjust to a BBA [Bipartisan Budget Act] law for 2016 we find
would be highly detrimental to the Department of Defense and
especially the Department of Navy. We have a number of items
that we continue to move ahead in this Navy. The LCS is
important to us. The Ohio replacement program we have already
talked about.
So the whole gamut of what the fleet is laying in those
aircraft carriers, and what I look for as the Navy's chief
financial officer is adequate, predictable, and timely budgets.
So far, we barely got adequate, and it has been real efforts
out of this committee and other committees to make sure that we
have something, but what they defined as being adequate is $25
billion short.
Predictable is not very high, except the one year that we
had the 15 is now I view as a high water mark of stability, but
it is $11 billion short of where I told us, you know, it needed
to be. So I don't need more predictability that. I will be like
General Pyrrhus in Southern Italy here in 479 facing the
Romans, and one more battle like this, I am lost.
And I need a timely budget. It has certainly been less of a
shorter CR [continuing resolution] this year, but I was budget
officer for 4 years and was N8 for another one, and every year,
we have had a CR of various lengths. So we need to move ahead
on that. We really need to have it.
I appreciate your process, Mr. Chairman, and your committee
to move ahead this year to say, we are going to move ahead of
budget.
When I look at the cruisers, I will tell you everyone--we
are all in on doing that. We have two ships that we are
starting this year; we have two more. There was a question
about what do we do when that law came out--2/4/6. When that
law finalized in early December, we had about 1 week to lock
this budget. In that period of time, we could not use the SMOSF
[Ship Modernization, Operation, and Sustainment Fund] where we
were planning to use it for operations and maintenance. The
Navy made adjustments as we locked the budget to add just a
little bit under $500 billion for operation and maintenance for
the other seven ships that we expected to be in this phased
modernization program, but not. So we adjusted the program to
fit and comply to the law, the SMOSF fund will pay for
modernization through the FYDP. What we have to go back now and
look at as we develop the next POM--and we are looking for
signals from the Hill--would be is are there other additions to
SMOSF? Then can we count on that account? And what can we do
about trying to support this law, because we acknowledge that
we want the ships; we are taking care of them; and we need that
cruiser plan. But we also want to make sure we extend the life
of them so that we can have those cruisers for a long time,
sir.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you.
General Glueck, thank you, again, for all your service and
for being here. Any closing comments you would like to get on
the record?
General Glueck. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
Last year I requested your support in funding flexibility
for the Amphibious Combat Vehicle way ahead. Because of your
support, the Amphibious Combat Vehicle program is poised for
successful transition to our RFP [request for proposal] by the
end of March.
Secondly, I requested your support on the development of
high water speed capability through an aggressive science and
technology program, and that is moving out smartly.
Lastly, I requested your increased amphibious ship
investment in both platforms and maintenance. Today, we have a
funded LPD-28, a defined way ahead on the LX(R), and programmed
approximately $1 billion dollars for amphibious maintenance
modernization across the FYDP. So I want to say thank you.
But I also come with my hat in hand. This year, I request
your support in both continued amphibious ship and ultimate
platform investment, particularly in the LX(R) and the
increased capability of LHA-8; continued support of our combat
vehicle strategy to replace supporting 40-year-old-plus AAVs
that we have in the inventory; and lastly, your support for
science and technology continued efforts to gain high water
speed. Thank you.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, General.
Mr. Secretary, we will give you the final word.
Secretary Stackley. Yes, sir. Very briefly, we spent a lot
of this hearing discussing concerns with sequestration, the
impact of sequestration. What we have delivered to the Hill is
the program, the budget, that we believe is essential to meet
the Nation's security requirements from the Navy-Marine Corps
perspective. The impact of the last several years of 2013
sequestration, the BBA's impact in 2014 and 2015. You have
heard us describe that we pulled away from the capabilities
that we believe we need, either in terms of timeliness or in
terms of capacity, and it has had a similar impact in terms of
the industrial base.
So, first and foremost, we want to provide you the
information and the armor that you need in order to fight the
sequestration and BCA in 2016 and out. Our first priority is to
hold onto the program that we have delivered to the Hill. And
we want to provide you the best information that you need to be
able to support that.
Much of this hearing has been on shipbuilding. That is the
nature of your Navy-Marine Corps team. We are on path today to
get to a 300-ship Navy by the 2019 timeframe. In the interim,
we are working our ships hard. The deployment ratios, their
dwell time, the length of their deployments, is bringing a lot
of wear and tear to the force and you are starting to see that
stack up in the depots. So the ship count is critical because
the demand for presence is not going to go down. So you have
been our partner for your time here on the committee in terms
of supporting our shipbuilding requirements, and we look
forward to continuing down that path. We need these ships.
Their demand overseas is not going to go down. It is only going
to increase when you look at the 2020 timeframe. We are not
looking at 100 ships being deployed. We are looking at 115
ships deployed. And the greatest challenge, the greatest threat
we have to that today is the threat of sequestration. So let us
know how we can help you in your battles here in the halls of
Congress to try to reverse what poses a great threat to our
Navy-Marine Corps team.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you all. Thank you for all the team that
worked with you. And to members of the committee, thank you.
And, with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:19 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

February 25, 2015

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 25, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

February 25, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. BORDALLO

Secretary Stackley. The Navy remains committed to maintaining a
robust ship maintenance and repair capability in Guam. The dry dock
specific business case analysis (BCA) prepared by the Pacific Fleet did
not have the depth and scope necessary to fully inform the Navy on how
best to address the need for repair facilities in the Western Pacific.
Some of the underlying assumptions made when conducting the analysis
need to be revisited, which may affect conclusions regarding the
affordability of recapitalizing dry docking capability in Guam.
The Navy recently initiated a warfighting assessment that will help
define the required repair capabilities in the Pacific. This analysis
will be much broader in scope than the BCA. However, when taken in
conjunction with the BCA (after revisiting and validating the excepted
assumptions), this warfighting assessment will allow the Navy to make
more complete and informed resourcing decisions on this important
issue. This work is to be completed sufficiently to inform the Fiscal
Year 2017 President's Budget request, and will be adjudged alongside
the full range of requirements competing for funding in the budget.
[See page 12.]
?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

February 25, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN

Mr. Wittman. Mr. Stackley, you signed out a memo on 8 August 2014
to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition,
Technology, and Logistics, highlighting the benefits of accepting non-
Navy workload to offset the rising costs of maintaining NWCF
infrastructure.
Among the benefits of the Navy Working Capital Fund, you indicate
that it aligns with Better Buying Power Initiatives, it will assist in
establishing the Navy as a lead systems integrator for certain
programs, and establishes more hands-on work at our Navy Laboratories,
among other benefits.
If OSD concurs with your approach, what are your next steps to
rescind any existing policies and required approvals that have deterred
Navy Work Capital Fund activities from accepting non-Navy work in the
past?
Secretary Stackley. Execution of non-Naval work is assessed
routinely in conjunction with Systems Command reviews and any changes
to related policy will be considered in this forum. Naval Laboratories
are authorized to accept and execute non-Naval work that reinforces the
skill sets of the workforce critical to their mission and helps off-set
the total cost of operations. Commanders are required to ascertain to
their chain of command that the skills and capacity to accomplish non-
Naval work are consistent with their assigned areas of expertise.
It is worth noting that since this policy was put in place, non-
Naval work at the Naval Laboratories actually increased by nearly six
percent from FY2013 to FY2014. The Department of the Navy will continue
to follow a disciplined work acceptance approach to ensure the non-
Naval workload is executed in accordance with the missions and
capacities of the respective Naval Laboratory and to ensure the talent
of the science and engineering workforce is optimized to meet current
and future Naval missions.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. BORDALLO
Ms. Bordallo. I am encouraged by continued investment in
technologies that support our military strategy in the Asia-Pacific
region. As you know, the Pacific is incredibly large--over 165 million
square kilometers. While the vastness of the Pacific region presents a
tremendous challenge, new technologies have the potential to greatly
enhance situational awareness and operations in the Pacific. In
particular, I am encouraged about how unmanned systems like the MQ-4C
Triton, with its persistence, endurance, and range, can meet the unique
challenges of the region.
How important is Triton to the Pacific maritime surveillance
strategy, and have you explored opportunities to accelerate Triton to
meet our growing needs in the region?
I understand that many of the combatant commanders, particularly
U.S. Pacific Command have ISR requirements that exceed their current
capability to execute. How do you plan to address this shortfall?
Secretary Stackley and Admiral Mulloy. The MQ-4C Triton is a key
component of the Navy Maritime Patrol Reconnaissance Force. Its
persistent sensor dwell, combined with networked sensors, will enable
it to effectively meet ISR requirements in support of the Navy Maritime
Strategy. MQ-4C Triton plans to operate from Guam in 2017 and is an
integral part of increasing our presence in the Asia-Pacific region.
The FY 2016 budget request reduces risk in the Navy's Maritime
Intelligence, Surveillance, Reconnaissance, and Targeting (MISR&T)
Transition Plan in both capacity and capability. In addition, the Navy
continues to work with the Joint Staff, Office of the Secretary of
Defense, and the Fleet to optimize the Navy's MISR&T Transition Plan
and comply with the FY 2011 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA).
Despite budgetary pressures forcing a reduction in procurement
quantities of baseline air vehicles, the Navy was able to maintain
fielding timelines for the future force and continue development of
future sensors. The current fiscal environment limits our ability to
accelerate the MQ-4C program without incurring significant risk
elsewhere. Timely and predictable system delivery is crucial to the
Navy's plan for meeting the intent of the FY 2011 NDAA. Due to the
MISR&T Transition Plan's dependence on timely fielding to limit
increased costs of sustaining legacy (EP-3E) platforms, continued
Congressional support for the MQ-4C program is vital to transition
success.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. HUNTER
Mr. Hunter. I am curious what your current plan is to upgrade or
replace the Navy's medium-lift helicopter fleet in the near future? The
Seahawk helicopter is a workhorse and is performing admirably but with
production ending for both the MH-60S and the MH-60R I am told that now
is the time to start planning for mid-life upgrades and/or a
replacement aircraft. I am concerned that sequestration has caused the
Navy to defer this planning for other priorities and would like to know
that you do indeed have a plan for both upgrades and eventual
replacement.
Secretary Stackley. MH-60S deliveries conclude in December 2015.
MH-60R deliveries will continue through mid-2018. The Navy plans to
maintain both airframes through 2030. The MH-60S Program plans to
commence a Service Life Assessment Program (SLAP) in Fiscal Year (FY)
2016 to determine what potential modifications may be required to keep
the airframe viable through its planned service life. MH-60R SLAP
activities may begin later than the MH-60S as the aircraft was
introduced to the Fleet after the MH-60S.
Additionally, the Navy has an ongoing Aircraft Modification Program
that includes a number of efforts addressing warfighter capability
improvements, obsolescence, and safety. These efforts will assist in
ensuring airframe and system components are supported through the life
of the H-60.
Lastly, the Navy's FY 2016 budget submission includes a new Program
Element, titled MH-XX, that directs Naval Aviation developmental
activities in support of the recapitalization of the Navy H-60 series
helicopters, multi-mission medium lift helicopter capability, in the
2028 timeframe. The Navy is participating in the OSD mandated, Army led
Future Vertical Lift effort to recapitalize DOD's helicopter fleet.
These efforts will enable timely development of a system in support of
the Navy's 30-year Aviation Plan.
Mr. Hunter. While the Navy's SCN and tactical aviation budget
accounts generate headlines and attention, I am concerned that serious
readiness and quality of life issues impacting our Navy are going
unaddressed. Specifically, I am concerned that many of our sailors are
being housed in substandard and outdated quarters when they are placed
on APL berthing barges.
Typically, sailors are placed on these berthing barges when their
ships are in port for repairs, maintenance or when conducting Inter-
Deployment Training Cycles. For frame of reference, approximately 400
sailors can be housed on an APL Small, and roughly 1,000 sailors can be
housed on an APL Large.
However, these deteriorating and aging vessels have significant
health, safety, and quality of life deficiencies. Overhead clearances
are only 5,8" to 6,2" high on the main deck and below. The main
engineering spaces have encapsulated asbestos covering pipes and lead
base paint on bulkheads and decks. Sixty-year old steam systems leak
and are in constant need of repair.
Thirteen of the seventeen APLs in service today were built during
the 1944-1946 time frame, which makes them almost seventy years old. In
one case, The Navy's Board of Inspection and Survey (INSURV) Quicklook
Report 221618Z of May 2, 2002, found APL-40 ``unfit for human
occupancy.''
Would you agree that our sailors deserve better than to live on
these substandard, antiquated, and hazardous APL barges?
Can the Navy support a strategy to procure APL Small berthing
barges as soon as FY2015 and certainly during FY2016 through 2020?
Do I have a commitment from you that the Navy will work with
Congress to determine if there are sufficient funds on hand (FY2015) to
begin the process of procuring replacement vessels for the legacy APL
fleet?
Admiral Mulloy. [No answer was available at the time of printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. WALORSKI
Mrs. Walorski. I co-chair the Working Group on Electronic Warfare,
a warfare domain that is particularly important to Indiana given the
important work NSWC Crane does in EW R&D, acquisition, testing,
fielding, and sustainment, including SEWIP and Next Generation Jammer,
one of the largest EW initiatives in history.
Despite these and other efforts, the threat continues to evolve at
an alarming pace. Given how dependent we are on having access to the
Electromagnetic Spectrum for success on the battlefield, what is being
done to develop the next generation of EW and keep pace with threats?
A recent Defense Science Board study found major deficiencies in
Electronic Warfare across the services. It recommended establishing an
Executive Office within OSD AT&L for EW to synchronize EW requirements,
technology development, initiative and operational concepts across the
Services. What are your thoughts on this recommendation, and what do
you think can be done to improve EW integration, specifically in terms
of developing an integrated EW strategy/roadmap?
How can Congress help the Defense Department streamline its
acquisition process specifically in this area, including possibly
circumventing the JROC process?
Secretary Stackley. To inform development of the next generation of
EW capability and pace advanced threats, U.S. Fleet Forces developed
the Navy Electromagnetic Maneuver Warfare (EMW) Campaign Plan, which
identifies efforts across four lines of operation: training and
certification; strategic communications; experimentation and tactics;
and investments and future capabilities. Naval Surface Warfare Center
(NSWC) Crane, with the largest EW expertise in the DOD, has a leading
role in identifying the future capabilities the Navy needs to meet
warfighting requirements. To align EW efforts across DOD, the Deputy
Secretary of Defense recently directed the establishment of an
Electronic Warfare Executive Committee to develop a comprehensive,
cross-Service EW and acquisition strategy. We fully support this
effort. With respect to DOD acquisition processes, it will be critical
for us to leverage rapid acquisition opportunities and maintain an
acquisition workforce with sufficient EW expertise to drive design,
development and procurement of new capabilities in response to the
changing threat environment. We must also ensure our acquisition
process reward procurement of systems that are built on open
architectures to allow more flexible, rapid updates and modifications
so we can pace the threat.
Mrs. Walorski. Who's responsible and accountable for EW in the Navy
and Marine Corps, respectively? If what Admiral Greenert has said is
true, that this is the next warfare domain, who ``owns'' it for each of
these services?
Secretary Stackley and Admiral Mulloy. The Chief of Naval
Operations (CNO) directed U.S. Fleet Forces Command (USFF) to lead the
overall effort to ensure Navy's ability to fight and win in a contested
and congested electromagnetic environment. USFF developed an
Electromagnetic Maneuver Warfare (EMW) Campaign Plan that identifies
how the Navy will man, train and equip the force for EMW. As the Navy's
Executive Agent for EMW, USFF is accountable to CNO for implementation
and refinement of the plan. Navy operational commanders, resource
sponsors, program managers and systems commands at all levels of the
Navy will have a role in implementing that campaign plan.
Mrs. Walorski. Who's responsible and accountable for EW in the Navy
and Marine Corps, respectively? If what Admiral Greenert has said is
true, that this is the next warfare domain, who ``owns'' it for each of
these services?
General Glueck. The Commandant of the Marine Corps receives advice
and recommendations from multiple sources to support key decisions
associated with his statutory responsibilities. These decisions include
manpower, acquisition, and resourcing matters directly affecting the
capabilities and effectiveness of the Service. The Deputy Commandant
for Combat Development and Integration (DC CD&I) is assigned as the
Marine Corps integrator with the authority and responsibility to
conduct capabilities-based force development. For Electronic Warfare
(EW), as with other capabilities, DC CD&I develops and implements
capability portfolio management processes supported by other advocates,
proponents, and commanders providing subject matter expertise and
services (e.g., training, acquisition, etc.).
While the Marine Corps recognizes the interdependencies between EW
(and broader electromagnetic spectrum operations (EMSO)) and cyberspace
operations (CO), at present these two mission areas remain separate,
pending potential changes in Joint and/or Service doctrine. In the
meantime, Marines will explore ways to achieve the inherent advantages
of closely coordinating the execution of EW and CO. For instance, in
May 2014, DC CD&I approved the Marine Air-Ground Task Force Cyberspace
and Electronic Warfare Coordination Cell Concept. This concept
envisions the MAGTF with an organic capability for planning, executing,
and assessing the integrated employment of CO and EW capabilities in
support of MAGTF operations.

[all]
