- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-28] STAKEHOLDER’S VIEWS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MILITARY COMPENSATION AND RETIREMENT MODERNIZATION COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-28]

STAKEHOLDER'S VIEWS ON THE

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MILITARY

COMPENSATION AND RETIREMENT

MODERNIZATION COMMISSION

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 25, 2015

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-230                     WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey, Vice   JACKIE SPEIER, California
Chair                            TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
Dave Giachetti, Professional Staff Member
Craig Greene, Professional Staff Member
Colin Bosse, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Davis, Hon. Susan A., a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Military Personnel.....................     2
Heck, Hon. Joseph J., a Representative from Nevada, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel.............................     1

WITNESSES

Bousum, Scott, Legislative Director, Enlisted Association of the
National Guard of the United States............................     3
Gehrke, Brendon, Senior Legislative Associate, Veterans of
Foreign Wars of the United States..............................     4
Hayden, Col Michael, USAF (Ret.), Director, Government Relations,
Military Officers Association of America.......................     5
Neiweem, Chris, Legislative Associate, Iraq and Afghanistan
Veterans of America............................................     6
Ruedisueli, Karen, Government Relations Deputy Director, National
Military Family Association....................................     8
Stovall, John, Director of National Security, the American Legion     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Bousum, Scott................................................    40
Gehrke, Brendon..............................................    52
Hayden, Col Michael..........................................    66
Heck, Hon. Joseph J..........................................    39
Neiweem, Chris...............................................    82
Ruedisueli, Karen............................................    88
Stovall, John................................................   123

Documents Submitted for the Record:

MAZON: A Jewish Response to Hunger, Statement for the Record.   151
National Association of Drug Stores, Statement for the Record   157
National Guard Association of the United States, Statement
for the Record.............................................   141

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
STAKEHOLDER'S VIEWS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MILITARY COMPENSATION
AND RETIREMENT MODERNIZATION COMMISSION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 25, 2015.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:59 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph J. Heck
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH J. HECK, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEVADA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Dr. Heck. I want to welcome everyone to a hearing of the
Military Personnel Subcommittee on the stakeholders' views of
the 15 recommendations to modernize the military compensation
and retirement system suggested by the Military Compensation
and Retirement Modernization Commission.
As we continue to study the Commission's recommendations,
we also need to consider the views of our current and retired
service members through you, the organizations that represent
them. We are committed to addressing the concerns and issues
raised by members of the Military Coalition and others on the
effects of the Commission's recommendations on service members'
and their families' willingness to serve and the effects on
their quality of life.
I want to continue to assure everyone that the Military
Personnel Subcommittee is taking every opportunity to
thoroughly review and discuss the recommendations. We are fully
committed to improving the welfare and quality of life for both
current members of our armed services and our veterans while
ensuring we keep our nation safe and secure.
Our purpose today is to understand how current and retired
service members are viewing and discussing the Commission's
recommendations. The guiding consideration for our work is the
viability of the All-Volunteer Force. Most importantly, we must
not break faith with our service members and undermine our
efforts to recruit and retain the best and brightest into our
Armed Forces.
Before I introduce our panel let me offer Congresswoman
Davis, ranking member, an opportunity to make her opening
remarks.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Heck can be found in the
Appendix on page 39.]

STATEMENT OF HON. SUSAN A. DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also want to welcome our witnesses here today. Your
perspective--those of you who are here to speak, and those in
the audience, surely share the views from our constituents, and
it is very important that we continue to discuss all of the
Commission's recommendations.
We have had the opportunity, as many of you know, to hear
from the Commissioners twice and have had two very good
roundtables with the Commission staff and outside experts to
discuss the recommendations.
I know that the organizations are certainly not all in
agreement; that would be an unusual thing. But we also know
that it is very important to hear the basis of your views, and
also important to solicit your thoughts on how to improve the
recommendations or provide solutions to the problems,
especially when it comes to TRICARE.
As I have mentioned in earlier hearings, we are truly
entering a new reality of fiscal pressures with a new
generation of citizens entering the military, and so we have to
look at this responsibly. I don't believe that doing nothing
will be an option for much longer, so how you come to frame
these issues and help us to make some of the decisions in the
future we value and we thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Heck. Thank you, Mrs. Davis.
We are joined today by an outstanding panel of
stakeholders. We will give each witness the opportunity to
present testimony and each member an opportunity to question
the witnesses.
We would respectfully remind the witnesses to summarize, to
the greatest extent possible, the high points of your written
testimony to 3 minutes because of the recent change in our vote
schedule. Your written comments and statements will be made
part of the hearing record.
I understand the clocks may not be working in the countdown
form for all of you, so we are going to go back to the old-
fashioned 2, 1, 30-second kind of cue cards behind me so that
you know where we are at in the process.
I ask unanimous consent to add written statements to the
record from the National Guard Association of the United
States, from MAZON: A Jewish Response to Hunger, and from the
National Association of Drug Stores.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
beginning on page 141.]
Dr. Heck. Let me welcome our panel: Mr. Scott Bousum,
Legislative Director for the Enlisted Association of the
National Guard of the United States; Mr. Brendon Gehrke, Senior
Legislative Associate, Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United
States; Colonel Mike Hayden, United States Air Force, Retired,
Director of Government Relations for the Military Officers
Association of America; Mr. Chris Neiweem, Legislative
Associate, Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America; Ms. Karen
Ruedisueli, Government Relations Deputy Director of the
National Military Family Association; and Mr. John Stovall,
Director of National Security for the American Legion.
With that, we will turn the clock over to Mr. Bousum, if
you want to begin with your 3 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT BOUSUM, LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, ENLISTED
ASSOCIATION OF THE NATIONAL GUARD OF THE UNITED STATES

Mr. Bousum. Thank you.
Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis, esteemed members of
the subcommittee, on behalf of 42,000 members of the Enlisted
Association of the National Guard of the United States
representing over 114,000 enlisted men and women of the Army
and Air National Guard, their families, survivors, and tens of
thousands of National Guard retirees, we welcome this
opportunity to submit testimony for the record regarding our
views concerning the Military Compensation and Retirement
Modernization Commission's recommendations.
The report is public evidence that the Commissioners and
their staff spent countless hours analyzing a gamut of military
compensation issues, and they should be publicly commended for
their efforts. The report will stimulate and has stimulated
some meaningful discussions that need to take place that affect
our National Guard members.
Let me begin by stating that we believe the Commissioners
set out to modernize systems currently in place. They did not
look for ways to cut spending off the backs of service members
and their families.
The fact that the Commissioners' recommendations save $31
billion from fiscal year 2016 to fiscal year 2020 by creating
flexible mechanisms for future service members, current service
members, and their families to choose health care and
retirement packages that fit their individual needs means that
success--means they successfully completed their mission.
The fiscal environment currently faced in the Department
[Department of Defense] puts Congress and the associations
before you today in unfamiliar territory of late. We are no
longer in a spend, spend, spend environment. Your colleagues on
the Budget Committee appear to have set a new tone, at least
for the time being.
In the spirit of the--one of the Commission's core
missions, retaining quality talent for 20 years, I would like
to briefly state a growing concern that readiness shortfalls
caused by less money toward training because of the budget
control caps and sequestration directly relate to poor
retention. If the service member does not get to do the job
that he or she signed up to do or does not feel prepared for
the fight, quality talent will leave the force.
As the discussion continues in the committee and on the
subcommittee, we look forward to working closely with you and
your staff on these recommendations.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bousum can be found in the
Appendix on page 40.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Mr. Gehrke.

STATEMENT OF BRENDON GEHRKE, SENIOR LEGISLATIVE ASSOCIATE,
VETERANS OF FOREIGN WARS OF THE UNITED STATES

Mr. Gehrke. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for inviting the VFW [Veterans of
Foreign Wars] to testify today on the Commission's
recommendations. My comments today will focus on recommendation
one.
While this recommendation is often misunderstood, we
believe that it will dramatically improve the current
retirement system. The impassioned debate on how to best
compensate service members, veterans, their survivors is as old
as the founding of this country.
In 1919 the American Legion and Veterans of Foreign Wars
argued that our members deserve separation pay to balance out
the difference between their modest military compensation and
the high compensation enjoyed by civilian industry workers. A
compensation measure worked its way through Congress by the
fall of 1922, but President Harding vetoed the bill to avoid
unnecessary government cost.
Undeterred, the Legion and VFW kept up the pressure and
succeeded in gaining passage of the World War Adjusted
Compensation Act of 1924. The Act was groundbreaking in that it
completely ended the indigenous components of previous military
pension legislation, and that it awarded all service members a
pension in the form of a 20-year endowment.
With the ending of two wars and DOD's [Department of
Defense's] continuing efforts to reduce personnel expenses, the
conversation about what it means to compensate and care for
service members is just as important today as it has been at
any other point in history.
There is a common military phrase that summarizes our
warrior ethos: Leave no man behind. Unfortunately, this ethos
does not translate to the current military retirement system,
which has left roughly 90 percent of all veterans behind their
civilian counterparts in saving for retirement.
Nearly 80 percent of full-time workers have access to
employer-sponsored retirement plans, and 95 percent of
employers with 401(k) plans made a matching contribution to
their employees. Unfortunately, the government contributes
nothing to the retirement of those who often are the most
deserving--those who bore the burden of battle.
Take, for example, Corporal Quentin Graves, from San Diego,
California. Corporal Graves deployed twice to Iraq in a 4-year
timeframe, earning a Purple Heart during each deployment.
Corporal Graves thought about reenlisting but didn't think he
would survive another tour.
Despite his sacrifices, he didn't receive any retirement
contribution from the government. However, if Corporal Graves
would have been employed by the private sector or in the
military under the Commission's proposed plan, he would have
received approximately $6,500 in an employer-sponsored
retirement plan. This relatively small investment by the
government would have compounded to nearly $100,000 for Mr.
Graves for when he reaches retirement age.
Another example is Staff Sergeant Alex Marovski, from
Norwich, Connecticut. Staff Sergeant Marovski enlisted in 1999.
He deployed to Kosovo in 2000 and reenlisted for 3 years in
2002.
He deployed to Iraq during the invasion, was stop-lossed in
2005, and deployed again to Iraq where he was catastrophically
wounded by an IED [improvised explosive device] in 2006. After
his release from stop-loss, Staff Sergeant Marovski was
discharged with a metal rod and fresh stitches in his arms, but
received nothing in the form of retirement compensation.
However, if Alex would have been working for another
government agency or in the military under the Commission's
proposed plan, he would have received approximately $20,000 in
retirement benefits, which would have compounded to over
$211,000 by the time he hit retirement age.
These examples show that if young service members aren't
saving today, they are losing the benefit of time compounding
the value of their money. That growth cannot be made up later.
In closing, ask yourself, if your son or daughter was about
to join the military and they had the choice between the
current system and the Commission's proposed system, which
system would you tell them to choose--a system that will
definitely prepare them for retirement, or a rigged system
where there is an 83 percent chance that they will receive
nothing in retirement for their service?
Thank you for your time, and I will gladly answer any
questions the committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gehrke can be found in the
Appendix on page 52.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Colonel Hayden.

STATEMENT OF COL MICHAEL HAYDEN, USAF (RET.), DIRECTOR,
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, MILITARY OFFICERS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA

Colonel Hayden. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis,
members of the committee, on behalf of the over 380,000 members
of the Military Officers Association of America [MOAA], we
welcome this opportunity to provide our views concerning the
Commission's report. MOAA sincerely appreciates the hard work
and analysis that went into the Commission's report.
We commend the Commissioners and their professional staff
for their extensive efforts. Their product provides the country
with an instrument that we can use as a catalyst to begin the
important thought discussions, analysis, and debates on vital
issues that directly affect our service men, women, retirees,
veterans, and their families, and their ability to ensure our
national security.
MOAA has reviewed the 15 recommendations, and overall we
support 10 with some varying degree of concern. Two we believe
require further study, and three we do not support.
In my statement I will focus on the ones we recommend for
further study: the retirement and health care proposals. As for
the retirement proposal, we are very concerned that the new
system lacks the drawing power to sustain service members to 20
years of service. As for the health care proposal, we are
concerned that the new system proposed would negatively impact
overall medical readiness.
Both of those recommendations produce a negative effect on
the pocketbook of those whom the government needs to serve for
a career of 20 years or greater. The combined effects of the
Commission's health care and retirement changes, if they were
fully implemented today, on an E-7's annual retirement value is
over $6,400 a year, for a loss of 27 percent, until they can
start to draw from their thrift savings plan at age 59\1/2\.
A complete overhaul of the retirement and health care
system, which itself serves 9.6 million beneficiaries, deserves
thoughtful and careful consideration. Some of the findings in
the Commission's report align with concerns raised by MOAA and
deserves addressing this expeditiously as possible, pending
deeper consideration of the broader issues.
Even so, the number one action Congress should take
immediately is to demand that DOD, without delay, reform
TRICARE under a truly unified military health care system, and
not just the service members' share of it. We are not
advocating usurping the Surgeon General's title 10
responsibilities, but without a unified budget and oversight,
TRICARE as we know it will remain administratively stovepiped
and suboptimized.
Service members stationed around the world should not have
to worry if they have selected the appropriate retirement fund
or the appropriate health care coverage for their families.
Making radical changes to the core retention programs, military
health care and retirement, carries a significant risk of
causing unintended negative effects to retention.
Our primary concern is the AVF's [All-Volunteer Force's]
health, welfare, and sustainability, and most important element
of the AVF is the experienced, high-quality, midgrade NCO
[noncommissioned officer] and officer corps.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Colonel Hayden can be found in
the Appendix on page 66.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Mr. Neiweem.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS NEIWEEM, LEGISLATIVE ASSOCIATE, IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN VETERANS OF AMERICA

Mr. Neiweem. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of Iraq
and Afghanistan Veterans of America [IAVA] and our nearly
400,000 members and supporters, thank you for the opportunity
to share our views on the final report and recommendations of
the Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization
Commission.
We applaud the Commission for putting forth some bold
measures that merit serious consideration. However, we also
look upon its report and recommendations as a mixed bag. Some
of what is called for is consistent with recommendations we and
other military and veterans service and advocacy groups have
long supported, while others raise serious questions and
concerns for IAVA and our members.
First, an area in which we are in strong agreement with the
Commission is the need for increased DOD-VA [Department of
Veterans Affairs] cooperation up to and including the sharing
of systems and information. The process of transitioning from
Active Duty to veteran status is still disjointed, and OEF/OIF
[Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom] veterans
often report gaps in care and assistance when leaving the DOD
and entering the VA system.
While the report cited increased interdepartmental
information-sharing, it also acknowledged poor oversight and
inadequate accountability. The situation not only negatively
impacts the new veterans' health care experience, but it also
prolongs the process of applying for disability compensation
benefits after separation. Further, it frustrates the VA's
ongoing efforts to process disability and compensation claims
in a timely manner.
There is no doubt to us that the goal of quality continuous
care requires a fully interoperable--preferably joint, but at
least fully interoperable--data record, as well as a joint DOD-
VA drug formulary, which I know the committee will be
addressing at a later date.
Additionally, we strongly agree with the Commission on the
urgent need for increased financial literacy and benefit
stewardship through education for service members and their
families. We see the need is not only with countless examples
of predatory lending targeting service members, but also some
for-profit college institutions' laser-beam focus on service
members' valuable post-9/11 G.I. Bill benefits.
IAVA is continuing to take a deeper dive into the
Commission's recommendations regarding alternate treatment plan
packages. In a recent survey of our members, 36 percent of
respondents felt the military retirement system should be
reformed. Of those respondents, when allowed to select multiple
options, 67 percent favored a 401(k)-style benefit for
noncareerists, and 33 percent favored increasing the overall
value of the current retirement benefit system, and 59 percent
favored a partial early retirement benefit for 10 or 15 years
of service.
Of those IAVA members surveyed, who are, by definition,
combat veterans, there is a fundamental belief that it is
fundamentally unfair that one could serve 10 or 12 years with
three, four, five, or more deployments and leave the military
with absolutely no retirement benefit at all, yet a careerist,
and possibly never even deployed, could be entitled to a full
benefit package.
Therefore, IAVA is open to reforms that would amend the
current system to allow not-career troops the opportunity for
some retirement benefits. We will continue to analyze and
assess the potential value of the Commission's options while
understanding and factoring in the long-term goal of
maintaining a ready and relevant 21st century force.
Mr. Chairman, I will just go ahead and close here.
Apologize, this microphone doesn't work, so hopefully that was
loud enough. Happy to answer any questions you may have for
IAVA.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Neiweem can be found in the
Appendix on page 82.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Ms. Ruedisueli.

STATEMENT OF KAREN RUEDISUELI, GOVERNMENT RELATIONS DEPUTY
DIRECTOR, NATIONAL MILITARY FAMILY ASSOCIATION

Ms. Ruedisueli. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak
on behalf of the National Military Family Association [NMFA]
and the families we serve about the Commission's
recommendations. While our written statement addresses several
recommendations in detail, today I will focus primarily on the
Commission's TRICARE Choice proposal.
Any changes to the military health care benefit must
address the unique conditions of service and the extraordinary
sacrifices demanded of service members and their families. With
this guiding principle in mind, we believe the Commission's
TRICARE Choice proposal merits further study and serious
consideration.
The Commission's health care proposal has the potential to
provide military families with a more robust and valuable
health care benefit than one that would address many
beneficiary complaints about the current system. To achieve
these benefits, we believe a lengthy implementation period is
vital and must include mechanisms for readily adjusting
policies, processes, and commercial plans to ensure TRICARE
Choice achieves the desired outcomes.
While we support in principle the concept of moving
families to high-quality commercial plans, there are three
areas where more information and analysis are needed before we
can fully endorse the Commission's proposal. First and most
importantly, we believe a change of this magnitude demands a
more thorough analysis of the potential impact on military
treatment facilities to avoid unintended consequences for
beneficiaries and military medical readiness.
Second, military families are concerned about out-of-pocket
costs under TRICARE Choice. Active Duty families worry how a
health care allowance based on averages will support larger-
than-average families or those with special needs.
Third, TRICARE Choice implementation details are lacking in
the Commission's proposal, and we need assurances on the
specifics.
Before I wrap up, I would like to briefly address a non-
health care issue that many military families find concerning:
the Commission's proposal regarding G.I. Bill transferability.
The Commission recommends eliminating the housing stipend for
dependents starting in 2017.
Our association understands and appreciates that G.I. Bill
transferability is a retention tool and must be optimized for
greater effectiveness and modified as retention goals change,
and we support changes on a forward basis. However, reducing
the value of the transferred G.I. Bill benefit after extracting
the wartime service commitment is unacceptable. Service members
with existing G.I. Bill transferability contracts must be
grandfathered in at the full benefit value.
In an era of budget constraints, when military families see
any proposed changes in benefits as just another attempt to cut
costs, it is important to rebuild their trust and show them
their service is valued. We hope the Commission's proposals
prompt a thorough discussion on military compensation and
benefits, including the best way to deliver the health care
benefit to military families.
Thank you, and I look forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ruedisueli can be found in
the Appendix on page 88.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Mr. Stovall.

STATEMENT OF JOHN STOVALL, DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL SECURITY, THE
AMERICAN LEGION

Mr. Stovall. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the 2.3
million members of the American Legion I appreciate the
opportunity to provide our views on the Military Compensation
and Retirement Modernization Commission's recently released
recommendations.
The Commission put many months of hard work into developing
and refining the 15 proposals, and reviewing these proposals,
the American Legion was chiefly mindful of three guiding
concerns: first, to preserve and to protect the integrity and
strength of the All-Volunteer Force; second, to recognize that
many of these recommendations are interconnected by their very
nature, and considering reform means to consider the impact
that they will have not solely on the force, but on the other
recommendations; and finally, that while it is easy to think of
these recommendations in terms of their impact on the DOD, some
proposals will have profound impacts on other agencies of the
government, especially the VA.
The American Legion believes strongly in protecting the
integrity of the All-Volunteer Force. As such, the American
Legion is concerned by any changes to the military system which
would reduce the incentive to enlist or reenlist.
The American Legion urges Congress to maintain continuous
oversight of DOD personnel policies to ensure satisfactory
retention, recruitment, morale, health, and effectiveness of
the Armed Forces. The American Legion is committed to ensuring
that any benefit in force at the time of initial enlistment is
a sacred promise that must remain in force throughout the
entire military career and retirement of a service member.
Within the scope of those guidelines set forth to protect
the morale and motivation of those who serve, there is still
room for reform of benefits within the military.
Where is there redundancy? How can efficiency be improved
without sacrificing vital programs? Where programs appear to
overlap, can the individual components of those programs be
protected through any merger so critical functions are not
lost?
These are difficult questions and are unlikely to be
answered in a few simple weeks of analysis.
The American Legion is diligently working to evaluate the
proposals of the Commission, to use the proposals as a jumping
off point for discussion, and to try to tackle the thorny
problems planners face preparing the military for 21st century
operations. We look forward to continued discussion with
Congress, the DOD, and other stakeholders to work toward a
solution.
And finally, because of the interconnected nature of the
military and veterans side of the equation, the American Legion
would call on this committee to reach out to and conduct joint
hearings with their counterparts on Veterans Affairs to explore
the impact of these changes both to the Active Duty service
members as well as the veterans who will benefit from future
programs.
And to wrap up, Mr. Chairman, the American Legion is an
eager participant in this discussion and forthcoming
discussions, and we are happy to answer any questions you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stovall can be found in the
Appendix on page 123.]
Dr. Heck. Great.
Thank you all for your testimony. Again, I apologize for
the short 3 minutes each of you were provided, but we really
want to make sure we allowed enough time to get to the
questions of the members.
So we will begin a 5-minute round of questioning by the
members. We have been joined by the gentleman from Oklahoma,
Mr. Russell.
I ask unanimous consent that he be allowed to participate
and ask questions after all the members of the subcommittee
have had an opportunity to ask questions.
Without objection, so ordered.
Okay, so I will start--put myself on the clock. So again,
appreciate all of you and your testimony.
You know, in looking through the 15 recommendations I
think, you know, in my view there are 3 that are the real heavy
lift: the retirement, the health care, and the commissary
exchange issues. The rest probably to some degree or another,
with some minor modification, make reasonable sense.
So I would like to, one, talk a little bit about the
retirement recommendation. It seemed that obviously there is
some differing of opinion amongst the members of the panel,
which is to be expected.
But I guess it is all about how you look at the benefit and
how you calculate and make sure--we have all got to make sure
that we are looking at the same numbers. And so again,
remembering that this is prospective, so nobody who is
currently retired is going to be affected, and one of the
Commission's charges was to look at how the millennials, those
folks coming into the service, what are they looking for, in
order to try to attract people to come into the service.
So, yes, so you get 40 percent of your annuity going
forward, as opposed to the 50 percent at 20 years, and you
start to build up your 401(k), vesting after 2 years, and 1
percent automatic matching up to 5. And yes, as Colonel Hayden
pointed out, when you retire at 20 the amount that you are
going to get paid from year 20 till you have reached full
retirement age is going to be less than you otherwise would
get--in some cases significantly less.
But if you look at what your lifetime--if you go out to,
like, age 85 and you kick in the 401(k), overall it seems to
appear, using conservative TSP [Thrift Savings Plan] numbers,
that you are actually making more money when you go out over
your lifetime, from age 65 to, let's say, age 85.
Colonel Hayden, your response to the idea that in the long
term you might be making more even though in the short term you
might be getting less when--and I hate to use this phrase
because a lot of folks have used it--but while you are
considered a working-age retiree and expected to actually have
another job after you leave at, let's say, age 38 or age 40?
Colonel Hayden. We have done quite a bit of analysis, and
actually in conjunction with the Commission back and forth,
taking a look at the variables. The one aspect associated with
the current retirement system is it is extremely predictable.
You can go out to the calculators that are on the DOD Web
site and see exactly what the paycheck is going to be. And you
true it in terms of a paycheck, what the retirement check will
be and what it will provide.
But under this proposal, it depends on variables. It
depends exactly on what the service member is going to
contribute. Will they be making the--we know that they get a 1
percent government contribution, if you would, but will they
also be getting, if you would, the--will they be making the 3
percent match, they make the 5 percent match?
Will they be doing it at the very beginning on the onset
when they first come into the service, and then carry that out
until they retire, or until they leave the service?
So the question is how that value will grow and, of course,
it depends on the economic aspects along with it. Mentioned,
for instance, the average TSP. If they get a 7.3 percent rate
of return, that is wonderful and it will be a richer benefit at
the time they leave at age 85, if you would, when the actuaries
say you are not supposed to be around after that.
But what it really comes down to is if you only get a 5
percent rate of return you will never make up the difference.
There will still be a gap.
There are other proponents associated with this. The little
components associated with the proposal, the first this is for
those that stay beyond 20 years of service, they don't make up
the difference.
So there is that portion that would have to be fixed if you
were looking at the retirement proposals to continue doing
dollar matching beyond 20 years of service. And then the other
piece is to take a hard look at the disability aspects.
Those that receive a disability compensation under this
proposal--disability retirement, that they are now going to be
receiving a 20 percent less if--when you look at the
differences between that in currency and the values that then
come into play. So that, because the multiplier is less, they
are going to be seeing a less of income, if you would, the net,
based on this type of retirement proposal.
Yes, they will have some type of transportable career
device, but our bigger concern is by providing a transportable
career device, does it incentivize more people to leave or more
people to stay?
Dr. Heck. Well, I think the Commission tried to, you know,
look at that with the idea of the continuation pay is at
roughly year 12, again, giving some leeway to the Secretary to
slide that either right or left depending upon the shaping of
the force and what was necessary. So, you know, as the
retention tool, let's say at 12 you get, you know, a
significant amount of continuation pay; if you agree to serve 4
more that puts you at 16, when most people will say, ``Okay,
now I am within 4 of 20. I might as well stay.''
I am going to stop there because my time is almost up.
Hopefully we will get around to a second round of questions.
And I will recognize the ranking member, Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And perhaps to just ask all of you whether--it's the
discussions that we are going to be having of trying to really
get more detail and more study, is that something that you feel
comfortable with generally, as opposed to, you know, basically
saying that the provisions that are included within the
Commission report are things that you just really don't want to
go beyond? Is it fair to say that you are comfortable with the
discussions going forward with more detail?
Mr. Gehrke. We would encourage Congress to move forward
this year with the retirement portion. We think it is high time
for a change, and that there is some modernization and really
that the current system is unfair.
By not providing retirement parity between civilian and
military sectors, we fear that we are sending a message to the
troops that the country does not value their military service.
And if you look at how troops are rating their pay now compared
to how they are rating it 5, 6 years ago, when they were
getting tax exemptions and large bonuses and incentive pays,
they are rating it much lower at 44 percent.
In addition, you are seeing a 10 percent drop in people's
desire to reenlist. A lot of that is due to lack of pay raises,
to perception that Congress and DOD is taking them for granted
and trying to lower their personnel experiences.
We feel that if there is--start to be a retirement
contribution immediately, or as soon as possible, that service
members will get that TSP annual statement and see what the
government is contributing and see that the government values
their service, and see the long-term value of staying in that
service watching that interest compound, as well as set them on
a retirement path.
As for the health care portion, we feel that needs to move
forward but it is going to need a lot of thorough study to
understand any unintended consequences.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
You know, rather than maybe trying to hear from everybody,
I will go on to the health care. I am sure we will have a
chance to double back on the retirement, as well.
But I think in many ways,--I--we all know that there are
challenges in TRICARE, and I wonder if you could speak to what
you see needs to be changed or improved--not necessarily
focusing on the Commission recommendations per se, but where do
you see the problems? What would you like to see come forward,
really, as a way to change the system?
I think that there is a need to possibly have retirees pay
more than the low premiums that they are paying now. That might
be something that people have talked about in the past.
But what areas of that do you think actually you would like
to see more improvements in the TRICARE system itself?
Mr. Bousum. Ranking Member Davis, if I may, from the
Guard's perspective who are currently serving, there is a lot
of friction when they are called to Active Duty and having to
get off of, say, their employer-sponsored health care plan or--
and they are mostly concerned about their dependents, so when
they move over their--say their child can no longer see the
same doctor that he or she saw before, and so that stoppage of
service that they are looking for is--that is problematic. That
is something that our currently-serving would like to see
changed.
Colonel Hayden. One of the things that we are--we have been
looking at is that we believe that the health care delivery
should actually change its entire model for TRICARE, going more
to, if you would, value-based type of delivery of health care
versus the fee-for-service that we have, if you would, just
kind of the volume--the way providers are actually reimbursed.
And we have created within TRICARE is we have created
incentives, if you would, where, because we have undercut, if
you would, the way we are providing payments back to the
providers, we are actually limiting the network. We are going
to constrict it.
We have also done it with the--limiting the prime service
areas. We have restricted the benefits, so it becomes, as some
have said, instead of TRICARE it is try-to-find-care, and that
becomes the problem.
Once you have access, once you have found the care, it is--
people have--at least what we are getting from our own members
is that they are very satisfied with the care once they have
gotten it. But it is the actual access to the care that is the
major problem.
And part of it is that the Department itself has done it to
themselves. And even the Commission highlighted this, that they
have done it to themselves.
So what we have been doing is the way to find the--to try
to improve the benefit has been to try to shift more cost onto
the beneficiaries, have them pay for more, and they are getting
less of a benefit at the end of the day. From what we are
seeing, the one positive aspect associated with the Commissions
is they are asking you to pay more but you are going to
supposedly get better access at the end of the day.
What we need to do is to take a look at TRICARE and see if
we can get rid of some of the policy aspect that they are
doing, come up with a unified what we think is a central budget
authority that is looking at that enterprise completely and not
this stovepipe--the services are going to restrict this, they
are going to turn a MTF [military treatment facility] and shut
it down, or constrict it, and they are not looking at what it
does to the enterprise overall. And we can see some savings
there.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have a question on the quality of life programs,
some of them, and one is the consolidation of commissary and
exchange systems into one entity. Many of the veterans service
organizations cite concerns over the potential of diminished
access to savings if the Defense Commissary Agency and the
various military exchange systems are consolidated into one
organization.
If combining these organizations achieves overall
efficiencies and cost savings to the DOD and the current level
of savings are realized by service members and retirees, then
would this reform continue--then would you continue to oppose
this reform? And if so, why?
Would anybody like to comment on that?
Mr. Gehrke. The VFW does not oppose the reform, and, in
fact, we support it so our--so much as we can retain the
overall value of the commissary savings. If we can do that we
are all for finding efficiencies and merging the two, is
ensuring that the savings stay there for the service member.
Mr. Bousum. For brevity's sake, I agree.
Mr. Coffman. Anyone else?
Ms. Ruedisueli. We have some concerns about the
consolidation. Specifically, it seems to eliminate the
assurances of the 30 percent savings, which is a critical
component of non-cash compensation for military families.
And we are also concerned because the--changes to the
commissary and exchange, the consolidation, if it doesn't go
well it has the potential to impact so many military families
that rely not only on the savings, but also on the access to
groceries in remote and isolated areas as well as overseas.
Mr. Coffman. But simply by merely consolidating and
creating administrative savings from that, you have concerns
about that?
Ms. Ruedisueli. Well, we do feel that it introduces risk
that the 30 percent savings might be eroded or that the access
might be eroded.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Anyone else?
Mr. Stovall. Congressman, I would echo Ms. Ruedisueli's
concerns. However, to your point, if efficiencies could be
realized through a consolidation without a net negative impact
to military families, either in terms of payment or
accessibility, it is not something that we would oppose.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Anyone else?
Colonel Hayden. We are also in support of the same comments
out of NMFA and Karen. I think the bigger issue also that you
have to look at is the--what we also put at risk with this is
the possibility of the MWR [Morale, Welfare, and Recreation]
funds, and that is another piece that we think needs to be
reviewed.
We know that there is a study that has been directed in the
defense bill this year, so would like to see what the outcome
of that study is also, before jumping into this proposal.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Many of the veterans service organizations on the
retirement issue have raised several relevant concerns
regarding the proposed retirement restructure and presented to
the Commission. That said, maybe somebody can identify what--
and I think a lot of you said it, but if we could summarize it
by going just down in order, let's start left--my left to
right, as to what you agree with in terms of the Commission's
recommendations about reforming the retirement system. And name
the most salient issue that you agree with the Commission's
report, if there is one.
Yes?
Mr. Bousum. Yes, sir.
We agree with it. Actually, I would like to answer the one
thing that we have a concern about, and that is the remoteness
of readiness centers and armories, as far as the financial
literacy piece, that the guardsman may not have the access he
or she needs to make the decisions--the recommendations with
input on the family.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Mr. Gehrke. We agree with the recommendation in its
entirety, recognizing that you can't contribute to a service
member's TSP account without lowering that 50 percent to the 40
percent, as well as you can't give guardsmen the option of
receiving a lump sum retirement package immediately when they
retire from service without making the changes.
So we feel one begets the other, and I think what makes us
feel comfortable with supporting the entire recommendation is,
as the chairman alluded to, is that the overall value of that
individual's retirement is not hurt, as well as they are
grandfathered, whoever is in the current system. So with those
two things being said, we support the recommendation in its
entirety.
Mr. Coffman. Real quick I will let you go, right down the
line real fast.
Colonel Hayden. Then only thing that--you have heard a
couple of my concerns, but if there was one thing that we do
see in this, and something that we will--we also support, is
that this does address the fairness issue, and it does provide
something to those that leave short of 20 years some type of
transportable benefit.
Mr. Neiweem. And so I would say, you know 67 percent of our
members support a 401(k) style. I think if out of these 15
recommendations if one is going to be prioritized, it should be
compensation or retirement reform.
And frankly, many of our members, by 11 or 12 years, are a
little bit banged up from deployments, from fighting the wars
or being out there at the front lines. And the pull of the 20
years, they are just not in that position to get that far, so
having some sort of opportunity there. And, you know, the
debate about whether reducing 50 percent investing to 40
percent, you know, I don't think that we believe that is going
to end retention, as many folks that retire are still working
age.
Ms. Ruedisueli. We do have some concerns, but focusing on
what we agree with, we do agree that it addresses the fairness
issue. We also feel that it encourages a very positive habit
early in life--that is, saving for retirement.
Mr. Stovall. I would agree with the other witnesses that we
need to address the roughly 80 percent of people who get out
without a transportable retirement benefit. However, we would
caution that it is critical if we go that route that we invest
in financial literacy for service members.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for the
additional time. I think it speaks to the subordinate
relationship between the Army and the Marine Corps, and I yield
back.
Dr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Coffman.
In that regard, Sergeant Major, you are recognized.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Chairman. And I do want to take a
moment and thank the chairman and the ranking member for a very
fair and thoughtful approach to an issue that is very--it is a
big lift, and you have both done it in a manner that is very
much appreciated.
And that leads me to having you here. I think this is an
incredibly important panel. I thank all of you.
You are literally representing millions of folks and the
families of our warriors, and we must get this right, first and
foremost for national security, to maintain the All-Volunteer
Force, and to keep faith with those warriors, both past,
present, and future. And so the thoughtfulness--and I want to
thank all of you--that you put into your testimony and as we
are starting to get this feedback is absolutely critical.
This could very well have profound impacts, which I think
it will; but it also has the potential to show how democracy
should work correctly. And so I am, I think cautiously
optimistic, as all of you. I think change is always difficult
for all of us, but I think we need to have these discussions.
And I think a couple things, if I could point out, some of
you mentioned on this. And I don't--while they are not
necessarily hard-core, these--the big three, if you will, of
recommendations, I would argue that the long-term impact might
be even greater.
This issue of collaboration of DOD and VA--I have spoken
about this 'til I am blue in the face for decades. It is still
promoting inefficiencies. It is wasting taxpayer dollars. It is
causing undue angst for us.
And I think to not look at that in greater detail is a lost
opportunity. And I say that with the sense of a little bit of a
chip on the shoulder that when they are coming for reforms,
perhaps you need to reform the bigger system first before you
look at the E-5s.
And that is the thing that I think we need to be very
clear--and I have said it in here, and again, I applaud all of
you on this--my concern is as much cultural as anything. When
the representative of the family says, ``We have got a little
bit of concern,'' that is a big red flag that people are
talking about it amongst themselves.
And so when you mentioned, ma'am, this idea of the
transferability of G.I. Bill, I have said it in here before,
taking that guarantee away once it was promised is an absolute
nonstarter. Do not do this. Do not break faith. Go back and
rethink that one through. Those are the types of things that
have profound cultural impact.
So that brings me to some of the things that you have
mentioned, and my colleagues have asked wonderful questions.
Mr. Coffman's question was one where I was getting at on this.
The thing I would ask all of you is, is it an accepted
frame that we have to take from the 20-year folks to make the
transferability a part of this? Is that just an absolute given?
We can't do both? We can't retain the mid-career folks and have
the 20 years and do something on portability?
And I ask this just to put it out there. I know the
Commission has done incredibly thoughtful work and thought it
through, but it seems to me now we have pitted 20-year career
folks against others and that was never anyone's thought.
So do you think that is--that has to be the way it has to
be done?
Colonel Hayden. Personally, I don't. The question is what
is it that you need in order to sustain the force and meet the
force profiles? And the current retirement system has done
that.
As an old assignments guy, I enjoyed having the retirement
system the way it was. I could put people on remote assignments
and these other types of things late in their career, and I
knew I had them to take them to 20.
There is a course of nature associated with it, but it does
really tend to see who is going to be able to stick around. It
gave you that flexibility, if you would, as the services. Some
think of it as very rigid, the current----
Mr. Walz. There is a strange mindset in the military, too,
of a bunch of people who have to be incredibly flexible and
have their lives ripped out from under them at any given moment
really like stability, risk aversion, and assurances. And so I
come back again to this issue.
We are framing this entire issue that it has already been
determined--and I absolutely agree that it is unfair for
someone to do tours and not get there. That is an absolute
given.
But I also have deep concerns that we are changing it on
that other end that has been a great way to maintain and hold
folks who could do better in the private sector but choose to
stay.
So, anybody else comments on that? If that frame is set, if
this cake is baked already, and our choice is now either to not
do anything and keep this current system or to go with the
proposal alone, I am not certain that is it.
Mr. Gehrke. So I guess it is not either/or in theory. You
could contribute to a 401(k) for every service member, as the
Commission recommended, and keep the 50 percent system,
realizing that the costs are going to skyrocket, and that is
great by us if you want to make that decision. If you don't
want to make that decision, we think the Commission's
recommendations is the next best alternative.
With that being said, the Commission also used a proven
model by RAND in order to calculate what the force structure
needs were. So it wasn't necessarily an arbitrary decision by
the Commission. They used a scientific model, and I think that
needs to be taken into consideration.
However, again, if you guys want to contribute to the TSP
accounts for every service member, and why not bump it up even
higher and keep this same 50 percent, we--the VFW would
strongly support----
Mr. Walz. I want people to think, as I give back my time,
to think of the frame that we have been putting on this. Our
greatest asset is our fighting force, and if someone says that
is the cost, we need to assume and talk amongst ourselves, is
that a cost we are willing to absorb or are they telling us
that.
So I yield back.
Mr. MacArthur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I also want to thank all of you for being here. I agree
with my colleague, this is a very important hearing because you
do represent millions of stakeholders, and certainly part of
this deliberation is what is important in the--on the military
side and what we can afford and all of that, but it is equally
important on the side of the people that you represent, the
other stakeholders. So I appreciate you being here.
Uncertainty and fear of change are two big drivers of human
behavior. And of all these recommendations, it seems to me that
the TRICARE recommendations are the most fraught with
uncertainty, fear of change--how it affects cost, how it
affects access, choice, all of those things.
So I want to stay there for just a couple of minutes.
Mr. Stovall, you laid out some--sort of a framework for
evaluating this, and you mentioned three things: preserve and
protect the strength of an All-Volunteer Force, the
interconnectivity of the recommendations, and the impact on
other agencies. And I think those are important.
I might add a couple, and that would be optimizing the
service member experience, which may be different than just
protecting the strength of the force. And I would also add
sustainability, because whatever we do has to be done in the
context of finite budgets, and so we have to create something
sustainable.
Recommendation six, the TRICARE that we have talked a lot
about, calls for increased use of commercial insurance plans.
It gives choice to Active Duty members, not so much choice for
non-Active Duty.
And there are things I like about it: its access to larger
panels of doctors; increased choice; the ability to move and
flex and adjust the plans without an act of Congress,
literally, which TRICARE requires.
And yet, a number of you have expressed a concern about it,
and I would just ask you to--particularly Colonel Hayden and
Ms. Ruedisueli, you have both spoken about concerns with it,
and I would like you just to develop those a little bit more
for the panel--or for the hearing.
Ms. Ruedisueli. You know, military families understand that
military medical readiness is critical. I mean, we are sending
our service members out there and we want to know that the
military medical personnel are appropriately trained to respond
to battlefield injuries, so that is one of our--we understand
that that must come first. And if this plan were to compromise
military medical readiness, it would be a show stopper.
Mr. MacArthur. Well, let's stay there for a moment, because
you both mentioned that. And I understand that you don't want
to have military medical facilities sitting unused during
normal times, but are they really doing the same kinds of
things? Is the normal day-to-day care of a military family
commensurate with battlefield care and the kind of readiness
that you are talking about?
Ms. Ruedisueli. You know, the report and I think common
sense would suggest no; that, you know, care for ear infections
and strep throat and delivering babies probably doesn't
contribute as much as it should to military medical readiness.
I think our concern is that, you know, what happens if
there is a mass exodus of beneficiaries from the direct care
system once you throw open the doors and, you know, provide
unlimited access to civilian care, as well as introducing
copays within the MTFs, which has not been done before. That is
our concern is, you know, will the MTFs be viable if the bulk
of their core business walks away?
We also have concerns kind of on the flip side of that from
the military family perspective. What happens if the services
decide that some of these MTFs that are located in remote areas
like Fort Polk, Louisiana, or Fort Riley, Kansas--what if they
are not necessary for military medical readiness anymore and
those are shut down and our families are left? Well, you have
got your commercial health insurance, but unfortunately, the
civilian provider assets aren't sufficient to treat our
military families.
Those are our two main concerns.
Mr. MacArthur. And, Colonel Hayden.
Colonel Hayden. And I will piggyback on that because part
of it is that the MTFs provide the family readiness aspect
along with it, not just the military member readiness piece and
their medical care and treatment, but also for the families,
especially in those remote areas.
And the thing that TRICARE does also right now is it
provides predictability for that care, where a family would go
from one location to the next with the multiple PCS [permanent
change of station] moves and things that take place over a
career. So that has some predictability along with it, where
under this you are going to be shopping for what would be that
insurance product in that new area, and some--and that is kind
of where we look at the ECHO [Extended Care Health Option]
proposal that is in there along with it. Is that proposal going
to be there? Is that same ECHO program or the autism program
that you were with at Base X going to be at Base Y?
And so that is the other readiness piece that you have to
look at. From our perspective, the current system actually
tends to capture that retiree population and even some of
that--the medical treatment that is done for families, and it
uses that towards medical readiness. And that captured
population is available, then, under the current TRICARE--
under----
Mr. MacArthur. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Dr. Heck. Ms. Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, to all of our witnesses today for the work
that you do representing the millions of stakeholders, whether
they be service men and women, veterans, military retirees, or
military families.
My question actually adds onto Congressman MacArthur's
notes about health care quality and your comments, Ms.
Ruedisueli--that is--I have a tough name too. That is okay.
I represent Fort Drum, which is in New York's 21st District
in northern New York in Jefferson County, and our health care
is provided off post to our service men and women. We have a
very unique partnership with Samaritan Hospital, and it is
unlike any other Army installation across the country.
The same goes for our education system. Our military
families aren't educated on post; they go to school in the
public school system, along with other members of the broader
community.
My question is, how do the recommendations regarding the
Federal Employee Health Benefit program--how would that have an
effect specifically on soldiers who are serving at Fort Drum in
the 10th Mountain Division because of the unique relationship
we have with hospitals?
Ms. Ruedisueli. I never thought I would feel so fortunate
to have spent a few years at Fort Drum, but I am very familiar
with what you are talking about. You know, I don't see that it
would have that much of an impact. I mean, right now, as you
mentioned, there is a very strong relationship. Most families
receive the bulk of their care out in the civilian network.
I think where the changes would occur is families would
still have to, under the new plan, be educated to pick the
right commercial health plan so that they have got the
appropriate coverage that fits their family's needs. I think
that would be more complicated than it is now, where because
the bulk of the medical care is automatically provided off
post, families are simply--they are considered TRICARE Prime,
they realize there will be no out-of-pocket expenses. As long
as they follow the referral and authorization rules it is very
straightforward.
Under the commercial plans there would be more education
needed, but I think people could achieve pretty much the same
results by picking the right plans.
Ms. Stefanik. And then my follow-up is on the education
system. So the report discusses a military dependent student
identifier. How would that be utilized for an installation like
Fort Drum, where students go to school off post in a non-
military school?
Ms. Ruedisueli. One of the benefits of the military student
identifier is that it allows aggregate reporting of military
student performance. So it would allow us to track how military
students are doing on standard measures of academic
performance, whether it be graduation rates, absenteeism,
college acceptance.
Those would all be valuable information to have as we
decided where to direct resources to installations that do
educate their students on post, but it would also be helpful to
understand how the local communities are doing with our
military students, as well.
Ms. Stefanik. Great. Thank you for the answers.
I think that Fort Drum's model is quite unique, and it is
actually a model for other military installations across the
country in terms of the high quality of health care provided
and the--how intertwined our community is with Fort Drum. And
thank you for your time at Fort Drum.
I yield back.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Russell, recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Russell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
your indulgence in letting me join you today.
And thanks, for the panelists, for all that you represent.
I guess a couple of important questions come to my mind.
One, when the draft was eliminated, part of the retention
to get people to 20 was to provide good incentives. And I have
not heard any discussion addressing the retirements as being
retainer pay. They are not property.
We, when we retire from the service, are on half rations
for half duty and are subject to recall until the day we die.
During the Gulf War I recall a 67-year-old pharmacist who had
served in World War II being recalled back to duty, quite to
his surprise.
And so I have not heard anyone in any of these proposals
address the retainer pay issue and what that means. Would
someone care to address that?
Colonel Hayden. You are absolutely right. There is still
that retainer aspect associated with the current retirement
system, that you can still be recalled and brought back.
And we actually used that during my time on the Joint Staff
on the Air Staff. We used it for the most recent conflicts
after 9/11. We are bringing people back on and out of
retirement status and back on Active Duty in order to meet some
of the critical skills that the Air Force needed at the time.
So it is an element that is important to remember. What we
are doing with this proposal, there is that portion that is
being devalued. It is providing, if you would, what would be a
401(k) that is more of that transportable career device.
But our concern is is that--still that draw, that whole
aspect of drawing people out to 20. I would be more than happy
to give a transportable career device to everybody who leaves,
and that is one of the things that we----
Mr. Russell. Well, and I think we have to address the
issue, because it gets into not only retention of the force,
but it gets into retention of skills in times of national
emergency. And I have not heard anyone in any of the reports or
looking at any of these things that addresses the issue, and I
think it is vital.
A second one that I have not heard addressed is because
retirements are retainer pay, they hold certain legal
differences over a 401(k). Now, the Uniformed Spouse Protection
Act, in the early--late 1980s, I guess, it tried to address
some of that to compare it more towards property, but it left
certain provisions still unique to what retainer was.
And that may not sound like something understandable, but
what it means is this, is that if you serve 3 years--and I know
a constituent who lives in Edmond, Oklahoma. He was the--one of
the sergeant--the chief master sergeants of the Air Force.
He married within 2 years. By the third year, as a young
buck sergeant, his wife left him. Two years later he married a
bride that he had for the next 30 years.
However, when he retired with 35 years service from the Air
Force, wife number one came knocking at the door for 50 percent
of his retirement. That is a problem.
And so, you know, we are digging into things that it sounds
good--we talk about portability, we talk about 401(k), and all
of that is appreciated. But there are some serious retention
issues here that we have to address before I am ready to dive
onto any of this.
As a military retiree, I get it, having raised five kids in
uniform--I should say my spouse, as I was gone on multiple
deployments. And I do share your concerns on the military docs
and the readiness. I know our chairman appreciates much of
that, as well, in his capacity.
Those are important factors for readiness, and I would hope
that as we look at these things that we could address that.
And the last question I have for whoever would like to
answer it, you know, pays are set by law. Having pushed
infantry soldiers for much of my adult life, you know, if you
give Joe the choice between $35 or $75 to buy the best
retirement plan for the end of his career, I can tell you what
he is going to do. He is going to opt for the cheapest plan if
he is forced to take a plan at all.
And so how will you address--do you envision any penalties
that will come about if you leave before 20 years service? Is
there benefit if you stay longer? Because if you make this
transportable before 10 years, I fear that our already
dwindling force will get very much smaller.
And I yield to whoever would like to answer that.
Mr. Gehrke. So I think, as the Commission pointed out, that
it would be an automatically opt-in for the 401(k), so they
would be contributing automatically, immediately from day one.
And I think with the financial literacy, being a dumb Marine
myself, enlisted type who served with a light armored
reconnaissance, same unit as Congressman Coffman, I can still
do my numbers and I can understand the compounding interest of
that 401(k) and the long-term benefit that it would have for
me.
But that financial literacy part is crucial, because they
have to understand that that is part of the benefit.
And then I think the retention pay is also a crucial part,
which Congress or the Department should be able to lower
whenever they want, and that should be able to keep people in
and pull them to those 10 years.
Mr. Russell. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Knight.
All right, well they haven't rung the bell yet so we will
continue.
One of the Commissioners during their presentation when
talking about the health care proposal basically said that
TRICARE was broken and that it couldn't be fixed. Kind of
scorched earth, come on in and start from the ground and build
something up.
Real quick, this is a simple yes or no: Do you believe that
TRICARE is that broken that it cannot be fixed and it needs to
be replaced with something else?
Mr. Bousum.
Mr. Bousum. The majority of members of my association would
say no, it is not broken.
Dr. Heck. Okay.
Mr. Gehrke.
Mr. Gehrke. TRICARE is in a death spiral.
Dr. Heck. Okay. Yes or no? Come on, Marine.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Gehrke. The VFW does not have a resolution on that
proposal----
Dr. Heck. Okay.
Colonel Hayden.
Colonel Hayden. No, TRICARE is not broken.
Dr. Heck. Okay.
Mr. Neiweem.
Mr. Neiweem. We would say no.
Ms. Ruedisueli. We would say yes.
Mr. Stovall. No.
Dr. Heck. Okay. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Let me go back to the issues that we are
talking about in terms of the retirement for a second, with
skill sets that people have and the opportunities to continue
them. One of the issues that is combined with that but maybe we
don't state it as clearly has to do with leadership. And I know
that when we have spoken particularly with the Marines, that
tends to be perhaps more of an issue that was raised.
I wonder if in your opinion that is something that we would
essentially lose, perhaps--I don't even want to use the word
``lose'' as much as not be able to capitalize on as much in the
services after--if the 12 years somehow signaled that people
were ready to leave. I think it is that midlevel leadership
that actually is a hallmark of our military.
Where do you place that, or do you think it is not as big
an issue as perhaps some would suggest?
Mr. Bousum. Well, I will take a stab. I think that even in
the current environment that there are people who get between
12 and 16 years who actually no longer want to be serving, but
that they know that they need to get to 20 to get the
retirement. And so I would actually ask open-endedly, does the
Department actually want those individuals?
Mr. Gehrke. So I was in the Reserves, and at 6 years after
I had done--already done a deployment to Iraq I was able to get
out. I did not get out.
I postponed my discharge for another 2 years so I could go
to Afghanistan. I had nothing in mind except the welfare of the
Marine next to me when I was choosing to go to Afghanistan and
reenlist in that contract. Twenty years did not enter my mind.
In hindsight, I realize that I financially would have been
better off if I would have continued in my civilian occupation
in the long term because my civilian occupation at that time
was matching my 401(k).
Colonel Hayden. It is an interesting question, and one of
the things, as a former chief of military personnel policy,
what we would look at is how do you retain the force. And the
thing is you also have to take a look at it just--you can't
look at it just as the retirement benefit; you have to also
then start looking at all the personnel policy aspects
associated with how you retain a force. What is the profiles
that you need?
It has always been a little bit better to have maybe too
many people at that midlevel NCO and officer corps to draw
from, and you use the promotion system many times to, if you
would, try to determine who are the leaders that you are going
to go ahead and continue on to try to make that career. So you
have to look at how you play both of them--the promotion system
as well as the retirement system, in order to draw the people
that you really need out there to that 20-year point.
The problem is that in difficult budget times that we are
in right now, sometimes we don't use the tools to our advantage
or actually we do drawdowns like we are right now with what we
consider with dignity. And what I would like to, you know--the
one thing that the Army is, if you would, right now, instead of
using the tools that you have provided them--temporary early
retirement authority, voluntary separation pay--where you could
incentivize people to step aside, we have continued to kind of
use what is more the budget-driven aspects and use the cuts of
RIFs [reductions in force] and SERBs [Selective Early
Retirement Boards] and other things like this to get people to
move to the side, or we just denied reenlistments.
And those are the kind of what I consider draconian tools,
where we really had strong tools available to recognize
people's service, allow them to leave even with a 15-year
retirement, but we haven't been able to do that.
Mr. Gehrke. If I can say something real quick, piggybacking
on what Colonel Hayden said, right now we are pushing people
out at the 8- and 12-year point. We want them to get out. We
are pushing good Marines. We are pushing good captains and good
staff sergeants out of service after 8, 10, and 12 years, and
we are pushing them out with nothing.
So I would consider that when we are talking about force
structure and retaining that force structure. Right now we are
acting--the Department of Defense is saying it is too big for
our current mission; we need to push these guys out. And they
are pushing them out with nothing.
Colonel Hayden. And if I could just piggyback on that, I
would say that once you get to the 6-year point there is such a
thing as called involuntary separation pay, so if people are
being forced at that point in time, there is a years-of-service
element. For instance, if you are at 10 years of service you
get 1 year of your base pay as an involuntary separation pay.
Now, I would think that if you are involuntarily letting
people go one of the things we could look at is allow them to
take that involuntary separation pay and invest that into a--
into the TSP or a 401(k), change the IRS [Internal Revenue
Service] rules to allow that to happen, and then recognize that
as some type of transportable career device along with it.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just raise one point that has not been addressed in
all of this when we talk about reforming the system that, well,
first of all, I--let me just say to the retirement system that,
I mean, it is antiquated, and I get the point about
incentivizing people to stay for 20 years. But this is my
father's retirement system.
My father retired from the United States Army in 1964,
where prior to I think when I came in in 1972, the system had
dramatically changed when they went to an all--when they were
transitioning to an all-volunteer system, where they
dramatically increased the pay from what it was.
And so the system really was designed initially as a--
basically you got low pay, but significant benefits, you know,
utilizing the PX [Post Exchange] and the commissary, those
discounts, but relatively low pay prior to being an All-
Volunteer Force. And the compensation at the back end--the
compensation was at the back end in terms of 20 years being at
50 percent.
We are living longer now. The pay is much more competitive
with that of the private sector.
One thing that amazes me now, with retention where it is--
retention is very high right now--is that we still have a
promotion system that is tied to basically a lower retention
system--I mean, a lower retention rate, whereby people are, in
fact, being forced out, that if you come up for promotion, you
are passed over a couple times, you are out.
And it is different when we started that, where the quality
wasn't what the quality is today. The quality today of the men
and women who serve this country is the highest that it has
ever been historically in this country. And we are forcing
people--good people that want to stay in--we are forcing them
out with a promotion system that doesn't reflect the fact that
we have high retention.
No organization outside the military would ever have--would
ever do what we are doing now, in terms of if they had a very
high retention system they would slow down the promotion rate,
and by slowing down the promotion rate we are giving people
more time to increase their technical proficiency within their
military occupational specialties. And we are, in fact, we are
reducing the pipeline in terms of training costs to replace
them.
So I think one of the things that we need to look at--and I
know it is painful and it doesn't sound good, but is slowing
down the promotion system so we stop pushing people out at the
rate that we are.
I don't know, does--would anybody like to comment on that?
Colonel Hayden. We couldn't agree more. It would be nice to
be able to retain even some of the great folks that we are
forcing out of the system right now.
It is not always just with the promotion system. We are
also doing it with what we would call in the Air Force ``career
job reservations.'' These are when you come up on career points
on the enlisted side of the house, denying reenlistments or
forcing them to retrain in the other types of aspect.
But what we have got right now with the--with
sequestration, the difficulties that that has put the service
chiefs in, especially in the Army and the Marine Corps to start
bringing down the forces associated with it, we are using end
strength as an offset to--to bring down personnel costs. And we
have been doing other things like capping pay and changing the
commissary benefit or the housing allowance, and things like
this, that is now going to cause even more what I think is more
of a retention problem.
I personally believe that what you see right now is the
true retention of the force is being masked. It is because we
are in the drawdown. When you take a look at the DEP [Delayed
Enlistment/Entry Program] bank for the Army last year, I think
it was in testimony that instead of entering the year with
about a 50 percent of their DEP bank, they entered the year at
about 33 percent of their DEP that was ready to ship in the
next year.
And so with those kind of indicators, the true retention is
being masked as we draw down the force. I think once we get
through this and now that the economy is coming back, and I am
hearing that the recruiting numbers are starting to go up for
the Army and the Marine Corps, that we may have a little bit
more of a difficult time meeting the recruiting as well as the
retention numbers once we are past this drawdown.
Mr. Coffman. Well, I would argue--I would agree with you
that it does mask--the reduction in force that is currently
ongoing to reduce end strength does, in fact, mask the
retention problem. But I think it is still--I think we are so
slow to update policies in the military, whether it is the
retirement system, and we are debating that today, an
antiquated system of--that was there in I think the Second
World War, to the rate of promotion that we have that doesn't
reflect retention.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. MacArthur. I am going to stay on health care, although
I am interested in all 15 of these and they all could have
hearings all of their own, frankly.
I have noticed in all of the hearings that we tend to look
at TRICARE in a very binary way. It is either good or bad. It
is either broken in a death spiral or it is the, you know, the
greatest thing and our service members love it.
And even going down the panel, when you were given the
opportunity to give a one-word answer, the yeses and the noes
were equally emphatic. And that fact is, we will never know, as
decisions are made, how it is going to flow and what the
unintended consequences are and how it will be--we are simply
not going to know.
I come out of the business world and I would never, ever do
something in my company that affected thousands of people
without piloting it, testing it. We are talking about something
here that affects millions of people.
And I know this is a better question for probably the heads
of our military services, but from your perspective, is there
any way that you can conceive of piloting some of these changes
to TRICARE so that we can actually assess--not study, not
consider how it might go, but actually do it and assess how it
goes? Be curious for any of you to respond to that.
Colonel Hayden. First of all, I think that there is an
opportunity with the FEHBP [Federal Employee Health Benefit
Plan]-like system proposed by the Commission and with--where I
look and see that the Guard and Reserve has had a very
difficult time of access, is potentially looking at a pilot for
this FEHBP-like system for the Guard and Reserve and try to
look to expand that area associated with it.
The other thing that we would recommend as an association
is to at least use these multi-service areas that are out there
the Defense Health Agency [DHA] has and look to at least pilot
there, where you have a single budget authority, that one of
the commands, if you would, one of the services is the
executive agent and would then have oversight of that budget
for that multi-service area.
DHA says that they wish to go to that, but we believe it
has been a little bit more of a snail's pace and we should look
to try to do that and use those at least as a pilot to see if
you can gain efficiencies within those multi-service areas.
Mr. Bousum. Representative MacArthur, just as Colonel
Hayden had said, I--while it is not a question I have asked of
my members to weigh in on when I--when we talked about these 15
recommendations, I think that the Guard would actually--the
Active members would welcome being kind of the guinea pig for
something like that.
Mr. MacArthur. Any others?
Ms. Ruedisueli. We have talked about it internally. I think
there would be a lot of challenges with doing a pilot.
The plans that are suggested by the Commission are not
exactly like FEHBP. They would have to be customized for our
risk pool, for the benefits that are specific and necessary for
military families. So it is not like you could just offer them
FEHBP and expect to have, you know, a legitimate pilot. I think
there would be a lot of challenges.
But we do appreciate the idea of testing this out before
doing a full rollout plan.
Mr. Gehrke. I think that the challenges of a pilot is the
civilian health care industry or economy is not a national
economy. It can be in a localized economy, whereas TRICARE is
pretty much national more or less. It is a national plan.
And what I am alluding to is your FEHB plan in California
is going to be different than what a plan looks like in
Oklahoma. And the costs are going to be associated different.
So you may not get a fair analysis of what the future of
that health care is going to be unless you do it countrywide in
different locations to gauge what the true costs are.
Mr. MacArthur. All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to touch on a recommendation that I don't think has
been raised yet, and that is improving access to childcare on
installations. And as I am reading and going through the report
it says that the Commission found that the demand for military
childcare often exceeds availability, resulting in more than
11,000 children on waiting lists as of September 2014.
Can you talk about why access to high-quality childcare is
an important aspect of readiness and whether or not you agree
with the Commission's recommendation that Congress reestablish
the authority to use operating funds for construction projects
for expanding and modifying child develop program facilities on
installations?
Ms. Ruedisueli. You know, I think there is the very obvious
link to readiness when you are talking about dual-military
families, when you are talking about single-parent military
families, where their ability to do their jobs is directly
linked to the availability of childcare. I think if you take a
little step away from that, though, there are other links to
readiness.
You know, spouse employment in general is very linked to
the availability of childcare. It undermines readiness if you
have people leaving the force because their spouse cannot
maintain employment, and that is a driver for leaving.
Furthermore, there is the link to readiness during
deployments. Childcare during deployment is critical for
families, for the stay-at-home--the at-home parent to have some
respite from childcare to be able to do basic things like go to
doctor's appointments.
So I think there are many ways that the availability of
childcare links to readiness.
We agree with the Commission's report. There doesn't seem
to be a lot of accurate data out there, but anecdotally we hear
virtually everywhere that there are wait lists for childcare.
We appreciate the fact that they are talking about
expanding child development centers, but we would point out
that 70 percent of military families live off the installation
and the child development center might not be the best solution
for them or the only solution for them. And so we would
encourage decisionmakers to look beyond just expanding CDCs
[child development centers] into programs like the childcare
fee assistance programs and other innovative solutions that
might help to address this issue.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
Any other comments on that subject area?
Colonel Hayden. Actually, we are in full support of what
NMFA had to say.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Knight. Now I am up.
You know, I would like to talk just about a couple areas. I
know that when we went down the row about the TRICARE there was
a little bit of difference there, and that seems to be the
biggest sticking point with me on this subject, and I will talk
about the other part here in a minute.
But if we can talk about TRICARE and basically talk about
the people who think it is broken--if it is not broken, do we
think that this will work, that this will continue to move
forward for the next 15 or 20 years without us doing anything
to it? And if you do think it is broken, where do you see it
going?
Ms. Ruedisueli. Well, we are one of the organizations that
thinks that it is broken, and, you know, our concerns basically
are that, yes, you can continue to deliver the benefit as it
looks today, but it will be eroded. You know, over the years
there have been increasing pressures to increase fees and out-
of-pocket costs for families. Our concern is that even in the
things that people can't see, like provider networks, that
those would be eroded because we are cutting reimbursement
rates.
So our concern is that you can't really compare the TRICARE
of today to TRICARE Choice, what is proposed, because the
TRICARE of today is not going to exist 5 years down the road;
it will have been chipped away by these various budgetary
pressures.
Mr. Gehrke. I think the VA health care system may be a good
analogy. If you look at where VA was 5, 7, 10 years ago, you
were seeing then access issues--same type of access issues that
you are seeing now: long appointment wait times, not being able
to get in to see the doctor when you needed to or when you
wanted to.
If TRICARE keeps on its path you are going to see the same
thing that happened, you know, in Phoenix, last year, the
difference being is that there is no real accountability in the
same way that there is accountability for the VA health care
system. When doctors aren't seeing their patients and denying
patients, there are going to be no lists at all. They are just
going to be denied and the military health care beneficiary is
going to have to keep on looking somewhere else.
I think a good example is I called up the top 20 hospitals
in the country. Eleven of them accepted--did not accept TRICARE
at all. Three of them only accepted TRICARE Standard; and I
think one of them only accepted Prime, Standard, and all the
different TRICAREs.
I imagined that if TRICARE goes down the same path in 5, 10
years you are going to be at zero. Will the proposed plan be
better? I guess I can't say.
Mr. Knight. Okay. Well, you know, I am going to agree with
most of those comments.
I think that, you know, not just TRICARE but in the medical
industry we see that across the board, where a lot of things
are not accepted anymore and they are just not being provided
or they are not being accepted by a lot of the industry. And I
am afraid that that is where TRICARE is going.
I will go on to my second. We talk about this kind of 2-
year vesting period, where you are 2 years and a day through
your enlistment or un-enlistment, and then you are kind of
through a vesting period.
You know, that was one of my first questions is, I don't
know of anything that you get vested after 2 years except for
California teachers get tenure. Outside of that, vesting is
typically a 5-year or 10-year period because that is kind of
the retainment and that is a commitment that we have accepted,
and that is where your--you get that level of commitment.
Is that a problem for any of your organizations, or is that
something that is accepted, that we love the 2 years? Or do you
think that that is going to be an issue?
Mr. Bousum. Actually, it is funny you mentioned that. Your
staffer actually vested after 2 years. Staff members on the
House side actually have that because of the election cycle.
Mr. Knight. I am a long way away from California so I can
talk about them instead of talking about these.
Mr. Bousum. Understood.
I don't think that our associate would have a problem.
Colonel Hayden. It is an interesting twist because
truthfully, when you take a look at the MCRMC's [Military
Compensation and Retirement Modernization Commission's]
proposal, there are a lot of variables. And so one of the
variables is just the vesting piece.
One of the things we would say is that if you get the--you
know, we have just gone through and provided the post-9/11 G.I.
Bill--a wonderful, wonderful benefit that we have--that now
service members get just at the 3-year point. So you could
easily see that the vesting could actually shift to somewhere
after the first term of enlistment, after the initial Active
Duty service commitment, which typically is around the 4-year
point--4- or 5-year point--and then start to look at
potentially doing more of a match, if you would, beyond that.
Mr. Knight. Sure.
Colonel Hayden. Because at that point now you have gone
through, you have done what you have signed up for; we have
provided the post-9/11 G.I. Bill as a service, if you would,
for that first term. And then beyond that, if you are staying
with the company, now it is up to the company to start to
investing back in you, and that is another one way of taking a
look at it.
Mr. Gehrke. I asked the Commission the exact same thing,
actually, and the premise of my question was, you know, if I
leave any company that offers a 401(k) match after a year I
would keep that 401(k). Why shouldn't service members?
Their response, which I think is in line with my
experience, is that usually the washed-out point of service
members, when you find out that they cannot transition into
military service, is that 2 years. So people who you know are
not going to fulfill their obligation usually wash out by 2
years, and that is why they chose that.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Russell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Go to an issue maybe a little more lighthearted, one we can
all relate to. The Army and the Air Force have been sharing
commissaries for a long time. The Navy and the Marines, despite
their love for one another, have also done the same.
Why would it not be possible to combine the two without
efficiencies? As a career soldier, you know, I don't advocate
necessarily that posts and bases need to be anything but self-
contained. We have done that since the days of, you know,
Vauban forts and stockade outposts. You know, we have to be
self-contained, both electricity, with provisions, all of that.
So I would never really advocate their privatization.
But why could we not combine two services with two services
and make it more effective? Be interested in your views.
Mr. Neiweem. Sir, if I could just say----
Mr. Russell. Oft times you get overlapping circles and you
go where the overlaps are. And, you know, the gulf is not as
wide.
I would be curious, yes, Mr. Gehrke?
Mr. Gehrke. I understand that the Marines were opposed to
merging these systems. Being the few and the proud, I can
respect that.
However, I think they may have changed their tone or it
changed my mind when I found out that the commissary system in
its current form has more SCS [stock control system] staff than
the entire Marine Corps has SCS staff. So when you look at
those numbers you think there is room to merge and to create
some synergies there.
Mr. Russell. Yes. I would agree.
Ms. Ruedisueli. You know, we are not opposed to the idea of
consolidation, and we acknowledge there probably would be
efficiencies there. I think our concern is that with the
reduction in the appropriations for the commissary, you are
expecting these efficiencies to then be able to pay for all the
operating costs, and I think that is where the risk comes in.
If that doesn't pan out that way, you are probably talking
about the death of a benefit that is very important to a lot of
military families.
Mr. Russell. Yes. And I would agree, it is very important,
which is why I was smart enough to retire near an Air Force
base, being an Army retiree.
But on that line, has there been any study to show that
maybe there is not a benefit to their combination, that there
is efficiency already and their combination would not create it
because--you know, I am just curious.
Colonel Hayden. There have been studies at least to look
and combine, if you would, the exchange systems. And it is--
there has been pushback on several of those studies, and we are
still where we are even though that the Army and the Air Force
were able to merge, if you would, their exchange systems.
But you have to take a look at the exchange systems on what
they actually do. The Navy, for instance, has their lodging
associated with the way they do the Navy exchange.
And so it is a business model that is, if you would, that
is built on profit, and that is the way the exchange systems
are now. And then the commissary is actually an appropriated
more of a----
Mr. Russell. So you think that the circle could go wider
and get the MWR on the Army and----
Colonel Hayden. Well, I think----
Mr. Russell [continuing]. The Air Force side, or----
Colonel Hayden. I think the important thing is that when
you look at a consolidation of this, you have to see the
business models that are out there with the different services
and why the consolidation may not be in the best interest of
all unless you are trying to bring in what would be the lodging
model and all these other types of aspects along with it.
But I am, along with Karen, the question really comes back
is now you are end up taking away, if you would, the subsidy
that was associated with the operation of the commissary, and
you are introducing this business model. And is that business
model really going to save, in the end of the day, are the--you
are still going to see the 30 percent savings when you are at
the commissary, and are you going to get the MWR funds that you
need in order to----
Mr. Russell. Put money back in, rather than take----
Colonel Hayden. So I think you end up robbing Peter to pay
Paul on this.
Mr. Russell. And thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Heck. So one thing we haven't talked about probably on
purpose is SBP [Survivor Benefit Plan]. And really, you know,
so the Commission makes a recommendation on how to potentially
move forward and address the SBP-DIC [Dependency and Indemnity
Compensation] offset--again, prospectively, fully recognizes it
is not going to do anything for anybody who is currently
impacted by the offset.
As you may recall, the recommendation is that for those
individuals who want to get full SBP if they also receive DIC
is that they would pay an increased premium annuity--roughly 11
percent, as opposed to the lower premium annuity at I think 6
percent, and not have the offset.
Thoughts? I mean, I--to me it seems--I don't know. I have
already filled out my election notice when I hit 20 years so it
is not going to affect me, but, you know--and again, realizing
that we are not talking about the more strategic issue of
whether or not there should be an offset to begin with, but any
ideas of whether or not that is something that is worthwhile,
something opposed? I mean, is that one of the, you know, easy
yes, check the box, that should be an easy one to do?
Colonel Hayden. Well, MOAA actually opposes the proposal.
What we see is, like you had mentioned, sir, is that it doesn't
do anything for the 60,000 survivors that are out there right
now that are affected by the SBP-DIC offset.
But the other thing is is because of the way that the
premium is set up, what you are doing is really--the people who
would take advantage of the higher-paying premium are those
that are the most disadvantaged. The ones who would look at the
SBP-DIC--the higher-paying premium for SBP--are the ones who
are actually what I would think are the 100 percent disabled
right now. They themselves are going to think that, ``Oh, yes.
When I die I am going to die of a service-connected
disability.''
And if you are 100 percent and you go through that--there
is that period of window that if you get I think it is the 10-
year point, you are automatically--whatever you die of, you are
going to die of a service connection.
The idea is that you are going to prey on the ones who have
the most severe disabilities. They are the ones who are going
to find it to their financial advantage to try to provide for
their survivors that way, and they are the ones who probably
are unable, then, to work--or the majority of them maybe have
difficulties working then when they get out of the services.
So for our perspective, it is nice to give an option like
that, but it is only to the advantage of those that actually
think they are going to die of service connection.
Mr. Gehrke. The VFW would agree with everything Mike said.
We really need to do something about the current beneficiaries
who are eligible.
But the current SBP-DIC is certainly untenable. I think the
SSIA [Special Survivor Indemnity Allowance] ends within the
next year or two, so you do need to find some alternative to
that. And we think the current plan--or the proposed plan is
the best thing that has been proposed other than completely
eliminating the offset.
So we think the service members do need a--some sort of
better option than what they are provided now.
Dr. Heck. Okay.
Anyone else?
Mr. Stovall.
Mr. Stovall. Mr. Chairman, this is something that the
American Legion opposes. One, like as mentioned before, it
doesn't address the current injustice facing the tens of
thousands of beneficiaries.
And then lifting the offset for those who follow on only to
charge a higher premium is a nonstarter for us. We feel that
this recommendation doesn't solve the problem.
Dr. Heck. All right.
This is the first time we have ever exhausted the panel--
the members of questions.
I want to thank you all for taking the time to be here, for
giving us your insights. Obviously it has been mentioned by
several of the members, just the sheer breadth of your
membership and the folks that you represent--you know, in
disclosure, I belong to three of your organizations seated at
the table--really means a lot to us.
And I want to assure all of you that are here today and
those who may be seeing the hearing or listening that we will
be very deliberative in this process as we review the
recommendations of the Commission before we make
recommendations to move forward to the full committee.
So again, thank you for your time today.
There being no further business, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:38 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 25, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 25, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 25, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
