- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-62]TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM--A UNITY OF EFFORT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-62]

TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM--

A UNITY OF EFFORT

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

OCTOBER 28, 2015

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-496                           WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey, Vice   JACKIE SPEIER, California
Chair                            TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
PAUL COOK, California
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
Jeanette James, Professional Staff Member
Craig Greene, Professional Staff Member
Colin Bosse, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Davis, Hon. Susan A., a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Military Personnel.....................     2
Heck, Hon. Joseph J., a Representative from Nevada, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel.............................     1

WITNESSES

Iacocca, BG James, USA, Adjutant General, U.S. Army..............    20
Kelly, Dr. Susan, Director, Transition to Veterans Program
Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense.....................    18
Larry, Horace, Deputy Director of Air Force Services, Deputy
Chief of Staff for Manpower and Personnel, Headquarters U.S.
Air Force......................................................    23
Mahoney, Sean, Executive Director, zero8hundred..................     5
Mann, Scott, American Dream U....................................     4
Randazzo, Phil, Founder, American Dream U........................     3
Whitman, MajGen Burke, USMC, Director, Marine and Family Programs
Division, U.S. Marine Corps....................................    19
Yavorski, Thomas, Executive Director, 21st Century Sailor Office,
U.S. Navy......................................................    22

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Heck, Hon. Joseph J..........................................    35
Iacocca, BG James............................................    82
Kelly, Dr. Susan.............................................    60
Larry, Horace................................................    97
Mahoney, Sean................................................    51
Mann, Scott..................................................    43
Randazzo, Phil...............................................    36
Whitman, MajGen Burke........................................    73
Yavorski, Thomas.............................................    89

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Coffman..................................................   107

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Knight...................................................   111
Mr. Walz.....................................................   111

TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM--A UNITY OF EFFORT

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, October 28, 2015.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:38 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joseph J. Heck
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH J. HECK, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEVADA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Dr. Heck. We will go ahead and call the hearing to order
again. I apologize for the delay.
Just as a disclaimer, we are going to have another vote
series somewhere around 4:50 to 5:20. So while we did ask
initially for the witnesses to make their statements 5 minutes
in length, we are going to ask if you can try to condense it to
3 minutes to the best of your ability. And we will make sure
that your written statements are entered in their entirety into
the record. Our hope is to at least get through the first panel
before the next vote series.
So I want to welcome everyone to this hearing where our
focus is on the collaboration between the Department of Defense
and private organizations to assist service members who are
transitioning to civilian life.
We are all well aware that the Army and the Marine Corps
are downsizing, with a plan to reduce 40,000 soldiers and 2,000
Marines by 2018. Undoubtedly, such cuts put strain on our
service members and their families. These reductions in end
strengths represent additional service members that will be
asked to leave the military on top of the more than 165,000
service members that separate every year.
We owe these transitioning service members and their
families a robust system that prepares them for life after the
military. We want to make sure they can continue to make the
same caliber of contributions to society once they take their
uniforms off that they made to our Nation's security while in
uniform.
Today's hearing continues our commitment to ensuring that
the Transition Assistance Program meets the needs of
transitioning service members, not only through a whole-of-
government approach but also by partnering with organizations
who share our commitment to help service members successfully
transition from military service.
I am interested to hear from our first panel how they
connect with individuals who are leaving the military and what
services they offer to assist. I am also interested to hear
from our DOD [Department of Defense] and military services how
they include organizations such as those represented here today
in the Transition Assistance Program.
In response to the increasing need to help prepare
individuals for post-service opportunities such as employment,
higher education, or entrepreneurial endeavors, Congress and
DOD have continually worked to improve the Transition
Assistance Program. So I am interested to hear from our DOD and
military service witnesses whether the recent changes have
produced the desired results. For example, in your view, are
service members transitioning today better prepared for post-
service life as compared to those transitioning 5 years ago?
With that, I want to welcome our witnesses, and I look
forward to our testimony.
Before I introduce our first panel, let me offer
Congresswoman Susan Davis an opportunity to make her opening
remarks.
Mrs. Davis.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Heck can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]

STATEMENT OF HON. SUSAN A. DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we know, each year, over 100,000 service members
transition out of Active military service back into civilian
society. The Department and the military services have made
considerable strides--my notes here say ``great strides.'' I am
not so sure I am willing to say ``great strides,'' but
considerable strides toward improving the Transition Assistance
Program. It has evolved from one mandatory class to an
integrated effort between the service member, the chain of
command, and the transition assistance cadre, spanning several
months or even longer, to ensure our young men and women are
set up for success.
Although improvements have definitely been made, as our
witnesses I know will attest today, there is still much work to
be done. Our first panel represents one area in which the
Department needs continued improvement and involvement, working
with qualified civilian organizations that maintain the
momentum of transitioning service members back into society. I
certainly look forward to hearing from our first panel on their
two different approaches to helping service members transition.
Both of these organizations, of course, are innovative and
potentially life-changing.
We will also be hearing from the second panel on how DOD
and the services plan to work with organizations such as
zero8hundred and American Dream U to improve successful
transition of our service members back into the community.
Definitely, their response to what you present and you bring is
very important to us, as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to our witnesses.
Dr. Heck. Great.
So I will introduce our first panel. We have Mr. Phil
Randazzo, founder of American Dream U; Mr. Scott Mann with
American Dream U; and Mr. Sean Mahoney, Executive Director of
zero8hun-
dred.
Again, I ask the witnesses to condense, to the best of
their ability, their testimony.
And, with that, Mr. Randazzo, you are recognized for 3
minutes.

STATEMENT OF PHIL RANDAZZO, FOUNDER, AMERICAN DREAM U

Mr. Randazzo. Chairman Dr. Heck, Ranking Member Susan
Davis, and distinguished members of the committee, it is truly
an honor to be invited to testify in front of such an esteemed
body. Thank you for the opportunity.
If we had to assure that every single veteran transitioning
out of the military was able to extract every ounce of clarity
and value from his or her own experience, resume, drive,
discipline, personality, and follow-through to have the best
chance, to get the best job, how would we in this room do that?
In founding American Dream U, I have had the opportunity to
bring in over 140 world-class entrepreneurs and business
leaders across 8 installations, including the Pentagon. They
have shared their successes, failures, insights, tactics, and
strategies with Active Duty military, spouses, dependents, and
veterans.
I would like everyone in this room to look back and think
and connect the dots, how they got here. I would argue that it
is the people you met and the books you read, not the books you
read in high school or in college, but the books that were
recommended to you by friends and colleagues; not the people
you met in college or in high school, but maybe a company
commander, an event you attended, or a friend introduction.
What I have noticed is some negative talk surrounding
becoming an entrepreneur or entrepreneurial thinking. The
service members are getting pigeonholed into whatever their MOS
[military occupational specialty] was in the military for job
opportunities during transitioning. From speaking to hundreds
of service members, I am not convinced this is a path to a
successful transition.
I had the opportunity to speak to the folks at the VA
[Department of Veterans Affairs], when discussion of becoming
an entrepreneur came up, we heard, ``Ninety-six percent of
businesses fail. We want them to have a degree, that
certificate on the wall, plan B.'' Does that general degree
carry as much weight as it does in 2015?
Dozens of service members at our conferences have asked
this question: ``We have been trained since the first day of
boot camp that failure is not an option; it results in a
teammate getting injured or killed. We have heard from all your
speakers that failure is okay and even encouraged. I am
struggling with this.'' I think the discussion during the
transition needs to address this. It is okay to fail in the
civilian world. Everyone in this room has had failures, and
that is okay, even valuable.
I think the people who run transition are great Americans.
I am not convinced they are open to new ideas, up to the latest
tactics and strategies, or emphasize the importance of finding
your purpose, self-education, the value of networking, and
finding a great mentor. Self-education is extremely important.
In 2015 and beyond, the area of focus needs to be in the
technology space, robotics, health care, finances. Nano
certificates, job apprenticeships, and job shadowings need to
be encouraged.
Twelve months before transitioning out of the military, I
think every veteran, soldier, marine, airman, sailor,
coastguardsman, spouse should read books like ``Start With
Why'' by Simon Sinek, ``Think and Grow Rich'' by Napoleon Hill,
``How to Win Friends and Influence People'' by Dale Carnegie.
Simon Sinek has been paid by several installations and has
spoken at the Pentagon. We think we can do better.
In working with hundreds of businesses over my 20-plus-
years career as an entrepreneur, the number-one hiring criteria
is finding those that are flexible, resourceful, show
initiative, work well with teams, and show up on time. This
defines the veteran. We owe our military to strive to do
better.
It has been an honor and a privilege to work with our
military, and I am constantly humbled in their presence.
I look forward to your questions or comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Randazzo can be found in the
Appendix on page 36.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Mr. Mann.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT MANN, AMERICAN DREAM U

Mr. Mann. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Susan Davis, and
distinguished members of the committee, thanks for the
opportunity to tell you the transition story of warriors, our
warriors, who just don't seem to have quite the voice these
days that they probably should.
I have spent my entire life as a U.S. Army Special Forces
Green Beret, and in those 22 years of service in many dark
places around the world, one thing I have learned is the
benefit of going local, immersing yourself in the problem to
get a perspective of what is going on. And that is the
perspective that I would like to provide you today on
transition.
As an entrepreneur and advocate for nonprofit work in
transition, I work with military members as I train them in
special skills but also working with them as they prepare to
leave the service that they know and love.
The other day, I was talking to a special ops master
sergeant, I will call him Steve, who was going through
transition from the Army. And I hadn't seen him in a while, so
I asked him how things were going. Do you know what he told me?
He said that he would rather go back to Afghanistan four more
times than to ever go through transition again.
How is that possible? Here is a man who has known more
pain, suffered more family stress, lost more friends, and seen
more violence than any warrior I know of, yet he would go back
and do it all again four more times than to ever go through
transition again. Something isn't working.
The challenges of transition, having gone through them
myself, are enormous. Our service men and women have been
fighting the longest war in our Nation's history. The corrosive
arena of combat is placing unprecedented strain on not just our
military men and women but their families. They face a massive
drawdown, as well. And as ISIS [Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria] and other extremist groups expand, the stress of
operational tempo on those service members who remain in
service is likely to go even higher, which is going to mean
less time for them to prepare for transition and even more
stress for transition in the future.
Whether these warriors get out of the military unexpectedly
due to a drawdown or whether they get out on a scheduled
departure, as I did, they will likely have fresh dust on their
boots, gunpowder residue on their hands, and not a lot of time
to even remotely contemplate the challenges of transition. Add
these to a tough economy and a low job market, and it is no
wonder that many of our veterans are terrified of coming home.
Now, that is the tough news. But let's not forget that
these warriors are high performers. They are complex problem
solvers. Our warriors possess immense leadership skills that,
frankly, society is demanding more and more every day. So the
question is, how do we bring them home and integrate them into
the communities that desperately need their leadership and
their loyalty?
Well, again, this Green Beret's perspective from the
village, a few things: One, this problem is probably going to
get worse before it gets better. Two, the current DOD and VA
programs of transition are simply overmatched for this massive
undertaking. And, three, the private sector is essential in
bringing home our veterans to a life of honor and happiness.
To expound a bit further,and I hope I get a chance to
expand on this today, is we must help our veterans reconnect to
their higher purpose. We should connect our veterans to
relevant civilian players in the community. And we need to
empower veterans to learn how to tell their story when they
come home. I believe that this is a challenge for both the
private sector and the public sector and that history is going
to judge us on our ability to do that.
One of my best friends and former soldiers, Romy Camargo, a
quadriplegic wounded in Afghanistan 7 years ago, working with
just a six-person advisory board from the community in Tampa,
Florida, in just over a year managed to raise $750,000 and open
a nonprofit center that is treating dozens of people, to
include severely wounded veterans.
My belief is that if the community can come together under
those kinds of extreme situations, there is nothing that we
can't do when we partner with folks like Mr. Randazzo and our
military leadership.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mann can be found in the
Appendix on page 43.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Mr. Mahoney.

STATEMENT OF SEAN MAHONEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ZERO8HUNDRED

Mr. Mahoney. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today. I would like to explain a
partnership with military bases in San Diego that provides a
community handoff from transition classes.
Every year, approximately 20,000 service members stationed
in San Diego County leave the service, and 30 percent are
expected to stay in the area. Many of these individuals
experience difficulty with transition.
San Diego community leaders realized that numerous
organizations were there to assist but there was a gap between
these resources and service members, who are often unaware of
them. These leaders developed a plan to close this gap without
duplicating existing services. This was called the Military
Transition Support Project [MTSP] and implemented as
``zero8hundred'' to illustrate the promise that comes with a
new day.
Zero8hundred addresses four areas of veterans' wellness:
employment and education, health, basic needs, and personal
connections. Zero8hundred provides transition support from 9
months prior to separation to 12 months afterwards. This begins
with a presentation on base at Navy and Coast Guard transition
classes, where those remaining in San Diego County have the
opportunity to opt in.
These zero8hundred clients are called VIPs, for Veterans or
Spouses in Process, and they get proactive check-ins, starting
with a call the following week from a zero8hundred navigator or
caseworker. All of our caseworkers are either veterans,
military dependents, or spouses, and all are in a master's of
social work program or have a master's of social work.
The partnership with local military bases began in 2013
with a memorandum of understanding [MOU] with Navy Region
Southwest that was signed in 2014. That allows the program to
be presented during the classes. The MOU also indicates that
MTSP's zero8hundred is responsible for providing an essential
organizing point for community resources. The program does this
by utilizing 2-1-1, San Diego's database of 6,000 vetted
resources in the community, to make them available to anyone
who is transitioning.
We train Navy contract instructors to make the
presentations in the TGPS [Transition, Goals, Plans, Success]
classes and began at Naval Base San Diego in January of this
year. We expanded to Naval Base Coronado in February and the
Coast Guard in March.
The first 2 years of the program are the pilot phase, and
the goal of the initial stage was to evaluate the impact on the
first 300 VIPs. Response has been very positive, and we hit
this 300 enrollment goal 8 months into the program. It has been
presented on 89 transition classes on base, and over 30 percent
of eligible personnel have opted into the program. Many also
choose to self-navigate to resources via our Web site, and
9,000 sessions have been recorded.
Zero8hundred navigators have been reaching out to these
VIPs to discuss their challenges, to handle case management,
and to offer warm referrals to organizations that can assist
them, and then follow up to see how they were helped.
University of San Diego's Caster Family Center is conducting a
third-party evaluation to measure outcomes.
We value our positive relationship with the military bases
that help make this community initiative possible. And I want
to thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mahoney can be found in the
Appendix on page 51.]
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
I thank you all for being so succinct in your opening
comments. Hopefully, we will have enough time to delve more
deeply into your written testimony as well as the questions.
Mr. Randazzo, tell us how you connect with individuals who
are leaving the military to introduce them to American Dream U
and the programs you offer. How do you get access to them? Are
you going on base? Is it base-to-base? Is it a pilot program?
How are you reaching out and touching those lives?
Mr. Randazzo. Yeah, so we just came back from Fort Bragg,
and we were invited by the DC [deputy commander] General Jeff
Smith. And so we work, typically, with the garrison and then
the TAP [Transition Assistance Program]. And then we have also
been introduced to the BOSS, the Better Opportunity for Single
Soldiers. We did an event for their national conference last
month, where Mr. Mann spoke.
And so we are going to be hitting all of the Transition and
the BOSS. And so we have done 13 events, Mr. Chairman, at 9
different installations. We have had a little over 4,000
attend. And I can provide feedback from those.
Dr. Heck. But how do you get access or how do you get to
each one of those locations? Is it by invitation? Or are you
going and soliciting and saying, ``Hey, we are here. Can we
come on base?'' How does that work?
Mr. Randazzo. So we have been working through the CGs
[commanding generals], through the commanders. So Fort Bragg
was our third event. So they saw something in the first event,
so they invited us back for a second and third. We have been to
Fort Hood twice. We are heading back to Fort Benning for a
second time. So we have asked to come, and then we have been
invited back.
Dr. Heck. Okay.
So has there been any thought given or any attempts made to
approach DOD of making this, you know, a program that is
offered automatically across installations, as opposed to you
having to go and, you know, present yourself to each CG at each
installation and get access?
Mr. Randazzo. I wouldn't even know, Chairman, how to even--
--
Dr. Heck. Okay.
Mr. Randazzo [continuing]. Start to ask the DOD to be a
part of the program.
Dr. Heck. Yeah, neither would we, but we will get to that.
So it is clear from your testimony that American Dream U
focuses on entrepreneurship and leading within organizations.
It is kind of like the ``Shark Tank'' of transition.
TAP GPS [Goals, Plans, Success] includes optional tracks,
one of which focuses on entrepreneurship. Are you familiar with
that track? And if so, what is your view of the information
provided? And what recommendations do you have to improve that
program?
Mr. Randazzo. So I would like to be clear: So we are not
just entrepreneurship programs. We talk about different tactics
and strategies to find jobs. I didn't get to it in my opening
statement, but LinkedIn is not talked about in class, and I
heard today that it is going to start to be. I think that is a
very effective way to get connected with jobs. We talk a lot
about different tactics on how to find a job that you actually
don't need an alarm clock to wake up to go to.
But, yeah, so I have reviewed all the Boots to Business
program that is run by the SBA [Small Business Association]. I
think it is very academic. I am an entrepreneur, and I like to
learn from people who have actually done it. And so I think
part of our program being effective is bringing in those
entrepreneurs and kind of cutting in line, learning from the
masters, versus maybe reading out of a manual. But I think it
is definitely a start if someone wants to be an entrepreneur.
Dr. Heck. Great. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all again for being here.
I remember quite a number of years ago how difficult it was
to start coordinating some of the efforts out there. And it
seemed like everybody wanted to help, which was wonderful, but,
on the other hand, it was really important to try and figure
out what the goals were, I think, for different organizations.
And so I am wondering whether the programs that you know
about in other areas--and your focus has been on the
entrepreneurial piece of that, to a certain extent, and Mr.
Mann as well. I am thinking with Mr. Mahoney--whether does all
that sort of resonate together? Or do you see these programs as
distinctly very, very different?
Mr. Mahoney. Ma'am, I can give our perspective on that.
Zero8hundred welcomes the different diverse programs that
are out there. I think they are different, and I think that
that is great, even if there is some overlapping. But we would
like to be in a position to offer two or three solutions to a
service member when they get out and refer them to them and see
which one they choose, which one is best for them. So I think
that that is excellent.
Mrs. Davis. Uh-huh. So providing multiple tracks but also
you are, perhaps by the emphasis, you are able to do a lot in
that area.
Mr. Mann. Correct. And with my smaller nonprofit, Mission
America, and working closely with Mr. Randazzo, you are right,
I mean, there are tens of thousands of nonprofits out there,
all, most of them, really trying to do good things. But as a
veteran who transitioned, it is overwhelming when you see the
number of folks out there. It is hard to sort it out.
I believe the doors are wide open right now for a no-
kidding, strong private-public partnership on this that is very
collaborative and allows groups like American Dream U and
Mission America, where I go in and talk to veterans, as a
veteran who is an entrepreneur and has transitioned, about what
they are going to see on the other side, to be positioned
players and be supporting efforts to DOD as they step through
this, just with the acknowledgement that it is more than a TAP
program, it is really, it is a process.
Transition is a, the Green Beret Foundation calls it ``The
Next Ridgeline.'' It is a long patrol. It is not something that
is done in 10 days. It is a process like any other mission. And
that is why I named it Mission America, is because it really is
about getting these guys and gals with the right skill sets and
looking at it as another mission, holistically, beyond just
jobs and entrepreneurialism. So collaboration is going to be
essential.
Mrs. Davis. Uh-huh. Yeah.
If I may, Mr. Mahoney, one of the issues sometimes
organizations find is that when they are involved in mentoring
programs or ways in which the community is really playing a
critical role, sometimes that staying power is a little tough
to achieve. I think often it is based on having good
facilitators, good follow-up, a kind of esprit de corps among
the people that are engaged in this.
Have you found that to be helpful? How does that happen,
you know, that you have people who really are staying with the
cause and feel very, very much indebted? It is a two-way
street. You know, it is not that person is sacrificing by being
part of this program, but getting so much out of it.
And so I wanted you to speak to that for a second and,
also, how that is happening in your Tier 3-level VIPs, whether
you are finding a need to have people with special skill sets
that really are able to relate far better to Tier 3 VIPs.
Mr. Mahoney. Yes, ma'am. I would say that it is a challenge
sometimes to get people to continue to focus on their own
transition as they are getting out. And one of the lessons that
we have learned is it is more difficult for us--our VIPs to
enroll 9 months prior to separation, and they are much more
actively involved in their transition maybe 90 days before they
get out, because they start to realize that it is coming up
very quickly. So we do get a change in their focus at that
point.
I will say, on the flip side of it, in the veteran's
community, there is a lot of commitment for folks to stay with
the cause and help them out. And a lot of times they are
frustrated that the service members aren't coming to them.
Mrs. Davis. Oh, okay. Yeah.
In those situations, then, who works to try and make sure
that that relationship is building so that it is a satisfactory
one on both sides?
Mr. Mahoney. We do, ma'am. Well, one thing we do is we have
the different--many of the different resources and agencies
come meet with our navigators, so our navigators are familiar
with many of the different nonprofits and their different areas
of emphasis. And that way, when our navigators explain the
resources that are available to the VIP, they can explain it in
a way that it is really a handoff. It is a personal connection,
that they will do a personal referral and a warm handoff to
that agency.
And to answer your question about the Tier 3, it is hit or
miss. I mean, some of our folks are Tier 3, where they may be a
single mom getting out with a small child. Maybe they are going
to be evicted in a week. And they might be very, very engaged
with our navigators. And some, it is frustrating that they will
be engaged and then they will drop off and try to handle things
themselves.
Mrs. Davis. Does there seem to be a difference whether you
are in face-to-face contact or by telephone, by cell? What are
you advising people to use, in terms of their method of
engaging?
Mr. Mahoney. We engage mostly by phone, ma'am. And then for
a Tier 3 VIP, we would encourage them to come into the office.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Randazzo, you mentioned that you hadn't yet--my time is
up. We will go another round. Thank you.
Thanks so much.
Dr. Heck. Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you all for being here. I appreciate the
commitment you obviously all demonstrate as you are responding
to different needs that you have identified within the
transition services that are being provided.
And just to add a little context to that, every year I have
a meeting with a roundtable of veterans from the 3rd District
of Massachusetts. We have a great tradition of service. And,
just last week, I was able to meet with them, and, in the
course of it, I always do ask, sort of, how the programs that
are out there are addressing their needs.
We met in a university setting, so I was glad to hear that
the GI Bill had made a real difference for many of those
returning. A good number of them had taken advantage of it,
were at the university and getting the degrees that they needed
to go on.
But one of the themes that I really heard was that
transition assistance has to be more than a one-time event and
that it needs to be broad enough to enable veterans to make the
most of all the different services that are out there, so
whether they are medical, financial, educational, whatever it
may be that are open to them and their families.
So even the GI Bill, for example, may not seem like the
right thing when you are first getting out of the services,
but, as you ease into your new life, suddenly it looms larger
as an opportunity.
And as outreach programs do exist--as I said, you all are
responding to needs that you have identified--I have found that
veterans I have spoken to often are not fully aware of the
range of programs or even the existence of the kinds of
organizations that you represent and the benefits that are
available to them.
And, again, what we heard, I think, from all of them and
have heard over time is that the program has to reflect a long-
term commitment, that they have to be responsive to them in a
long-term setting, especially in the job market, in the era of
seeking jobs, because that market is so dynamic.
So we have an interest in developing entrepreneurs. That is
a great thing. And I agree with you; the leadership skills that
have been developed for those serving are remarkable, and there
are many places for those skills to be exercised. And a
mentoring program and an example set is always very good, but
sometimes it may get a dream going in your head but you still
don't know how to follow on and realize it.
So I am curious with all of you, as in the job-market
context--we know all the other needs that are out there--and in
a very dynamic environment, how are you providing assistance or
programs that reflect the dynamism of our times so that you are
not outdated from day one as somebody is moving from one--
thinking about one thing to another to another?
Mr. Randazzo. No, those are all great comments.
So I think what is really important is, today, if they are
not able to tell their story,and I am going to let Mr. Mann, he
has done phenomenal work with having soldiers tell their story,
but the importance of working together as groups.
So when we just go to a base, we spend a weekend with them,
and we just don't leave. We give them scripts and tactics to
use, whether it is for salary negotiations or it is even a
script to contact maybe a veteran that works in an organization
that you may want to work with and then use those scripts to
get into that organization. Because the days of sending out
your resume just doesn't work. No one is reading resumes;
computers are reading resumes. Most jobs are found within an
organization. So if you can network in and have scripts already
tailored towards you and you can just kind of tweak them, I
think it is a very valuable tool. And so those are some of the
tools.
And then, when we leave, we set up meet-up groups so they
can meet up as a group and take ownership of it and have
organizers within there so that they can hold themselves
accountable to making LinkedIn connections, you know, to go to
maybe different events in the community and to network. Very,
very important.
Ms. Tsongas. And those follow-on activities would seem to
be very important. Yeah.
Mr. Mann. Thank you for that question.
I work with veterans at a very grassroots level from all
services, spending a lot of time trying to get our head around
what is challenging them as they come into transition and then
going to speak on it. And what I have found is that most of our
military warriors today, they absolutely love what they do for
a living. In fact, it satisfies such a high calling for their
inner purpose, and it is so in line with it, they almost don't
even think about it.
But what happens is, when they separate from service, there
is all this emphasis on getting a job and just stepping into
civil society, and they kind of leave that inner purpose back
in their team room, back in their platoon bay, back in their
ready room, and they are not as aware as they could be and
should be of what it is that really makes them tick. What
brought them in the military? What was it that kept them in the
military in those dark times when they lost buddies and
friends?
And when you leave that kind of purpose behind, even if you
get a great job, and with the kind of caustic combat that they
have seen, in many cases, it makes transition very tough. So
just one thing is getting familiar with each warrior's purpose
well before they transition. You know, that is a very important
thing.
The second thing is the ability to tell their story. We are
hardwired as warriors not to talk about ourselves. We are
hardwired to talk about our teammates and maybe a few other
things, but, for the most part, when they step into civil
society, they are not telling their story. And folks like Mr.
Randazzo and others, they want to hear their stories, because
it really has a massive impact. And it has huge healing powers
on the kind of combat stress that many of these warriors have
been through.
So teaching them and empowering them to tell their own
story is the second thing that we do at Mission America and
that I work with Bill on.
And then, finally, we call it ``keeping the light on in the
team room.'' Military warriors are some of the most
collaborative, communicative people in the world. We can go
into any rough spot, and we can figure it out. We will build a
team around it and get it done. For some reason, when we walk
into civil society, we don't do that. We don't stay connected
to the team that we had, and we sure don't build new teams.
So those are just three areas where we put a lot of
emphasis to hopefully be position players for TAP and others to
meet a need that, if we don't address it, it is going to come
calling at the end.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you.
I have run out of time, and I am sorry, Mr. Mahoney, I
can't hear your answer.
Thank you.
Dr. Heck. I think we will have time for a second round, so
stand by.
Mr. Knight.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know, it is interesting, when I ETS'd [estimated time
served] out of the Army years and years ago, it was go around,
make sure that everything is cleared. You know, everybody is
walking with their briefcase or their folder or whatever. And,
of course, on your folder, it says, ``I am ETSing, I am going
back to the world,'' or whatever.
And, to me, back then, that was it. I was applying to
college. I was going to college. I had a mission, and I was
ready to go. But a lot of guys were like, ``I don't know what I
am going to do. I am going to go home, and I am going to figure
it out when I get home.'' And that seems to be the problem.
Now, I live in a real military area, next to a base. A lot
of retirees, a lot of young folks that are coming home, and a
lot of people that are trying to transition back into the, kind
of, private sector. The biggest thing I see is--and I know the
military has changed since I left, but the biggest thing I see
is, once they leave the military, there is a little bit of a
gap there. And I know some of your organizations step up and
take over that gap. And we have some in my area.
What do we do with those people that say that they have it
all figured out? They have done everything that they can, they
are going to college, or they have a job, or they are--they
have everything worked out. Because some of those people might
not have it worked out, and, after a couple years, they figure,
what the heck am I doing?
So do we have something that, maybe not tracks them, but
gives them that card and says, hey, look, we would like to talk
to you every couple months, or we would like to check in with
you, just make sure you are doing everything--everything is
going right?
Mr. Mahoney. Yes, sir. Good question.
With our organization, with zero8hundred, we have a case
management system that drives those follow-on calls. So we have
the initial call with them right after the class, and then they
discuss their needs. And as you are kind of alluding to there,
their needs change over time. They may have everything all
wired, and then 3 months later they maybe aren't in that
situation anymore. So those follow-on calls discuss their new
needs and can connect them to resources.
And all those calls are recorded in the case management
system so that, when that navigator goes back, he can refresh
his memory on his conversation with the customer or client, and
he can start the conversation from that point.
But I think having that 21 months of those check-in calls
can really help the transitioning service member.
Mr. Mann. Thank you, Mr. Knight.
One other best practice that I have seen that seems to work
pretty well that we might think about sharing with the services
is the smaller organizations like special forces and the Navy
SEAL, the Honor Foundation, special forces with Next Ridgeline,
the foundations aligned with those outfits do a pretty good job
of keeping track of guys as they go deeper into transition. It
is a little easier to do that.
But one thing, you know, that might be considered for a
best practice is, with the services, the foundations that are
aligned with the services could possibly play a role in that
deep tracking like that. Because it is an involved process to
do that. A lot of these guys go off the grid, you know, and
they kind of go dark, and it is hard to do, even in smaller
organizations like special forces.
Mr. Knight. Mr. Chair, I want to thank you, and I want to
thank these groups. You know, it is a difficult thing, carrying
a ruck one day in a desert and then, a month later, you are in
an office and you are looking around at a different
environment. So it is a difficult transition.
I appreciate what you are doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Randazzo. Can I make one comment on that?
Mr. Knight. Yes, sir. Absolutely.
Mr. Randazzo. We are only 2 years plus a few months, but we
gather their personal email addresses, and for those that have
attended our first event, we keep in touch with them weekly
with newsletters. And you are right; sometimes when we are
there it doesn't click. But when they are ready, they are
ready, and so they will reach out to us.
So we have had some real good success in getting feedback
and emails back from maybe a soldier who attended 18 months ago
and now they are ready.
Mr. Knight. Very good.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In terms of the transition, what is a briefing on Active
Duty in terms of on-the-job training opportunities and
apprenticeship training opportunities run by the VA?
It is my understanding that there just isn't much of a
knowledge that the veterans have, in terms of Active Duty
personnel when they exit the military, about that particular
option. And so it is in law, but it is dramatically
underutilized.
Mr. Randazzo. Are you talking about the last 6 months of
their service where they can do a job apprentice or job shadow?
Mr. Coffman. No. When they actually go through the out-
briefings, that it is available to them under the Veterans
Administration. It is my understanding that the soldiers,
marines, airmen, and sailors are really not made aware of that
particular opportunity.
Mr. Randazzo. Yeah, so I am aware of a program for the last
6 months of their service.
Mr. Coffman. Right, yeah.
Mr. Randazzo. They are allowed to do a program, and maybe
you are not aware of it, but----
Mr. Coffman. No, I am aware of that program.
Mr. Randazzo. Gotcha.
Mr. Coffman. This is after they leave Active Duty.
Dr. Heck. That might be a question better suited for the
second panel.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Mr. Randazzo. But I think that program, sir, is one of the
best programs that the military could offer in the VA or the
DOL [Department of Labor] can offer is a job shadow and
apprentice. I think that should be emphasized more.
And I think some of the rules should be laxed on that. It
is a 50-mile radius. So, for example, Fort Hood is 61 miles
from Austin, Texas. I mean, there is a lot of growth and
opportunities in Austin, Texas. JBLM [Joint Base Lewis-McChord]
to St. Louis--to Seattle, same thing. Fort Bragg, which I was
just at, to Raleigh that is just outside of that mile radius.
So I think there are some things that could be tweaked in
that to make it better.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Heck. We will go around with a second round.
Mr. Mahoney, I would imagine that, based on the success
that your program has had, there would be other communities
interested in trying to replicate what you have done and not
recreate the wheel. Could you discuss any specific challenges
you had in establishing your program and how you overcame those
challenges?
What I find often is that, when there is a community
organization or a not-for-profit or somebody who is trying to
gain access to a base to provide a service, that is usually one
of the biggest obstacles that they have to overcome. Did you
face that same thing? And if so, how did you overcome that and,
as well, any other challenges that you might have had?
Mr. Mahoney. Yes, Mr. Chairman. We had the Navy on our ops
committee, which is really the planning committee, and the
leadership and oversight committee from the start. So we were
fortunate that Admiral Dixon Smith, who is now the chief of
Naval Installations Command, was the regional commander--very
interested in transition and was participating in some of those
meetings. So he was engaged from the start. We also had a
representative from Marine Corps Recruit Depot on our
committee, as well, so that helped.
But it still, even with that level of engagement, it still
took about 9 months to get the memorandum of understanding
through the legal staff at the region. So that was challenging.
We were very pleased that it did get through and did get
approved.
I know that one of the concerns is, if you let one
organization on base, then you are letting thousands, perhaps,
on base. And one of the things that we tried to explain is that
we are really a neutral connector; we are connecting people to
resources. We are not going to duplicate what many of the other
great organizations are doing in San Diego. And I know that had
to be sort of socialized with the nonprofits and the other
agencies in San Diego. We were happy to have the VA on our
board, as well. And I think that helped us get past some of
those challenges.
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
I am wondering about scaling up. You know, every time we
have a really great pilot doing something that works, we often
want to take that to another level. And sometimes the
conditions, the personalities, the demographics, what have you,
that there is something that is different enough and it doesn't
work.
What are some of the thoughts that you have about your
programs? We are going to talk, the next panel, about the
relationship with the DOD, and so I know that you don't
necessarily want to get into that. But do you have an interest
in that? And what do you see as some of the ways that you would
go about doing that? What do you need from the Congress or, you
know, from the Department?
Mr. Randazzo. So, yes, so, definitely, we do want to scale.
And so online and technology gives us the option to do that. So
we have an app that we have developed, a transition app, and we
are coming out with another version here in the next 90 days.
We also have online programming that will feed them in a good
sequence of order of different techniques and strategies; as
well as we have over 140 TED-type videos online that we can
sequence to them, along with workable, actionable steps they
can take after watching and take action.
So, yes, we definitely would like to scale, but we need to
activate this 18 months prior to them leaving. And I had a
great conversation before. It should even be maybe 3 or 4 or 5
years before they transition out, some of these things. And we
have almost developed a more of a leadership-type role summit
versus a transition, and that is from some of the CGs that we
have dealt with and that have sat in our program for 2 or 3
days.
Mrs. Davis. Uh-huh.
Mr. Mann. If I could just offer one thing to that, it is
understanding that, as a former Army officer, going deeper into
the life pattern of the service member, that is harder because
you have a war to fight, you know, you have to retain numbers,
and you have to do the mission. And that becomes very hard when
you are trying to train and deploy.
So one of the things I might suggest, too, in the private-
public partnership realm is some kind of collaborative council
that meets with entrepreneurs and leaders and military
leadership and even military personnel serving at the lower
levels, to come together and find ways to do that, because
there are ways.
I built my real estate portfolio still on Active Duty
serving in a special forces group. A lot of it was offline work
that I had to do in my own time, but the point is there are
ways that this stuff can be provided that isn't necessarily
intrusive into the daily military cycle.
But a collaborative forum to do that, you know, it is not
going to be sorted out here. It is going to take some time and
the right people in the room.
Mrs. Davis. Uh-huh.
Mr. Randazzo. Ma'am, I will just say that we would like to
expand access to our program. We are growing to meet the large
demand that we are seeing already. We would like to expand to
Camp Pendleton this year.
USD [University of San Diego], as part of their evaluation,
the third-party evaluation of the outcomes, is also documenting
how the program was rolled out so it could be potentially
replicated in other communities.
And as far as what could be done by government, grant
programs would be helpful. If there are grants that we could
pursue for community-based handoffs from the transition
courses, that would be terrific. And, also, we would be
pursuing those kind of grants through county and more local
government, as well.
Mrs. Davis. Uh-huh. Great.
Thank you.
Dr. Heck. Ms. Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you all again.
So, as veterans are seeking you all out for one reason or
another, I am curious what they are telling you about what has
been most effective with regard to the transition services that
they have been offered through the DOD and where are there
shortfalls.
If we could start with you, Mr. Mahoney.
Mr. Mahoney. I think, from my perspective, the transition
classes on base are effective if the--you basically get what
you put into those courses. If the service member goes there
and is participating and they are anxious to learn and they are
going to leave there and make progress with their future, that
can be effective for them. It won't be effective for them if
they are in the class and not paying attention and focused on
other things.
So we have seen that. It is frustrating that there are
things that are available for them that can be effective that,
in some cases, they don't take advantage of.
I think the courses on base also that are directed towards
education and other specific areas, we refer them back to the
base for those courses, and they can be effective, as well.
Ms. Tsongas. Do you hear why there might be some who don't
take advantage of it? Do you see a reason why some are more
likely to do it and others not?
Mr. Mahoney. I would say, ma'am, that it is a little bit of
complacency. There might be overconfidence in how marketable
their skills will be when they get out of the service. They may
not have a realistic expectation of, say, their salary range or
how long it will take and how much effort it is going to take
to get employment.
Ms. Tsongas. Okay.
Mr. Mann.
Mr. Mann. Just a little different twist to that. The folks
that I have talked to, they are sprinting all the way to the
finish line. They still have dust on their boots, and they
don't have a lot of time to really process the notion of
transition. And so, you know, it is a mindset. And it is more
than just the TAP program. It is getting yourself ready for
that.
And so, in many cases, they are going into transition
having just come off deployments, having just come off training
missions. And what I hear often is just frustration that
transition happened so quickly and there just wasn't time to
prepare. And then they find themselves, you know, in a brand-
new world, trying to figure it out.
Ms. Tsongas. So it is more a timing issue?
Mr. Mann. Operational tempo and timing, I think.
Ms. Tsongas. Okay.
Mr. Randazzo.
Mr. Randazzo. I would add, I think it is also a delivery
issue. I understand--I have not sat through a class. I have
finally been invited to sit through a class. I am going to sit
through one at Fort Bragg. But I understand there are hundreds
of PowerPoints throughout a 5-day period. And a 26-year-old
soldier who might be transitioning out, a marine, may not--that
might not be engaging to them. So I think more interaction, I
think more technology tools.
And the manuals they receive, I mean, it is 15 pounds of
manuals. I am not sure if printing those are super-effective. I
think you can provide those digitally.
But I think there needs to be more engagement. The one
thing that I have heard is that the people who deliver this,
they are rushing through slides. And I have heard from about a
dozen people who are going through it right now, it is, ``Hey,
let's get through these last 45 slides, and let's work through
lunch, and we'll get you guys out of here by 2:30.'' And so I
don't think that is the message that soldiers need to hear.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you.
Thank you. I yield back.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Knight, followup? No?
Mr. Coffman, followup?
Mr. Coffman. No.
Dr. Heck. Okay.
Well, again, I want to thank all of you for coming here
today and showing us the value of the public-private
partnership and some of the challenges and obstacles you may
have faced in bringing your programs to camps, posts, bases,
and how we can further help you as, you know, some of the
premiere models out there expand across the Nation and provide
more of these services to more of our transitioning troops. We
appreciate your time and your testimony today.
And we will break and allow the flip of the panels, and
then we will move into the next panel quickly.
[Recess.]
Dr. Heck. Okay. I would like to welcome our second panel to
the dais.
We have with us Dr. Susan Kelly, Director of Transition to
Veterans Program Office in the Office of the Secretary of
Defense; Major General Burke Whitman, Director of Marine and
Family Programs Division, U.S. Marine Corps; Brigadier General
James Iacocca, Adjutant General of the U.S. Army; Mr. Thomas
Yavorski, Executive Director of the 21st Century Sailor Office,
representing the Navy; and Mr. Horace Larry, Deputy Chief of
Staff, Manpower and Personnel, for the U.S. Air Force.
Again, I would remind the witnesses, if you can, to please
summarize your testimony to 3 minutes to your best of your
ability so we can get into the questions.
And, with that, I will recognize Dr. Kelly.

STATEMENT OF DR. SUSAN KELLY, DIRECTOR, TRANSITION TO VETERANS
PROGRAM OFFICE, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Dr. Kelly. Good afternoon, Chairman Heck, Ranking Member
Davis, distinguished members of the subcommittee. I appreciate
the opportunity to provide you an update on the Transition
Assistance Program, TAP, and our united effort to support our
transitioning service members.
Since the last time I testified before this subcommittee,
the Department has fully implemented a redesigned TAP at 206
sites worldwide. There were four core components to this
redesign: adopt Career Readiness Standards, CRS, which measures
a service member's preparedness to depart from Active Duty;
develop Transition GPS, a curriculum that builds the skills
needed by service members to meet the CRS; a Capstone event,
during which commanders verify their members have met Career
Readiness Standards or, if not, ensure that they receive
additional training or a warm handover; and implementation to
the military lifecycle transition model, which aligns
transition activities with touchpoints across the military
career.
We have accomplished these core objectives, and the results
are clear. The most recent participant assessment data show
over 80 percent of respondents saying they gained valuable
information and skills to plan their transition, that the
training enhanced their confidence in their transition, they
intended to use what they learned in the classes, and that they
knew how to access appropriate resources post-separation.
Between October 2014 and August of 2015, over 150,000
service members separated from Active Duty. Based on data
verified by the Defense Manpower Data Center, 94 percent of
these eligible members met the VOW [Veteran Opportunity to
Work] Act mandate. Eighty-eight percent either met Career
Readiness Standards or received a warm handover.
These results indicate the commitment of the services and
our partners to prepare members for civilian life. These
partners include the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Labor,
and Education, the Small Business Administration, and the
Office of Personnel Management.
This cooperation has been institutionalized through the TAP
interagency governance structure, consisting of an assistant-
secretary-level executive council and the SES [Senior Executive
Service] and SES senior steering group. These bodies assess and
modify TAP. And the services are fully engaged with the
governance to influence the continued improvement of TAP.
Over the past 2 years, private and public organizations, as
you have heard, companies, and Federal agencies have recognized
that service members present an incredible pool of talent, and
they seek increased opportunities to harness that talent. In
collaboration with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's foundation
Hiring Our Heroes, we have helped shape the environment in
which employers gain early access to transitioning service
members and their spouses.
In 2015, thousands of members attended 18 large-scale
transition summits at installations in both the U.S. and
overseas. The Departments of Energy, Agriculture, and Homeland
Security are actively engaged in targeting service members for
industry jobs.
And through the SkillBridge authority, under the Office of
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness, a growing
number of members have developed skills for employment in high-
demand industries.
My colleagues from the services can share more about the
programs implemented at their installations.
There has been tremendous forward movement, but we must
continue to work with Federal partners and the private sector
to gather lessons learned, improve the curriculum, instill a
culture of planning for post-military life, and developing
pipelines into the national workforce.
That concludes my statement. I will be happy to take your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kelly can be found in the
Appendix on page 60.]
Dr. Heck. General Whitman.

STATEMENT OF MAJGEN BURKE WHITMAN, USMC, DIRECTOR, MARINE AND
FAMILY PROGRAMS DIVISION, U.S. MARINE CORPS

General Whitman. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis,
distinguished members, on behalf of the Marine Corps, I am
grateful for the opportunity to give you an update on our
Transition Readiness Program.
We call it ``transition readiness'' rather than
``transition assistance'' because it is an essential component
of the overall readiness of our individual marines and their
families.
We transition 30,000 marines out of the Marine Corps ever
year. Your marines are fighters. They are mostly young, and
most plan to separate after just one or two tours, maybe 4 to 8
years of Active Duty service. So we don't wait until the end of
their service to begin building their transition readiness. We
begin shortly after the marine enters the Corps and continue
throughout and even beyond the uniformed career.
We use a framework that we call the Marine for Life Cycle.
There are three action points in that cycle--eight action
points, excuse me, in that cycle. And at three of those, we
require some specific activities to build transition readiness.
The first of these mandatory action points occurs when the
marine arrives at the first permanent duty station, which is
after boot camp, after follow-on combat training, and after
their military occupational specialty school. Upon welcome
aboard at that duty station, they attend our Personal Readiness
Seminar, which is required at that point. This establishes the
foundation for the marine's journey through the Corps and
highlights the available services throughout the Marine for
Life Cycle, to include transition readiness, individual
development plans, transition plans, and that kind of thing.
The second mandatory action point occurs at promotion.
Before a marine gets promoted to corporal, she or he has to
take a course we call Your Readiness. This provides them an
update review of the services and resources available to them
and the development of her or his individual transition plan.
And then the final mandatory action point occurs as the
marine approaches separation and attends the Transition
Readiness Seminar that Dr. Kelly talked about.
At the end of this is the Capstone, which, in our case, is
an exit interview with the commander or designee to ensure
readiness. That is a key moment. Transition Readiness is a
commander's program, and we treat it as a commander's
responsibility to make sure that the marine is ready or,
instead, to conduct a warm handover.
In addition to these mandatory components, we do have the
three track options for higher education, entrepreneurship, or
career technical training. We also have a number of workshops,
seminars, apprenticeship programs, and others that we may talk
about during the questions.
Also, after departure, a marine is forever a member of
Marine for Life Network, which is an organized element of our
Marine for Life Cycle led by marines who maintain networks of
job opportunities.
One quick example that I will close with. Major Kyle
Aldrich, our Marine for Life representative in one particular
geographical area, maintained a long-term active communication
with a corporation that might someday hire. And, at one point,
that person, his contact there, called him, said, ``We've got a
job opening. It's a hot fill.'' The major immediately gave him
the resume of a transitioning marine, and that marine just
recently got the job.
As the area's Marine for Life representative, as part of
that network, Major Aldrich's duty was to stay on top of those
opportunities. That was his mission, and that is what he did.
We have a lot more to do, and we are working with the
Department and the other services to try to improve our
program, as well. And I look forward to answering your
questions about that. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of General Whitman can be found in
the Appendix on page 73.]
Dr. Heck. General Iacocca.

STATEMENT OF BG JAMES IACOCCA, USA, ADJUTANT GENERAL, U.S. ARMY

General Iacocca. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis, and
distinguished members of this committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you on behalf of America's Army.
The United States Army is committed to ensuring the
lifelong success of our soldiers as they transition to citizens
and veterans in civilian society. Our responsibility is to
inspire soldiers for life by providing essential counseling and
training throughout a soldier's career to ensure they are ready
to succeed when they leave Active Duty.
The Army's Soldier for Life-Transition Assistance Program
is a commander's program. The program facilitates a soldier's
transition by ensuring they begin the process early and they
visit the transition center often and ensures commanders
provide encouragement and adequate time for soldiers to
complete transition activities.
Today, the Soldier for Life-Transition Assistance Program
serves approximately 110,000 soldiers annually. The program
provides soldiers with the counseling, employment and education
workshops, career tracks, and career skill opportunities
required to achieve the VOW to Hire Heroes Act of 2011,
commonly known as the VOW Act, and OSD [Office of the Secretary
of Defense] policies. As a result, the program helps soldiers
make informed career decisions, be competitive in the
workforce, and continue to provide positive contributions to
their community after completing their Active Duty service.
Currently, the Army is meeting the requirements of the VOW
Act, with the Active Component at 89 percent, the National
Guard at 75 percent, and the Army Reserve at 79 percent for
fiscal year 2015.
In the last 5 years, we have increased our investment in
the Soldier for Life-Transition Assistance Program and have
grown from 54 to 75 centers worldwide and increased transition,
financial, and educational counselors by 475 personnel, to a
total of 700 counselors and staff.
Additionally, the Army established mobile training teams to
support the National Guard and Army Reserve at home and at
demobilization stations. To expand our reach, the Army created
a 24/7 Virtual Soldier for Life-Transition Assistance Center to
meet the needs of all soldiers, including those deployed in
Iraq and Afghanistan. And we have TAP 21, an automated system
that allows commanders to maintain visibility throughout the
process.
Focusing on expanding soldiers' career options, the Army's
Career Skills Program affords transitioning soldiers the
opportunity to obtain industry-recognized credentials and to
participate in first-class apprenticeships, on-the-job
training, job shadowing, internships, and employment skills
training up to 100 days prior to separation.
One of those programs is the United Association of Veterans
in Piping, which provides internships in pipe welding and
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. The program has a
98 percent retention rate, and more than 1,100 soldiers have
received jobs through this program.
To conclude, I wish to thank all of you for your continued
support. The Army is committed to being a leader of the
Department of Defense transition efforts by preparing and
connecting our soldiers and our veterans to career and
education opportunities.
Chairman Heck and Ranking Member Davis and members of the
subcommittee, I thank you again for the opportunity to appear
before you.
[The prepared statement of General Iacocca can be found in
the Appendix on page 82.]
Dr. Heck. Mr. Yavorski.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS YAVORSKI, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, 21ST CENTURY
SAILOR OFFICE, U.S. NAVY

Mr. Yavorski. Chairman Heck, Ranking Member Davis, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to update you on Navy's Transition Assistance
Program.
Nearly 4 years ago, the Veteran Employment Initiative Task
Force was formed to develop and improve the Transition
Assistance Program and the Transition GPS, or Goals, Plan,
Success, curriculum. We implemented Transition GPS throughout
the Navy in 2012 through 2014. We have also continued to
improve classroom delivery by updating Transition GPS software,
enhancing the WiFi capability for computers in every classroom,
expanding our delivery approach to accommodate sailors in
isolated locations, and adding classroom capacity.
Sailors leaving the Navy today have a far better transition
experience than was previously available. They have far greater
insight into the quality veteran benefits they have earned in
recognition of their service. As part of the interagency
transition assistance governance structure, the Navy continues
to meet with the Defense Transition to Veterans Program Office,
other service representatives, and our interagency partners to
continuously assess and improve Transition GPS.
The transition military life cycle incorporates career
readiness and transition preparation across a sailor's career,
rather than waiting until they are separating. Aspects of
Transition GPS are incorporated into the Navy Career
Development Boards held at key points in the sailor's career.
Navy Credentialing Opportunities Online, or Navy COOL,
helps sailors obtain civilian certifications and licenses for
skills acquired during their service. Since its inception in
October 2007, Navy COOL has provided over 130,000
certifications and licenses for over 41,000 sailors in every
enlisted rating and pay grade.
Commanding officers are encouraged to authorize eligible
sailors to pursue employment skills training through the
Department of Defense SkillBridge initiative during their final
180 days of Active Duty. For example, the Navy is supporting
the Solar Ready Vets pilot program in Norfolk in partnership
with Tidewater Community College and the Department of Energy.
The Navy continues to work with public and private
organizations like zero8hundred to provide sailors additional
transition assistance opportunities.
Each sailor who selflessly serves our Nation eventually
separates or retires and, in doing so, has earned our
unwavering commitment to provide them the tools that will
position them for success as they transition and continue
serving our Nation as honored and distinguished veterans.
I thank you for your steadfast support for all Navy
sailors, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yavorski can be found in the
Appendix on page 89.]
Dr. Heck. Mr. Larry.

STATEMENT OF HORACE LARRY, DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF AIR FORCE
SERVICES, DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF FOR MANPOWER AND PERSONNEL,
HEADQUARTERS U.S. AIR FORCE

Mr. Larry. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Heck and distinguished members of this
subcommittee, I am pleased to testify before you today
regarding transition assistance the Air Force provides to our
Active Duty, Guard, and Reserve members and their families.
In 2012, we revamped our Transition Assistance Program with
a major overhaul that embraced requirements outlined in the
Veterans Opportunity to Work to Hire Heroes Act and the
Veterans Employment Initiative. We executed a partnership with
the staff of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, our fellow
armed services, the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Labor, and
Education, as well as the Small Business Administration, and
the Office of Personnel Management.
Along the way, we teamed with industry leaders in
orchestrating a type of revamped Transition Assistance Program
that is delivering what our members need and want. Through our
collaborative efforts, the Air Force has created a win-win
situation where our airmen succeed as employees, students, or
business owners and as productive members of the private sector
while in transition from military service.
The Air Force is committed to furthering collaboration as
we press forward in delivering the best transition assistance
possible for our members and families. Thank you for this
opportunity to testify before you, and I look forward to
addressing any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Larry can be found in the
Appendix on page 97.]
Dr. Heck. Again, thank you all very much for coming and
participating today.
Dr. Kelly, in your testimony, you mentioned a TAP
interagency organization. So is there representation from the
private sector on that interagency group, such as entities like
zero8hundred or American Dream U?
Dr. Kelly. The TAP interagency governance structure, both
the executive council and the senior steering group, are made
up of the Federal agencies as well as the services.
Dr. Heck. So, in your opinion, is there an opportunity or,
I mean, would there be a benefit to have representation from
the private sector, especially those entities that are looking
to try to offer services to transitioning service members?
Dr. Kelly. I think if you give the services the opportunity
to talk about all of their public-private partnerships that
they are engaged in right now, you will find out that they are
getting feedback from the program. But, also, I think we have
evolved from just providing a Transition GPS curriculum and
meeting Career Readiness Standards. It has been a tremendous
learning experience over the last couple of years.
We were very much focused on unemployment of our veterans
and resolving that issue and working with employers to resolve
that issue. What we have learned is that employers are now
coming to us and saying, ``This is a real talent pool, and we
want early access to that.''
But the other lesson that we have learned is that this is a
community issue that is probably best addressed at the
community level. You heard of the terrific success of
zero8hundred. He talked about using the 2-1-1 directory for the
community resources that are in that community. He talked about
bringing in the employers, bringing in the installation
commanders.
So he mobilized or that entire community mobilized their
community resources and looked at the needs of that community
and developed a solution. You see that going on in multiple
places, which some of the installations are part of. You see
those kinds of communities coming together and saying, how are
we going to use what we have to either keep these service
members here because they are a terrific talent pool for us,
you see it going on in North Carolina, you see it going on in
Washington State, you see it going on in California. But what
is happening is that they are developing efforts to address the
workforce skill gaps in those States and in those communities,
and that becomes more meaningful.
Dr. Heck. So is there a process, a formal process, by which
a program, let's say, like zero8hundred that has done extremely
well in the San Diego area, is evaluated for potential
implementation or recommendation to be used in other locations?
I mean, if we find a private-sector program that seems to be
working in one area, is there some formal process by which that
is looked at to see whether or not it can be implemented
elsewhere?
Dr. Kelly. Well, the Secretary of Defense then at the time,
Secretary Hagel, provided guidance to the military departments,
the Secretaries of the military departments, the Chiefs, and
the Chairman and provided guidance, saying, look at allowing
non-Federal entities onto the installations when they are
providing support to our military members and our families.
There was very explicit guidance and templates, actually,
on how to evaluate those entities, but left to the installation
commanders and those communities to evaluate those programs,
what was needed by the service members on those installations
and those families, and how that fit into the community. So
that authority still is retained by each one of the
installation commanders.
And as we see this evolving, it seems to be the community-
level efforts that have the most meaning. And if we look at it
in the long term, we can build that economic prosperity for our
States and our communities using the workforce skills of our
transitioning service members. And I think we have to figure
out and come to an agreement as to what are our long-term
goals.
Dr. Heck. Great.
My second question will take longer than the 45 seconds I
have left, so I will wait for the second round.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you very much.
I actually wanted to ask all of you to just respond to
anything you heard in their presentations that could be
problematic in terms of the services or what you would welcome.
I think, Dr. Kelly, you are suggesting that having the
community engaged in the activities is very, very valuable. But
I think it also raises some questions about the capacity of our
services to respond and, I guess, to be able to spend some
valuable time interacting with them, as well, in order to make
that effort go further.
How is that? What do you say to the organizations that are
working hard in the communities? And does that say something
about the fact that maybe you are not totally having a TAP
program that works for the service members, as well?
Dr. Kelly. I am sorry, I am not quite clear on what the
question is.
Mrs. Davis. I am just wondering about a reaction to what
you heard and whether there are some instances in which perhaps
they do get in the way, in some instances, or just the fact
that you are trying to provide the authority for them to go on
base becomes problematic in any community. How can they deal
with that?
Dr. Kelly. Go ahead.
General Whitman. We do have to balance at each installation
the opportunity. We are eager to have the engagements with
partners, even with hiring partners, to the greatest extent
that we can. We have to balance that at times with safety
concerns, security concerns, just installation capacity
concerns, which may mean sometimes we might want to move
something off the base. It might not be quite as appealing.
Each installation is different. That is why it has made
sense for us so far to let each installation determine how best
to manage that. At Camp Lejeune, which is not close to a big
urban area, we manage that pretty differently from the way we
do at Camp Pendleton, California, which is very close to lots
of urban, big hiring organizations.
And we also have to balance the goodness that comes from
entering into these partnerships with ensuring that we do it
legally and also fairly, in a way that doesn't give
preferential treatment to someone that someone else may not
like.
But we are doing it in a very robust fashion. You will hear
from all of us, we are partnering heavily in every one of the
installations, much more so than in the past.
General Iacocca. Yes, ma'am. We, too, in the Army allow our
installation commanders flexibility in the program. And we do
have to maintain balance of who we allow on post. But, in many
cases, as you heard, they have access to posts, and our
soldiers are participating in their programs.
But one of the things that we are working through is to
stress to our soldiers to go to transition early and often and
not wait till they get to the end of their service when they
are close to transition. And that would allow more time.
And many of our soldiers are starting to go earlier and go
more often. And it makes the program easier to digest, rather
than try to do it in a condensed 5-day program as they are
getting ready to transition out.
Thank you.
Mrs. Davis. Right.
And anything that is different? I mean, if you find that
you can work well with these organizations, that is great.
Mr. Yavorski. I would just like to address one of the
issues that one of the gentlemen brought up about the
PowerPoints, in that we recognize that. And that is why we put
the computers in all the classrooms, the WiFi. It is
interactive.
They can bring their own computer in. We have computers for
all of those--we talked about social media and LinkedIn through
the VA. And every service member veteran gets 1 year of premium
free LinkedIn membership. So we are stressing that and teaching
that in our classes. So we are taking that on board.
Mrs. Davis. Great.
Mr. Larry. In terms of access to the bases, we, the Air
Force, take a similar approach. It is a balancing act, it most
certainly is, with the force protection and the requirements of
the base, et cetera. But the other part of that, we do look at
opportunities to bring on specific agencies or organizations to
see how they could team with us, as well. We don't have an
overarching process where it says, here is where we go Air
Force-wide, but we leave it to the individual installations.
So we take the GPS TAP program; here is where we start,
here is how we have to finish, here are the outcomes we see.
But within that, like at Eglin Base in Florida, look at the
Boeing Company, we bring them on and say, we have some
opportunities, and we will work with you. And we give the
members specifics, as opposed to the job search overall.
So we do work to embrace the local communities in this
process.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Just going back to the Marines very quickly, and you talked
about being a Marine for Life. In the other services, do you
also work with organizations that work with the service member
after they get out, specifically in your service?
General Iacocca. I think, in the Army, if there is an issue
with transition, we do the warm handover with the VA or the
Department of Labor.
Mrs. Davis. With the VA. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Yavorski. In the Navy, we don't have a ``Sailor for
Life,'' but we have a lot of those programs in our Fleet and
Family Service Center and a warm handover and so forth.
Mr. Larry. Similar with the Air Force, we don't have a
codified program like the Marines, but we do the warm handover
and validate that is done.
Dr. Heck. Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Can you tell me about, in the transition phase, the
integration with the Department of Veterans Affairs? To what
extent do they make themselves available, and how are they
integrated into what you do?
Dr. Kelly. The VA's benefits briefings are a mandatory
briefing. There are no exemptions for any of the service
members. So that is 6 hours of face-to-face time with the
benefits briefers. And there are follow-on one-on-one
appointments after that.
So you have VA benefits briefings as part of the mandatory
Transition GPS core curriculum. But VA also volunteered to
build a curriculum for the career technical training track for
those service members who want to use their Post-9/11 GI Bill
to get certifications in the trades. And that course teaches
them how to choose the best institution, get the most financial
aid, choose the course of study, and sets them up well to apply
for those particular institutions.
So VA is very well integrated across the Transition GPS
curriculum and on the installations.
Mr. Coffman. To what extent when members, because a lot of
the members that leave tend to be, probably, disproportionally
junior enlisted, junior officers. And so, to what extents are--
and a lot of them have an inactive requirement but have no
Active Reserve requirement.
To what extent do their respective services try to sell
them on continuing their military service in the Active
Reserves and also potentially getting another--are there
opportunities to earn a different occupational specialty on
their way out the door through a Reserve school to fit a unit
requirement in whatever geographic area they are relocating to?
Dr. Kelly. Well, on the first point, one of the Career
Readiness Standards is to go through the interview with the
Reserve recruiter.
Mr. Coffman. Oh, great.
Dr. Kelly. So that is mandatory. We are realistic, in that
we want to keep the best. So that is a Career Readiness
Standard for all service members.
In reference to MOSs, I will let the services speak to
that.
General Whitman. We do, we pursue that programmatic piece
aggressively. And we do offer retraining in occupational skills
based on the need at the time. We are constantly reassessing
that, sometimes even with bonuses, to try to get the right
people in the right place.
General Iacocca. While in the transition phase, sir, there
is not an opportunity to train them on a new MOS, but they do
have opportunities to participate in a career skills program to
gain new skills that they can use as they transition out of the
Army.
Mr. Coffman. No, that would make absolute sense. But so, in
other words, a lot of times you have Reserve units in their
geographic area, there is not an MOS match with what they have,
say, in the Army today and what that unit is in proximity to
where they are going to live, and so that would require an MOS
school. And so is that available?
General Iacocca. Yes, sir, that is available. Once they
transition, if they go into a Reserve unit where there may be a
MOS mismatch at the time, they can go to school once they are
in that Reserve unit.
Mr. Coffman. Okay, but let me phrase this differently. So
they are in transition. They decide they do want to re-
affiliate to another unit. They are talked to by the Reserve
recruiter. So are there orders cut for them when they are
leaving Active Duty to go to their school before they even
report into the unit?
Quite frankly, that was an offer made to me when I was
leaving the Marine Corps to the Marine Corps Reserves.
General Iacocca. Sir, I will have to get back to you on
that. I know that opportunity exists. I don't know if it
happens--I don't know if they are issued their orders prior to
leaving. But I will get back to you on that, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 107.]
Dr. Heck. Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
And, Dr. Kelly, you may have covered this in your
introductory remarks, and I am sorry I missed them. What is the
total budget for the Transition Assistance Program?
Dr. Kelly. The Transition Assistance Program is not
actually a line item. The activities are spread throughout many
of the different activities within the military personnel
system.
Mr. O'Rourke. Do we have an idea of what it costs us to
perform these activities?
Dr. Kelly. We are currently going through the process of
publishing our DODI [Department of Defense Instruction] and
publishing that on the Federal Register. And it is in the
neighborhood of $100 million per year.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay.
And then I know from reading some of the conclusions from
the 2014 GAO [Government Accountability Office] report, there
is the recommendation that we do a better job of measuring the
effectiveness of the TAP program.
Dr. Kelly. Yes.
Mr. O'Rourke. What are the measures that we would look at?
Veterans' unemployment? Percentage who are connected with a job
within so many months? What are the things that you will
measure going forward?
Dr. Kelly. We actually have a TAP evaluation strategy that
was requested by OMB [Office of Management and Budget] and was
approved by OMB. It has three pieces to it.
One is to make sure that the program is implemented that
meets the law and policy. So we monitor VOW compliance as well
as Career Readiness Standards that are met by the service
members; also, customer satisfaction. And we monitor that
through the Participant Assessment Tool, an anonymous online
tool, and provide the results of that at the installation level
every quarter, so even commanders can monitor that at their own
installation. And then, finally, looking at long-term outcomes.
For DOD, our input into the evaluation is our VOW
compliance and our Career Readiness Standards. Our partners on
the other side of the DD 214 [military discharge document] are
looking at long-term outcomes--for instance, for Veterans
Affairs, the use of the Post-9/11 GI bill, the successful use
of that; persistence rate, the numbers who are actually
completing courses; as well as a Small Business Administration
for the entrepreneurship track, how many are still in business
at certain periods of time; and then for the Department of
Labor, also looking at unemployment.
Mr. O'Rourke. So employment is part of that?
Dr. Kelly. Yes, it is. Yes, it is. But we are in the
process of looking at even longer-term outcomes. And DOL is
looking at a quasi-experimental design to look at some more
results.
Mr. O'Rourke. And did I understand that you are in the
planning stage of defining those metrics? Or have you already
published what those metrics will be and you are measuring and
you will then publish the results the coming year?
Dr. Kelly. We have identified some of the measures. With
some of the measures, we are identifying or tracking
milestones, because it takes time to put the data collection
process someplace, as well as the IT [information technology]
infrastructure to capture the data, and to work through the PII
[personally identifiable information] issues of data-sharing.
But we have milestones, and we are tracking those
milestones. That is one of the purposes of the TAP interagency
governance structure. And that is looked at every quarter.
Mr. O'Rourke. And my last question. I appreciate my
colleague asking about your effectiveness in working with the
VA. I think one of the things that a separating service member
is counseled on is their eligibility for health benefits within
the VA. Tell me what the consequences are of poor performance
within the VA on access to mental health.
We have an especially acute situation in El Paso. And I am
hearing from recently separated service members who are living
with PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], for example, that
their inability to access health care, mental health care, is
affecting their ability to pursue employment or, you know, have
a quality of life that perhaps many of us take for granted.
Any thoughts on that?
Dr. Kelly. Well, certainly, Veterans Affairs is given 6
hours of face time with each transitioning service member to go
through the VA benefits briefing. That is a mandate. There are
no exemptions for that. That is tracked. That is one of the
mandatory attendance and mandatory Career Readiness Standards.
But one of the basic tenets of the TAP redesign was to
ensure that connectivity between the installation, wherever any
service member is transitioning from, to the resources with VA,
also the resources for DOL. So they are taught how to navigate
the Web-based tools to identify the resources in their own
communities and to connect to those staff members in their own
communities to which they are relocating.
Past their transition out of Active Duty, that would have
to be tracked by Veterans Affairs.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Heck. Thank you.
Well, that bell signified the votes series, so we will
forgo a second round of questions. My second question I will
submit for the record.
Again, I want to thank all the witnesses on both panels for
taking the time to be here and for hanging with us through our
hour-long delay. I appreciate what you are doing for our
service men and women as they prepare to take on their civilian
second careers.
And until we see you at the next hearing, we will be
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:00 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

October 28, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

October 28, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

October 28, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. COFFMAN

General Iacocca. Transitioning RA Soldiers do not get training or
schooling required for a new Reserve Component (RC) MOS or unit while
they are still on active duty. If a Soldier transitions from active
duty and joins the Reserve Component (RC) and that Soldier has already
signed into his or her RC unit, then the RC funds the training
(assuming it is a ``will-train'' position) after he/she transitions off
of active duty. In some cases that training happens immediately after
the transition, and in other cases it may happen months post-
transition. The exception to this norm is the 365 Pilot Training
Program at Fort Hood. That pilot allows a Soldier to train in a new
military occupational specialty prior to transitioning off of active
duty from the Regular Army. The Army Marketing and Research Group
funded this pilot for Fiscal Year 2015. However, funds are still
pending for Fiscal Year 2016. The program is on track to expand to Fort
Bragg later this year pending the release of a third fragmentary order
and additional funds.   [See page 28.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

October 28, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALZ

Mr. Walz. It is encouraging to learn of the continued emphasis and
on-going successful development of the Transition Assistance Program?
Looking forward, what additional assistance from Congress, if any, do
you require in order to increase the effectiveness of the program?
Dr. Kelly. The Department is very appreciative of the support
Congress, and this Committee in particular, has given to our
transitioning Service members. We would appreciate your continued
support and assistance in directing your constituent Service members
to:

register at an American Job Center and take advantage of
the programs and services they provide regarding employment assistance;

apply for VA benefits immediately, if they did not do so
prior to separation; and

use their robust Post-9/11 G.I. Bill wisely.
Congress can continue to support TAP by encouraging employers in
your respective districts to take advantage of the job announcement,
skills training, and placement opportunities available to them at the
American Job Centers in your state. The American Job Centers now have
millions of dollars in funding to help employers develop new
apprenticeships and skills training that are needed in the local
economies. All jobs are local. The more employers engage with the local
American Job Centers, the more Veterans can return to their local
communities and look forward to economic opportunity.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KNIGHT
Mr. Knight. Do we have a system in place for ensuring every vet's
``hand-off'' has succeeded 6, 12, 24 months down the road? How are
service men and women ``tagged and tracked,'' so to speak, by TAP?
Dr. Kelly. The Department of Defense's authority and ability to
track a Service member ends once a Service member separates from the
military. However, as members of the TAP interagency governance body,
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Department of Labor (DOL),
and the Small Business Administration are working on developing long-
term outcome indicators/measures of TAP. The successful use of the
Post-9/11 G.I. Bill for completion of a college degree and the new
business formation rate for those veterans interested in pursuing
entrepreneurship are two examples of ensuring long-term success.
Additional long-term, outcome-oriented evaluations are in development
by the VA and DOL to further strengthen the interagency evaluation
approach and ensure that the TAP is continuously improved. For example,
VA intends to conduct a survey to veterans (post-transition) on the
value of the TAP. Due to the Department of Defense's limited role after
a Service member separates, our TAP interagency partners are better
suited to provide additional data on the long-term effectiveness of
TAP.
Mr. Knight. What percent of service men and women leaving the Armed
Forces today who want jobs transition to jobs within 6 months? And
within a year?
Dr. Kelly. The Department of Defense's authority and ability to
track a Service member ends once a Service member separates from the
military. Our Transition Assistance Program (TAP) interagency partners,
particularly the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Labor, have
mechanisms in place and in development to assess such outcomes of
Veterans. In particular, the Department of Labor, through its National
Longitudinal Survey, is able to track the employment situation over
time of some Veterans. Due to the Department of Defense's limited role
after separation, the Department of Labor may be better suited to
supply this data.
Mr. Knight. What letter grade, or qualitative assessment, would
each of the military branches give the TAP today? How much has TAP
improved since 2011?
General Whitman. Our qualitative assessment of TAP is that it is a
vital, useful tool for Marines; it has improved significantly since
2011. TAP continues to gain momentum as we move forward in the Marine
For Life Cycle with increased interagency collaboration, an improved
governance process, and annual reviews and updates. Metrics have been
put in place to track its effectiveness. Working groups with
interagency partners discuss challenges and implement improvements in
the program. Through these efforts, we remain actively involved and
committed to ensuring Marines are successfully meeting in-service and
post-transition goals.
Mr. Knight. What letter grade, or qualitative assessment, would
each of the military branches give the TAP today? How much has TAP
improved since 2011?
General Iacocca. VOW to Hire Heroes Act compliance through third
quarter Fiscal Year 2015 was 90% for Active Component. For this reason
the Army overall correlates as an ``A-'' for executing Transition
Assistance Program (TAP) services, whereas Army was a ``B'' in Fiscal
Year 2014 with Active Component at 83% compliance.
The Army is doing well and improving year after year meeting the
law and the additional White House components of TAP. In the last five
years, the Army's Soldier for Life-Transition Assistance Program (SFL-
TAP) has grown from 54 to 75 centers worldwide, and from 225 to 700
transition, financial, and education counselors and staff. The program
added a center in Kuwait, and established mobile transition teams to
support the National Guard and Army Reserve at home and at
demobilization stations. Additionally, the Army created a 24/7 Virtual
SFL-TAP Center to meet the needs of remotely located Soldiers, those
deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan, and for any Soldier that needed to
receive transition services telephonically or virtually.
Furthermore, the Army has improved Soldiers' opportunities to reach
their post-transition career and education goals by establishing a
Career Skills Program. The Career Skills Program affords transitioning
Soldiers the opportunity to obtain industry-recognized credentials, the
opportunity to participate in first-class apprenticeships, on-the-job
training, job shadowing, and employment skills training up to 180 days
prior to transitioning from the Army.
Finally, the Army is working to improve the accuracy of our TAP
assessments by increasing the quality and quantity of post-transition
feedback from our partnering agencies of the Departments of Veterans
Affairs and Labor, and the Internal Revenue Service.
Mr. Knight. What letter grade, or qualitative assessment, would
each of the military branches give the TAP today? How much has TAP
improved since 2011?
Mr. Yavorski. I would give the Navy Transition Assistance Program
(TAP) a grade of B+, and improving. Sailor feedback reflects that 86
percent agreed, or strongly agreed, that TAP was beneficial in helping
them gain the information and skills to better plan for transition.
Since 2011, the program has greatly improved as a result of:

revising the core transition assistance curriculum and
increasing the length from four days to five days;

adopting career readiness standards upon which the new
curriculum is based;

adding two-day tracks on assessing higher education,
career technical training, and entrepreneurship. (Sailors can also take
the Small Business Administration advanced entrepreneurial workshop);

adding a capstone event to ensure Sailors meet career
readiness standards, or are provided a warm handoff to partner
agencies;

incorporating the transition Military Life Cycle into our
existing career development program to prepare Sailors for eventual
transition throughout their military career;

offering Sailors the opportunity to pursue employment
skills training during the last 180 days of active duty.

updating curriculum software, enhancing WiFi capability,
and adding 2,493 new computers to facilitate an interactive classroom
environment; and

improving access to classroom curriculum for remote
overseas locations.
We will continue to monitor the effectiveness of Navy TAP with an
eye towards opportunities for additional program enhancements based on
sharing lessons learned from the current program across the Department
of Defense.
Mr. Knight. What letter grade, or qualitative assessment, would
each of the military branches give the TAP today? How much has TAP
improved since 2011?
Mr. Larry. The Air Force believes an ``A'' should be awarded to
today's TAP. Since 2011, the Air Force has been sharply focused on the
redesigned Transition Assistance Program (TAP) to support Airmen as
they transition back to civilian life. The Air Force prepares our
Airmen for transition in partnership with the Department of Labor,
Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Personnel Management,
Department of Education and the Small Business Administration.
Collectively, these partners provide services or support for delivering
a purposeful Transition Assistance Program that helps ensure
transitioning Airmen are ready for the next steps in civilian life--
whether as a full-time student, employee and/or business owner--to help
them in having successful careers. The Air Force remains committed to
ensuring Airmen, as they depart military service, are ready for the
challenges and rewards of civilian life and we extend a great deal of
gratitude to our private sector partners.

[all]
