- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-5] FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE MILITARY COMPENSATION AND RETIRE- MENT MODERNIZATION COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-5]

FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE

MILITARY COMPENSATION AND RETIRE-

MENT MODERNIZATION COMMISSION

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

FEBRUARY 4, 2015

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-092               WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado                   Georgia
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
PAUL COOK, California                GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             PETE AGUILAR, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Dave Giachetti, Professional Staff Member
Craig Greene, Professional Staff Member
Colin Bosse, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Maldon, Hon. Alphonso, Jr., Chairman, Military Compensation and
Retirement Modernization Commission; accompanied by
Commissioners GEN Peter W. Chiarelli, USA (Ret.), ADM Edmund P.
Giambastiani, Jr., USN (Ret.), Hon. Stephen E. Buyer, and
Michael R. Higgins.............................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Maldon, Hon. Alphonso, Jr., joint with Hon. Larry L.
Pressler, Hon. Stephen E. Buyer, Hon. Dov S. Zakheim,
Michael R. Higgins, GEN Peter W. Chiarelli, ADM Edmund P.
Giambastiani, Jr., Hon. J. Robert Kerrey, and Hon.
Christopher P. Carney......................................    54
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac''..........................    53

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Fleet Reserve Association Statement for the Record...........    73
Thirteen Commission charts displayed during hearing..........    83

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Forbes...................................................    93
Mrs. McSally.................................................    95
Mr. O'Rourke.................................................    93
Ms. Sanchez..................................................    93
Mr. Takai....................................................    93

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Shuster..................................................    99
Mr. Zinke....................................................   101
FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE MILITARY COMPENSATION AND RETIREMENT
MODERNIZATION COMMISSION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, February 4, 2015.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in Room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
I am pleased to welcome our members, guests, and certainly
our witnesses to today's hearing on the Military Compensation
and Retirement Modernization Commission report. This is a very
important issue for the committee and for our country.
You know, it is often said that people are our most
valuable resource. And just because we hear it a lot does not
mean that it is not true. It is a central truth of our
country's security that the men and women who serve are our
most essential and valuable asset. And today we are asking more
and more of those who serve, and various proposals and actions
and inactions by Congresses and administrations over the years
have certainly caused some of them at least to question our
country's commitment to them.
Congress decided that we needed to take a comprehensive
look at our pay and benefit structure, see what was working,
what wasn't working, and especially whether it will continue to
be able to assist us in recruiting and retaining the high-
quality folks that we need to serve our country in the
military.
Last week, the Commission on Military Compensation and
Retirement Modernization issued their report, and we are very
pleased to have many of the commissioners before us to testify
and explain the report before us today. And I particularly
appreciate the Commission's work to help us understand what
sorts of pay and benefits are most valued by the people who
serve. Their proposals certainly deserve and will receive a
thorough examination by this committee.
As Congress reviews these recommendations, I think we will
continue to ask what sorts of pay and benefits are working as
intended, what sort are not working, and does this overall
structure put the military in the best possible position to
attract and keep the kind of top-quality people we need moving
ahead. As we study the Commission's proposals and receive other
opinions and suggestions, those will be the primary questions,
at least on my mind.
Let me turn to the distinguished ranking member, Mr. Smith.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thornberry can be found in
the Appendix on page 53.]

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too want to thank our
panel for taking on a very, very difficult task and doing an
outstanding job. I think the proposals are thoughtful and
really get into the difficulty of the issue, and I think it is
good place to start for our committee.
And really there are just two competing principles here.
One, as the chairman noted, we need to take care of the men and
women who serve in our military and their families. First of
all, it is the right thing to do. Second of all, we have an
All-Volunteer Force. We want to make sure that people join and
stay, that we are able to attract the people we need and then
to keep the people that we need.
And obviously there are a lot of things that factor into
that. But the compensation, pay, benefits, are a piece of it.
And we want to make sure that we continue to be able to have
that All-Volunteer Force, whatever debate one may have about
whether or not we should have a draft or more people should be
involved. We all know that is not happening. We are going to
have an All-Volunteer Force, and we need to have a pay and
benefit structure that attracts and retains them.
At the same time, over the course of the last 20 years, the
amount of money that we spend per service member, the personnel
costs, has tripled. There is a very deceptive stat out there
that shows that personnel costs as a percentage of the overall
budget have stayed roughly the same, and that is true, but we
have reduced the number of personnel, I think it is by roughly
900,000. So the per-person cost has gone up and gone up
significantly. Healthcare costs are a pretty significant driver
of that.
And as we look at where we are at with the budget, in
trying to figure out what we are going to do over the course of
the next decade with sequestration, if it comes, and even
without sequestration, we have less money to spend in the
Department of Defense [DOD] than 3, 4 years ago we thought we
were going to have. How do you make those choices? Because for
me, the number one overall obligation is to make sure that
whatever it is that we ask the men and women in our Armed
Forces to do, they are trained and equipped and ready to do it.
Having a hollow force is the one completely unacceptable
outcome.
And if we wind up spending a whole bunch of money on
personnel costs or on other things and we don't have the money
for training, which is the situation we have been in for the
last several years as readiness accounts have been raided to
deal with, well, government shutdowns and CRs [continuing
resolutions] and sequestration, then we wind up having a force
that is not as trained and as ready as it needs to be.
So when we look at the budget we need to consider all of
those questions, and personnel costs are parts of it. Is there
a way that we can save money in those areas and still meet the
obligation that the chairman said that we should, first and
foremost, have to the men and women who serve and to make sure
we continue to have a very effective All-Volunteer Force?
That is not an easy thing to take on. And I think the
proposal that you have put before us is a very thoughtful and
good start for this committee. And I hope this committee will
take it seriously, and I think it is absolutely critical that
we do some kind of personnel reform in this Congress that winds
up saving us some money long term. So we are going to have to
start that process, and today is a good day to do it.
I thank the chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
I ask unanimous consent that my full opening statement be
made part of the record. And after consulting with Mr. Smith, I
ask unanimous consent that the statement of the Fleet Reserve
Association on the Commission's recommendations also be made a
part of our record. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 73.]
The Chairman. Let me now turn to our distinguished panel of
witnesses.
Honorable Alphonso Maldon, who has been chairman of the
Compensation Commission.
We also have with us Honorable Steve Buyer, who was once a
member of this committee and I believe chaired our Personnel
Subcommittee once upon a time.
Mr. Michael Higgins, who has also been associated with this
committee as one of our key staffers dealing with personnel as
well.
General Peter Chiarelli, who has not only a distinguished
military record, but a distinguished record after he has
retired from the military in dealing with some of the most
difficult issues, including brain trauma, that our military
folks have to endure.
And Admiral Edmund Giambastiani, also someone I have known
for a long time for whom I have tremendous respect.
I also notice that our former colleague Chris Carney is
sitting there, former Senator Larry Pressler, a commissioner is
sitting there, all of whom served on the Commission.
And you all know what thankless jobs in Washington are
like. But know that your efforts here are not thankless, that
they are very much appreciated. We needed this look. You all
have done what we asked in coming up with serious proposals
that, as Mr. Smith says, deserve our very serious
consideration, and they are going to get it.
So thank you all for your service. Thank you for being
here.
Mr. Chairman, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. ALPHONSO MALDON, JR., CHAIRMAN, MILITARY
COMPENSATION AND RETIREMENT MODERNIZATION COMMISSION;
ACCOMPANIED BY COMMISSIONERS GEN PETER W. CHIARELLI, USA
(RET.), ADM EDMUND P. GIAMBASTIANI, JR., USN (RET.), HON.
STEPHEN E. BUYER, AND MICHAEL R. HIGGINS

Mr. Maldon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Thornberry,
Ranking Member Smith, distinguished members of the committee,
my fellow commissioners and I are honored to be here today, and
we thank you for this opportunity to testify before the House
Armed Services Committee. We also thank you for your support of
the Commission during the last 18 months and for your
leadership in protecting service members' compensation and
benefits.
I would like to request that our final report be entered
into the record, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The Commission final report is retained in the committee
files and can be viewed upon request.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Commission final report is also available online at
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/AS/AS00/20150204/102859/HHRG-114-AS00-
20150204-SD001.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Maldon. The All-Volunteer Force is without peer. Their
unwavering commitment to excellence in the service of our
Nation has never been clearer than during the past 13 years of
war. As commissioners, we recognize our obligation is to craft
a valued compensation system that is both relevant to the
contemporary service members and able to operate in a modern
and efficient manner.
We are unanimous in our belief that the recommendations we
offer in our report strengthen the foundation of the All-
Volunteer Force, ensures our national security, and truly honor
those who served and the families who support them now and in
the future.
Our report is, of course, informed by our own lifelong
experiences with military service, public policy, and as public
servants. However, our recommendations are most informed by the
insights of the service members, the veterans, retirees, and
their families.
The Commission and staff visited 55 military installations
worldwide, listening to the views and preferences of hundreds
along the way. More than 150,000 current and retired service
members provided thoughts, very thoughtful responses to the
Commission's surveys, and we developed working relationships
with more than 30 military and veterans service organizations.
Additionally, the Commission received input from more than
20 Federal agencies, several Department of Defense working
groups, and numerous research institutions, private firms, and
not-for-profit organizations.
The results of this process, including 18 months of
comprehensive independent research, review, and analysis, are
15 unanimous recommendations that will improve choice, access,
quality, and value within the compensation system.
Our work represents the most comprehensive review of the
military compensation and benefits program since the inception
of the All-Volunteer Force. Consistent with our congressional
mandate, we reviewed each program to determine if and how
modernization might ensure the long-term viability of the All-
Volunteer Force, enable the quality of life for service members
and families, and achieve greater fiscal sustainability for
compensation and retirement systems.
Our recommendations do this and more, improving choice,
access, quality, and value within the compensation system. Our
retirement recommendations propose a blended plan that extends
retirement benefits from 17 percent to 75 percent of the force,
leveraging the retention power of traditional military
retirement to maintain the current force profiles, protect the
assets of service members who retire at 20 years of service,
and reduces annual Federal outlays by $4.7 billion.
Our health benefit recommendations improve access, choice,
and value of health care for Active Duty family members,
Reserve Component members, and retirees, while reducing outlays
by $3.2 billion. Our recommendation on commissaries maintains
patrons' grocery discounts, while also reducing the cost of
delivering those benefits by more than $500 million annually.
While these savings to the taxpayer are significant, the
Commission did not engage in a cost-cutting drill. In fact, our
recommendations to improve joint readiness, service members'
financial literacy, support for exceptional families, and
transition assistance require additional funding to ensure
program efficacy.
In summary, our recommendations represent a holistic
package of reforms that modernize the structure of compensation
programs rather than adjust the level of benefits delivered to
the service members. They sustain the All-Volunteer Force by
maintaining or increasing the overall value of compensation and
benefits for service members and their families. And they
provide additional options for service personnel managers to
design and manage a balanced force.
This approach creates an effective and efficient
compensation and benefit system that after full implementation
saves taxpayers more than $12 billion annually, while
sustaining the overall value of compensation and benefits to
those who serve, have served, and the families who support
them.
Mr. Chairman, my fellow commissioners and I thank you again
for the opportunity to testify before this committee, and we
are honored to present our unanimous recommendation. And we now
stand ready for your questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The joint prepared statement of the commissioners can be
found in the Appendix on page 54.]
[Commission charts displayed during the hearing can be
found in the Appendix beginning on page 83.]
The Chairman. Thank you, sir. And, again, I appreciate the
work of all the commissioners.
I am going to yield my time to the distinguished Personnel
Subcommittee chairman, the gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Heck, who
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Likewise, I thank all the
commissioners for the incredible effort you put forth in
developing this product.
Some of the recommendations may be considered earth-
shaking, maybe even seismic shifts. And what we have heard a
lot in the past is this idea of making sure that we don't break
the faith with either former or current service members.
In fact, Michele Flournoy, who was the former Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy before the HASC [House Armed
Services Committee] roundtable last September, in a review on
the QDR [Quadrennial Defense Review] had brought up the
question, how do you define breaking the faith? Is it benefits,
making sure that we keep a paying compensation program? Or is
it about readiness and making sure that those that are serving
are actually manned, trained, and equipped?
Interestingly, just yesterday, Todd Harrison, in an article
in Forbes, brought up that same question, stating, ``Keeping
faith with troops means more than protecting the existing
compensation system. It means ensuring our military remains the
best trained and equipped force in the world. Breaking faith
with the troops is sending them into battle understaffed,
undertrained, or with inferior equipment.''
I would ask the Commission, in looking at the
recommendations made, how did you balance or how do you view
the balance between keeping the faith with those that are
serving and have served with some of the recommendations that
are generated by the report?
Mr. Maldon. Thank you, Congressman, for that question.
We spent quite a bit of time discussing just that. We know
that there are competing interests here. And we have dealt with
those, we believe, in a very thoughtful manner.
Before we actually get into talking a little bit more
specifically, Congressman, about the question that you have
raised, I have asked my colleague here, Commissioner Buyer, to
actually respond by reading to you a statement here that we had
talked about in some of our sessions that we have had. So with
that, I am going to ask Commissioner Buyer to please respond to
that.
Dr. Heck. As long as he can do that and get to my question
within the 3 remaining minutes.
Mr. Maldon. I promise you, Congressman, we will do that.
Mr. Buyer. It should not be lost on the committee that of
the five commissioners, and actually the commissioners also
sitting behind me, all of us have had military service, we are
military retirees, we have served this Nation in war and in
peace. And that this question about keeping the faith, for me
and for my commissioners, it comes down to two questions. Will
the recommendations keep the faith with the men and women who
have served in the past and who are presently serving?
The second question would be, do these recommendations in
this report enable us to recruit and retain the force in a
manner that the benefits will be sustainable and that will be
structured in a manner that can ease return to civilian life.
The answer to both of those questions is yes, and we
enthusiastically support these recommendations to you.
Dr. Heck. I am going to keep the real detailed questions
for when we see you in subcommittee. But from the kind of
strategic view, the 30,000-foot view, can you give some
specific examples where you looked at the balance between
keeping the faith and making some changes?
I mean, I think the idea between retirement with a
grandfather clause shows some thought. But when you get into
the healthcare issue and moving currently serving dependents
out of the current system, some may argue that that is breaking
faith, it is not what they signed up for.
Mr. Maldon. Congressman, I am going to have Commissioner
Giambastiani respond to that question next.
Admiral Giambastiani. I am going to give you a top-level
answer. As you said, in the subcommittee we can spend time
drilling down into the details. I learned as a young junior
officer, and I have lived by it for four decades of service, if
you take care of your people they will take care of you. That
is number one. And that goes to the chairman and the ranking
member's comments along with yours, sir.
But we came up over a period of time to try to describe,
for example, in the Navy, in my years when I was resourcing
both personnel and modernization in combat programs, how can we
describe what we are doing to support our soldiers, sailors,
airmen, and marines? Most people talk about quality of life,
but that mainly happens to be the types of things that we
addressed here.
Our view was that quality of service was the penultimate
measure. Quality of life was part of that. All of these
compensation programs, health care, et cetera, were a subset.
But quality of service included all those things. Weapons
systems, anything to prevent casualties, anything to lower
combat casualties, anything to bring our soldiers, sailors,
airmen, and marines home fell into that quality of service.
And we can get into more detail at a different time. But I
would just tell you that quality of service is how we as a
Commission looked at this.
Dr. Heck. All right. Thank you all very much. Again, I
appreciate your efforts. Look forward to getting into the
details with you in subcommittee.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield my time to
Mrs. Davis, who is the ranking member on the Personnel
Subcommittee.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all of you. I know this has become very
personal to you, the fact that you worked so diligently on this
and came to these conclusions.
And I wanted to perhaps follow up with Dr. Heck's question
as well. And maybe, because we are taking this larger look
right now before we get into so many of the details, I wonder
if and perhaps, Mr. Chairman, but the others as well could help
us take us into the room, let us be a fly on the wall for a
minute to a breakthrough time when you really sort of had one
of those ``aha'' moments, this is the best way that we can come
to that balance, that tension that we know exists and that we
will have much testimony to deal with. I wonder if you could
sort of let us in on that, what was key in that.
And the other question is, what would you be the most
disappointed about if we are not able to kind of come together
as a committee and deal with this issue?
Mr. Maldon. Congresswoman, thank you very much for your
question. Quickly, let me just mention to you, everything that
we did, people that we met with, first of all, we had town hall
meetings across the country, we actually had public hearings,
we had sensing sessions. We talked extensively to families, to
service members, Active, Reserve Component, and retirees, and
we listened very carefully to what they had to say.
We heard them express to us their concern for choice,
wanting to have more choice, wanting more access. We heard them
talk about what their preferences were. We received responses
from the survey that we sent out where they actually told us,
here is what we prefer as a value.
And so what we did in our deliberation and spent lots of
time, many discussions going through, discussing how we should
be aligning compensation benefits to the preferences that the
service members told us about. And so everything that we did,
we ran it through that thread.
We had 80 percent of the people told us they like the
solutions of what we were doing, where we were going with this,
providing more value, providing more access, more choice for
them, which is very different from what we have done before.
Mr. Buyer. Ma'am, there were three ``aha'' moments, if that
is what you are asking for, for me. One was we had pretty
extensive debates over BAH [basic allowance for housing]. And I
know you have had them. And the Pentagon year after year will
send over cuts or they will send over--we decided we would jump
into that issue and we would debate it and we would try to
figure out a new way of doing it and debate it again and again
and again.
And in the end, the ``aha'' moment came out of Mr. Higgins,
not surprising to the committee, when he said, you know, I do
believe that over the years that this compromise is founded
about just right. And that is why we did not make any of the
changes on BAH.
So I want you to know, Chairwoman, we went into it
extensively, drilled down to a level that has never been really
done before.
With regard to health care, an ``aha'' moment was how can
you really create a health system that will increase the
quality, give choice to the beneficiaries, improve access,
improve quality, hit the value proposition. And we could do
that when Admiral Giambastiani and General Chiarelli gave the
recommendation to create this Joint Medical Command. And that
was an ``aha'' moment.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Anybody else want to----
Mr. Maldon. Could I have Commissioner Giambastiani to
follow up, and then one more from my left, General Chiarelli.
Admiral Giambastiani. This may surprise you, but my ``aha''
moment came when we transitioned from the draft to the All-
Volunteer Force.
General Chiarelli and I are kind of old geezers here,
serving a hell of a lot of years, myself 41 years in uniform.
And I came in during the draft era, went to the Naval Academy.
But I served with that draft force, fine individuals, men and
women. But I have to tell you, this All-Volunteer Force is
absolutely the best I have ever served with in my entire
career.
And that is the ``aha'' moment on how to maintain that All-
Volunteer Force, maintain that professionalism, the training,
but continue to bring in quality people. That has been a
lifetime of ``aha'' moments on how we maintain that.
And I would just tell you, I am impressed, there is no peer
out there. And as a NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]
Supreme Allied Commander, I used to give talks around Europe to
other NATO allies about the All-Volunteer Force. Many of them,
including the Germans, would push back and say, our system is
good. And I would say, fine, you do what you need to do.
If you look at Europe today, even though their militaries
are small, they have all moved to a professional force, just
like us, because they understand how effective it is. So
maintaining that is so important.
The Chairman. Thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. The chairman has eloquently thanked and
expressed the appreciation of this committee for your work. But
I think your work merits an appreciation from all of us. So
thank you both for what you have done on this Commission, but
also what you have done and continue to do outside the
Commission.
General, you mentioned that one of the comments you
consistently received from individuals was more choice. And so
just two questions for you. One, did the Commission give any
thought to making the new retirement system optional for
everyone, even new people? If the system is as attractive as
your research and analysis suggest, it does seem like most
service men and women would opt in voluntary. And if it doesn't
get us all the way home, does it get us part of the way home?
One.
Second, the Fleet Reserve Association [FRA] put out a quote
that said shifting benefits from 20-year career service members
to service members with as little as 2 years of service with
portable benefit is laying the groundwork for a catastrophic
retention crisis.
How do you respond to that? And what are your thoughts on
that issue?
Mr. Maldon. Congressman, thank you for the question.
We spent a lot of time talking about and thinking about
retention and recruiting and what does that mean, what do we
have to do to make sure that we can ensure an All-Volunteer
Force. I am going to have Commissioner Chiarelli to talk
specific to that question.
General Chiarelli. I guess the kind of an ``aha'' moment
for me is when we went to San Antonio and saw new medics and
corpsmen who were at the beginning of their basic training to
become medics. And, you know, that MOS [military occupational
specialty] is not filled with a lot of lower GT [general
technical] score people. These are all bright young men and
women. And we asked the question to them, would you please
raise your hand, if you stay in the military for 20 years, will
you receive 25, 50, or 75 percent of your base pay in
retirement? And we had two people, I think, get it right out of
a crowd of about 100.
And it was clear to me at that moment that as a young
medical corpsman, you are not necessarily joining the service
and making the best decisions about your retirement plan. It is
going to become important to you later on. And that really
drove home to me the importance of what we are doing.
If you look at the chart you will provide us, you will see
that an E7 [enlisted grade] in any one of the services under
this current plan, using the best financial estimates that we
can make, not high, not low, will make more in the long run
than he would have under the current system.
[The chart referred to can be found in the Appendix on page
84.]
General Chiarelli. So I am totally comfortable that this
retirement system that we have crafted is absolutely essential
as we move forward and takes the best interests of our service
men and women into account at all pay grades and ranges of
service.
Mr. Forbes. And, General, nobody could question your
commitment to your troops and your service to them. Can you
just elaborate a little bit on what it would do if we did make
it optional? If it is that attractive, would that be a
possibility if we did that?
Mr. Maldon. Thank you. Congressman, I am going to have
Commissioner Higgins to respond to that.
Mr. Forbes. Yes, please. Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congressman, we absolutely will make the new proposal
optional for currently serving service members. And we believe
that there will be a significant number of those service
members, largely service members with less than 10 years of
service, because as you grow closer to the defined benefit that
we have today, of course, the draw there is very strong. But
for those with less than 10 years of service, and particularly
those with less than 5 years of service, we believe that the
opt-in rate is going to be very high, very high indeed, perhaps
in the range of 90 percent.
Mr. Forbes. So everybody would have the option?
Mr. Higgins. Yes, sir. That is correct. Everybody would.
Now, regarding the FRA comment, we would disagree with the
premise of their comment, because I think what they are
suggesting is that people that stay for 20 years are going to
pay for these new benefits that are not currently provided to
service members in the Thrift Savings Plan [TSP]. And the
answer is that we believe, and our analysis strongly supports,
that these benefits for the 20-year retiree are going to be
every bit as good as they have today, or better, and that we
are still going to deliver this interim benefit for those that
don't choose to stay.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you.
My time is up. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Sanchez.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all on the Commission for doing what is
basically a very difficult job.
I have three questions. The first has to deal with, I know
in your report you mention that you weren't necessarily looking
at cost savings, you were looking at what it would take to
retain, what military compensation and the retirement system
would look like to be effective for us.
But I think since we are going through this whole issue of
taking a look at everything, that cost should be an important
piece of this, especially when we are bumping up against this
whole issue of maybe a hollow force and making sure we have the
money for not only future systems, but also for training our
military.
So my questions go to, first of all, TRICARE. The
Commission recommends essentially replacing TRICARE with a
selection of commercial plans in order to provide more option
and accessibility. And in terms of the level of service and
cost efficiency, how is replacing TRICARE better than
essentially expanding health care?
My second question is with respect to the consolidation of
all the GI [government issue] Bills and educational issues. I
am worried that if we go to that and we are in the transition
period of what might be less than 1 year, but could be 3, 4, 5
years as we consolidate everything, that some of these benefits
might fall under or really impact the soldier or the airman or
what have you who are trying to get an education. So can you
comment on how we might restructure that?
And then the third issue goes back to the base housing
allowance. And I just heard you all say that we looked at it,
we looked at it, and pretty much we ended up with the same. But
when we began with base housing allowance way back when it was
at 80 percent and now it is at a full 100 percent. And this is
one of the largest areas of escalating cost for us.
So would you speak please to the review of that and why we
might not scale it back to, for example, 80 instead of 100?
Thank you.
Mr. Maldon. Congresswoman, thank you very much for the
question. I am going to do a couple things here. We will try to
break this out and respond to your question with regard to
TRICARE, with regard to the BAH, and the GI Bill, the
educational benefit piece of this.
But let me first say that we took a very, very extensive
look at the overall benefits here for the service members in
terms of what they told us that they wanted, what they needed
in order for us to be able to ensure an All-Volunteer Force. So
as we looked at each one of these, we approached it in a way of
wanting to achieve efficiencies wherever there is an
opportunity to achieve those efficiencies. And so then cost
came later. But we were totally not driven by cost.
I want to start with having Commissioner Buyer to talk
about the TRICARE piece. And then I will have him followed by
Commissioner Higgins on the GI Bill piece and the BAH.
Ms. Sanchez. Great. And when I am talking about costs, I
mean, you really have to just oppose that against what is
happening to the American public at large. And that means that
many of them have lost higher-paying jobs. They are making less
either for the same job with respect to what it costs to live
or they have gone and found other jobs that don't have
benefits. Nobody has a pension, et cetera, et cetera.
So we are asking taxpayers to pay for our military when our
taxpayers are not in the same position they might have been
from a monetary and quality-of-life perspective of 20 years
ago.
Mr. Maldon. Commissioner Buyer.
Mr. Buyer. Health care is a tremendous value benefit not
only to the men and women who wear the uniform, but their
families, and then the retirees, and then those of whom are
disabled. So how do we now improve that benefit? At the same
time, when we talk about cost or savings, it is not only to the
beneficiary, but also to the taxpayer. And how can we do this?
So we looked at TRICARE and said every year as the budgets
come over, why are you dealing with these issues on TRICARE?
Because when TRICARE was first installed, where it was then
compared to where it is today, it has diminished in its value,
diminished because it is now a very limited provider network.
It is limited why? Because of the pressures that have been also
placed upon the TRICARE contractors to go out there and get
providers into the system and you pay below Medicare rates.
So I will give you as an example, pick a specialty,
orthopedics, Fort Bragg. Those of whom that are in the TRICARE,
have signed up for TRICARE to do orthopedics at Fort Bragg,
there are 12. If you look at the government employees health
plan, there are 43 in that one. If you look at Blue Cross/Blue
Shield at Fort Bragg, there are 163 orthopedics that are in it.
Why only 12 of them if there are 163 in Blue Cross/Blue Shield?
It is because they don't want to sign up for TRICARE because
the reimbursement rates are so very, very low.
Now I will ask you, of those 12, do you think they are at
the top of that 163 that are in Blue Cross/Blue Shield? I think
you know the answer to the question.
So with regard to the quality----
The Chairman. I apologize for interrupting. But with the
largest committee in Congress, we have to have some time----
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will take those
answers to those questions in writing, please.
The Chairman. Well, I hope other folks will ask about the
other issues too, because I think they are important and I
would like to hear----
Mr. Buyer. We can answer for the record, Mr. Chairman.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 93.]
The Chairman. And I appreciate that.
Mr. Maldon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Chairman Miller.
Mr. Miller. I can't believe you gaveled down Chairman
Buyer.
The Chairman. Note that for the record, please.
Mr. Miller. Again, thank you very much for the hard work
that you have all done. I have one question. But I want to
yield back to my colleague, Mr. Forbes, who wants to ask a
clarification for the record.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Chairman, obviously you guys are the
experts. I just want to make sure we have the record right. I
think several of us misread the report. But I want to make sure
that this new retirement system, as I understood the testimony,
was that it would be optional for everyone, even new people.
Did we misread that? Because I know some writers have misread
it too. And we just want to make sure everybody is on the same
sheet of music.
Mr. Maldon. Of course, Congressman.
Commissioner Higgins, could you please respond specifically
to that question?
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We only envision the opt-in provision in terms of those
that were currently serving when the law is adopted. New
entries would be brought into the service under our proposal.
There wouldn't be an opt-in to the old system that currently
exists today.
Mr. Forbes. And that was what we had thought. At some point
in time, just for the record, if you would give us your
thoughts about making that optional as well.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 93.]
Mr. Forbes. But I want to yield back to Chairman Miller for
his questioning.
Mr. Miller. Thank you very much.
We are all looking for efficiencies and the proper delivery
of health care. And I just want to talk about the Military
Readiness Command just a little bit. This is something that I
think the Joint Staff should already be doing.
So my concern is, do you foresee this creating another
layer of bureaucracy within an already bloated system, if you
will? And the question basically is, how will this help improve
readiness, especially medical readiness?
Mr. Maldon. Thank you very much, Congressman, for your
question here. I am going to ask Commissioner Giambastiani to
lead that for us.
Admiral Giambastiani. Thank you, Chairman Miller. Great
question.
As we went through and debated the phenomenal medical
success that we have had during this last 13 years of war and
we looked at how overall the services have reduced combat
casualties to a record low compared to World War II, Vietnam,
even Desert Storm, down to about a death rate of about 10
percent of those very serious casualties, we looked at what did
it take to do this.
And medical care, combat medical readiness is much more
than just doctors, nurses, corpsmen, medics on the battlefield.
It happens to be the transportation systems, medevac
helicopters, aircraft, the logistics and systems that allow
them to do that, and all of those supporting structures out
there that are beyond any medical command.
Now, there have probably been 14 commissions over the
years, 30, 40 years, that have recommended establishing a Joint
Medical Command. We looked at that. And this is the most
contentious topic that we debated and discussed within our
Commission.
And unanimously we came out to the conclusion that the best
way to deal with this is to embed a joint medical unit, if you
will, a command unit within a Joint Readiness Command, and also
create on the Joint Staff a significant structure called a J10,
that was just solely medical as opposed to having it buried
underneath transportation and the rest.
It is probably more than we can discuss in this forum
during this timeline. And I would be happy to do that offline
with you, as I know General Chiarelli would. But I think that
we have come up with the right solution.
Finally, although our report says that the costs in there
are just under $300 million a year, frankly, all of the people
pretty much have been transferred from the old Joint Forces
Command to the Joint Staff, and that is the reason why the
Joint Staff has about quadrupled in size.
Mr. Maldon. Mr. Chairman, if you don't mind, I would really
like to have Commissioner Chiarelli to follow up on that very
quickly. I am certainly concerned about the time. But I would
love to have him say a few words.
The Chairman. Sure.
General Chiarelli. Whatever you want, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Well, If you have a brief comment, General,
because you have done so much work in this healthcare area.
General Chiarelli. The number one requirement for our
health care in the military is to take care of deployed
soldiers. Period. I mean, that is what makes it different. And
we have to ensure that as we reorganize and look to make our
MTFs [military treatment facilities] be able to be better
training grounds, as the force gets smaller for our physicians
and entire medical team.
It is absolutely essential that somebody be able to go into
the Tank, along with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
and make the argument for the tough decisions that are going to
have to be made in order to maintain that capability. And I can
go into that in great detail.
The Chairman. That is helpful. Thank you.
Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins, I will just ask you directly on the retirement
questions. Can you clarify for me, again, I think what Mr.
Forbes was trying to get at, if the new law passes, this
proposal passes, I am a new service member, I am immediately
enrolled into the TSP as the Commission envisions it?
Mr. Higgins. That is correct.
Mr. Larsen. And then what is my vesting period under the
Commission's plan?
Mr. Higgins. It would be 2 complete years of service and
your first day of your third year, you are vested.
Mr. Larsen. And then what percentage of my salary, what is
the maximum percentage of my salary that I would be able to put
into this TSP plan envisioned by the Commission?
Mr. Higgins. Five percent would be the maximum matching at
that time. Your automatic enrollment would be at the 3 percent
of salary point.
Mr. Larsen. Automatically enrolled at 3 percent of salary?
Mr. Higgins. Base pay to be specific.
Mr. Larsen. Base pay. And then my employer, the Department
of Defense, would put in what?
Mr. Higgins. After 2 years, they would match 3.
Mr. Larsen. After 2.
Mr. Higgins. Or if you invested 5 yourself, they would
match 5. The 1 percent, the base amount that the government
would contribute regardless of what the individual does, would
always be there. So, in essence, it is 6 percent----
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. For a service member who invests
up to 5 percent of base pay.
Mr. Larsen. Does the Commission envision that this would be
separate from the Federal employee TSP, this would be internal
to the DOD?
Mr. Higgins. No. This would be Thrift Saving Plan as
currently used within FERS [Federal Employees Retirement
System].
Mr. Larsen. And it would become part of the existing TSP?
Mr. Higgins. That is correct.
Mr. Larsen. And then just to clarify, I would not have the
option to opt out of that as a new service member. I would be
required.
Mr. Higgins. Of the 3 percent on automatic enrollment?
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. No. They could the very next day go down to
their finance office, not a very great hardship procedure, and
remove themselves from the program. However, we believe that
studies would indicate 97 percent of people would not do that.
Mr. Larsen. Right.
Mr. Higgins. And I think that is healthy in terms of
encouraging service members to think about financial matters.
Mr. Larsen. So just on the flip side, in the testimony
provided by the Commission, 83 percent of enlisted folks
receive no retirement savings currently. And if I am enlisted
and served 2 years, get vested, I would at least start to have
something, and 100 percent of my enlisted friends would start
to have something.
Mr. Higgins. That is correct.
Mr. Larsen. There are probably other questions to ask on
that that others may have.
I want to move to health care quickly. It seems that what
you are proposing is more along the lines of where the rest of
the world--not the rest of the world, maybe the rest of the
country is going--but that DOD to me seems headed the other
direction. They would rather consolidate, keep health care
consolidated.
And the Commission is essentially recommending health care
should be distributed, healthcare provisions should be
distributed, that is, commercial choice, see doctors of your
choice within parameters in the individual plan.
Have you received input at all from the Department on that
particular recommendation?
Mr. Maldon. Congressman, the thing that we focused on here
after hearing from people across the country again and also
just the overwhelming support that we got from people with
regard to their responses to the commissioners' survey, people
kept saying to us that they wanted more choice. They wanted
access to health care. They wanted increased value in terms of
them being able to make the decision what was best for them.
And let me just ask Commissioner Buyer if he would talk
just specifically to that question also.
Mr. Buyer. We are trying to capture the trends of where the
demographics are going. So not only are we doing it being
responsive with regard to the TSP, we are also doing that with
health care.
At our opening meeting, it was Commissioner Higgins that
said, let's get to the question of paternalism. How
paternalistic do we want to be? How paternalistic has the
military always been? And where is America? And where is
America going? Because that is what you have asked us to do,
can we modernize and prepare for into the future. And that is
what we are doing with health care too.
So part of that empowerment is also an education piece, not
only financial literacy, but also the literacy on how to make
good choices for your family with health care.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Turner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Buyer, I am glad that you just ended on that comment
because my question is for you. I remember serving on the VA
[Veterans' Affairs] Committee when you were the chairman of the
VA Committee, you were always an impassioned advocate for
TRICARE and one of the Members of Congress that I would say was
probably the most knowledgeable of it.
Now as we are looking at these recommendations, I thought
you might want to give us some additional insight as to your
thoughts on this, how it relates to your work in Congress, and
how you see the evolution of this occurring.
Mr. Buyer. Well, thank you very much. And thanks for your
service. And congratulations with your new assignment.
I look back, and personally I made some mistakes. We should
have indexed the premiums on TRICARE for the gray area
retirees. We should have done that. I remember the staff coming
to me and asking me should we index it. And I said, you know, I
want Congress to take an active role in these programs, and I
believe that year after year, when Congress takes an active
role, that they will do the right thing.
It has not happened. The pressures on Congress to actually
increase those premiums or copays or deductibles, when we first
instituted TRICARE, that premium was 27 percent. It has eroded
over time now to 5 percent. And the TRICARE as a network
themselves has become so limited, bureaucratic, cumbersome, it
has diminished its quality. And just trying to even perfect
those contracts has become incredibly costly. To manage it,
costly. You don't have utilization management that can actually
perfect savings. It is not really a good program at the moment.
So the question, Congressman Turner, is can we do better? I
mean, that is sort of the mandate that you have said to us,
look at these things, let us know what you believe and what you
think. And in the end, yes, we can do better.
When you look at FEHBP [Federal Employees Health Benefits
Program] and how OPM [Office of Personnel Management], with 100
people, manage a program of similar size to what DOD is, with
100 people, at $47 million, TRICARE takes almost 3,000 people
at $350 million approximately.
And going to this selection of plans, it is not FEHBP. It
is kind of like it. It is a variant. We actually take away some
of the successes. We did that when we created Medicare Part D
also.
But the most important thing is our military medical
readiness. How do we maintain the sharp edge of that readiness
that has been perfected in 13 years of war and maintain that
and sustain it?
And we said, if you take the MTFs and we roll them as part
of the network of the plans, utilizing this Medical Readiness
Command to oversee, we can actually attract good procedures
into the MTFs. Because when you look at the MTFs today, some of
the procedures that they are doing, it will surprise America.
When you look at some of our charts and figures, you will see
that a lot of it has to do with delivery of babies, which is
great. It is great for the perfecting of the cohesion of the
medical team. But that is not what is happening on the
battlefield.
So attracting procedures into the MTF can be done as part
of the network when we give them the ability to have different
cost shares and provide those incentives.
Am I being responsive to you, Mr. Turner? I hope so.
Mr. Turner. Yes. Thank you for your insight.
And also for each of you, thank you for your service. And
certainly this is going to be a very spirited discussion, but
you certainly have started off well.
And, Mr. Buyer, thank you for your context.
Mr. Buyer. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Veasey.
Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To the chairman of the Commission, can you talk a little
bit about the recommendation to improve collaboration between
the Department of Defense and the VA [Department of Veterans
Affairs]? And I am specifically interested in the
recommendation that there is a unified health record. And I
think your recommendation is to use the VA's healthcare record
through their VistA system. But if that is not the case,
correct me.
And tell me whether that is going to require an act of
Congress or whether DOD and VA could administratively implement
that recommendation. Because, along with other members here, I
serve on the VA Committee, and that has been a significant
frustration for us, the disconnect between DOD and VA on this.
Mr. Maldon. Congressman, thank you for the question.
We spent an inordinate amount of time amongst ourselves
discussing the benefit of having better collaboration between
DOD and VA. We have actually spent time talking to the
Secretary of VA. We have spent time talking to the people
within the Department of Defense regarding the position that
they have taken on moving forward with their health care,
electronic healthcare records, the way they want to approach
it.
We know that there is a lot of money that is spent between
DOD and VA on how they do business. We believe that we can take
better advantage of the taxpayers' resources if, in fact, we
had better standardization, shared services, we had better ways
of actually conducting business between the two.
I am going to ask, because we spent so much time on this,
and I know that Commissioner Buyer spent a lot of time when he
was here and since that time he has been one of our lead in
following through on these things in our discussion, so I am
going to ask him if he would please respond briefly to that as
well.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Mr. Buyer. Thank you for your service on the Veterans'
Affairs Committee, along with Sergeant Major and Chairman
Miller for your years and your eyes on recommendation 8, on the
collaboration.
We looked into this on the JEC, so the Joint Executive
Committee. We didn't put it in our recommendation, but after
having met with Secretary McDonald, I do believe they are
correct, try to achieve parity there at the committee. Right
now you have the Deputy Secretary of the VA meets with the
Under Secretary for Personnel. It really should be the Deputy
Secretary at DOD meeting with the Deputy Secretary of the VA.
So I would ask that that establish a parity and put it in
statute.
And the other is with the Joint Executive Committee, it is
what we talked about on the committee, about heterodox, when
someone, you have given them a position, they have the
authority, but they have no power to perfect or implement. And
that is exactly what the Joint Executive Committee is.
So we try to get these two Departments, the VA and DOD, to
collaborate. But they can come up with great policy, they can
come up with great recommendations, but they have no power to
implement it.
So what we are asking, Chairman Miller, is--I am sorry, I
am talking to him because he can get this done, and you are
also on the committee--pass it and make it law that they can
actually implement. So in the areas on mental health, that you
can actually blend those mental health drugs. We are not going
to dictate to you, nor should you dictate to them what
antipsychotics, antidepressants, pain medications, let the
experts, let science lead, but then let's make sure that that
can happen.
With regard to capital projects, never again should there
be that situation down in El Paso where the Army builds an Army
hospital and VA builds a hospital and they won't put it on the
same timeline.
Mr. O'Rourke. Let me apologize for interrupting.
Mr. Buyer. So making sure that that committee has the power
is important.
Mr. O'Rourke. I represent the community of El Paso and I
wish they were building a VA hospital there. But it is alarming
that we are spending $1.1 billion for an Army medical center,
state of the art, with no provision made for the 80,000
veterans who live in that community who are going to be
stranded at an existing clinic that today is collocated with
the Army hospital, the new one is being built 9 miles away.
So the benefits of these recommendations are obvious. Is
there a specific number in terms of the savings of using a
single medical record, collaborating when it comes to
purchasing for medication and pharmaceuticals? Is there a
dollar amount associated with this recommendation?
Mr. Maldon. Sir, the answer to the question is we don't
know exactly what that dollar amount is, Congressman. We didn't
go that far. That is not the kind of thing that we really
looked into that deeply. We had discussions about it. We know
that there would be some savings there if their processes were
more streamlined. But we don't know the extent of that. We
would be happy to look into that for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 93.]
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you for the recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank all of you for your service to the
country, including your work on this Commission.
And, Chairman Buyer, I enjoyed working with you on the VA
Committee when you were ranking member there. And I am so glad
that you are working on, among other things, collaboration
between the Department of Defense and the VA.
In my district in Colorado Springs there are about 100,000
veterans and about 40,000 Active Duty personnel, plus many,
many thousands of dependents. So this issue of a better
transition from DOD to VA is very important. And I am so glad
to hear of the work you have done on this.
And of course we have referenced recommendation number 8,
and there is also number 12: Better prepare service members for
transition to civilian life.
What would you say there--and I will start with you,
Chairman Buyer--would be your recommendation specifically on
how to better prepare service members for a transition to
civilian life?
Mr. Buyer. I think Congress did a wonderful thing with the
new GI Bill. It really did. That is a tremendous valuable
product that helps prepare them. The recommendations, we
enthusiastically support.
I would like you to know that there are Governors out there
that are frustrated with the Department of Labor, with regard
to their vets program. So the DVOPs [Disabled Veterans Outreach
Programs] and LVERs [Local Veteran's Employment
Representatives], if you were Governor of Colorado and your
Department of Veterans Affairs--your State Department of
Veterans Affairs, those DVOPs and LVERs, is a State grant that
goes to the State Department of Labor. And the Governors were
telling us that it is very challenging for their Department of
Veterans Affairs to actually get them to work collaboratively
together.
And so we want to make sure that these grants that get to
the States, if you have got your director of State Veterans
Affairs who is responsible for that seamless transition that he
can actually perfect and get his job done. You know, this idea
of, well, this is my job and this is all I am going to do, I
don't do any other duties as assigned, that has got to end. And
that is part of the genesis.
Pete, do you have a--pardon me, Ed.
Admiral Giambastiani. I would just say that General
Chiarelli and I, having experience with numerous organizations,
trying to work the unemployment problem with veterans is a
serious issue because of the disconnect between what we would
call and what we think should be one-stop centers, where you
have got Department of Labor, DOD, VA. Where they are working
together in one-stop centers is probably the single most
important thing to force in this area.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, thank you so much.
And back to health care, and one idea I had that I put into
the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] last year was a
pilot project to be investigated on a joint DOD/VA healthcare
facility in Colorado Springs, because there is such a need
there with Active Duty and veterans, and we are behind the
curve in supplying that health care that is much needed. What
kind of collaboration has worked and that you would like to see
working better together in the future?
Mr. Buyer. You know, Congressman Lamborn, with your
experience and what you have seen, I think members of the
committee have, a lot of these collaborations are personality
driven in particular localities. And those crucibles produce
great ideas. Those great ideas don't necessarily disseminate
across the health system. When you have a joint executive
committee [JEC] that has the power to implement, you take that
crucible of an idea that was borne out of Colorado Springs and
you send that to the JEC, the JEC can actually then move it
centralized, and we get greater perfection and clarity across
the system.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Maldon. Yes, Congressman, let me just say very quickly,
the recommendations that we have provided here, we are
proposing, the ones on TSP itself, that helps prepare service
members as they transition from the military to civilian life.
The ones that we have made with regard to health care, the
insurance plan itself, that is more like--more closely
associated with the kind of things they would experience as
they go into civilian life from the military. So those are some
of the things that we have done.
And I would like to ask Commissioner Chiarelli to just
speak briefly on that as well.
General Chiarelli. Well, I would like to tell you one thing
you could do, and that is rationalizing the drug formularies
between DOD and VA. I mean, it is absolutely unbelievable to me
that we have soldiers--and I was a Vice [Vice Chief of Staff of
the Army] for 4 years and did not know this--that we have
soldiers that we put on antidepressants, antipsychotics, and
pain medications. We give them 90 days' supply. They show up at
their VA on day 89. They ask to get their medications refilled
and the doctor looks at them and says, I can't refill that
medication.
Now, that is wrong. And quite frankly, I think that is
breaking faith, breaking faith with those who have served and
those who are in need of those medications, medications that
have worked. And that would be a huge, huge thing that this
committee could help us do.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I will work with all my committee
members on this and the VA Committee as well.
Thank you for your good ideas and your work.
I yield back.
The Chairman. As a matter of fact, there is a Member of
Congress who is a practicing psychologist who has made this
exact point to me. He tries to help people and they can't keep
them on the same medicine when they do this transition, and the
enormous problems that come from that is unbelievable.
Mr. Aguilar. No.
Mr. Takai.
Mr. Takai. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, distinguished panel of commissioners. I
appreciate your work.
You know, it has been said before, but the services have
been able to meet and exceed their recruitment and retention
goals over the last 13 years while in war with our current
compensation system in place. I am assuming we are here today
because there is now a need or it is the right time to take a
look at this and to change it, despite the fact that we have
been successful in maintaining a significant, viable, All-
Voluntary Force.
So my question to you is, what are the impacts of your
recommendations, changes to the future of this All-Volunteer
Force in terms of recruitment and retention, and how were these
impacts assessed?
Mr. Maldon. Thank you, Congressman, for your question.
Congressman, we believe that, and we believe this
unanimously, that the recommendations that we have made are
going to have a very positive effect on recruiting and
retention.
We have taken a look at what service members have told us
that they want, what the senior enlisted advisors--as we talk
to people across the country, they have been completely making
us aware of the fact that things that they want, that they
prefer are very different than what they were before, because,
one, there is a totally different generation here. The
contemporary workforce is changing and the environment is
changing.
The very people that we would be interested in recruiting
and retaining in the military are the same kind of people that
the industry are looking at. And so we wanted to make sure that
we can provide benefits and meet the preferences that they have
told us that they were concerned about so that we can compete
against the industry for the same people.
Commissioner Giambastiani, would you like to add to that?
Admiral Giambastiani. Yeah. If I could just--thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
If I could just add that if I go back and look at our
transition from the draft era to the All-Volunteer Force, many
thought that that would not work. I was a submarine officer who
was serving and was sent to Navy Recruiting Command as a
recruiter, and on the staff there back in 1975 to help make
that work. And I have to tell you that we have looked--and the
reason why I give you this perspective is there were a lot of
people who thought it wouldn't work.
What we have looked at here is 350 personnel programs that
we have provided you in this interim report before, and yet, we
have only made 15 general recommendations, which I think are
important. We looked at 350 separate programs across health
care, quality of life, everything else, and we have made 15
recommendations. And behind those 15 recommendations are
substantive surveys--as we have already mentioned--studies, and
analysis.
And all of that is referenced in footnotes and the rest in
here. We have talked to a significant amount of people. We have
talked to the personnel people, the personnel chiefs in the
services. We have tried to use the extensive experience of us
nine commissioners. And I think we have looked at how this
impacts and how we assessed that we would have a positive
impact. And we try to say the positive impacts that we would
bring by the value of these programs in here. So that is a
general answer, but I would just give you some historical
perspective.
Mr. Takai. Thank you.
And I do appreciate the long, hard look that the Commission
has done in regards to Guard and Reserve members, Drill Status
Guard and Reserve members, and determining that the traditional
methodology still works. So I appreciate that.
My last question is in regards to TRICARE. As a former
member of TRICARE, I do understand the challenges that we have
facing us in terms of the number of providers accessible for
TRICARE. Everything you say about this new program sounds good,
but to me, it just sounds like it is going to cost a lot more
money, because increased provider pay and other things. Can you
just elaborate a little bit on what the cost is going to be, or
if, in fact, there are savings and what specifically they are.
And now that I am short of time, maybe if you could just
prepare a response to us.
Mr. Maldon. Yes, we will take that for the record and get
back to you, Congressman.
Mr. Takai. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 93.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank all of you for your devotion to this
country and to our troops. It is greatly appreciated.
And in this particular realm today, I want to thank you for
addressing the medical readiness of our providers, not only
enhancing their skills but maintaining the skills that they
have acquired over time and recognizing ways that we can and
should do things better.
I think as you look through this and you have the top 10
things that are taking place as far as treatments in a garrison
medical treatment facility, it is pretty telling to what I
found. I served in a CSH [combat support hospital] in Iraq in
2005, 2006, Reserve Component.
Most of our surgeons were coming from Philadelphia, New
York, Detroit, used to high levels of trauma. And then we get
an Active Component coming in following us and they were deer
in the headlights with what was going on, because they were
doing things like appendectomies, which is not what was taking
place in the battlefield. So I really appreciate you addressing
that and the need that we have to maintain that high level of
training.
And of course, we have programs like C-STARS, Center for
Sustainment of Trauma and Readiness Skills. As a reservist, I
participated with the Air Force a couple of years ago in
Cincinnati, so those are some good opportunities. What we see
at SAMMC [San Antonio Military Medical Center] in San Antonio,
the opportunity to provide care with trauma. This is what we
need more of, and I appreciate that you are addressing that.
You have simulation training, but you have got real-time
training too, and there is nothing better than the real-time
training that takes place.
So as a reservist still, I go to Walter Reed, and that is
where I am honored to serve. Some of the surgeons there, now
they are having their outside employment limited. They were
going to Baltimore Shock Trauma, now they can't go. They are
losing their skills and a couple of them are getting out,
because they said, you know, I am used to this high tempo of
trauma. It slowed down. I have nowhere to practice these
skills. We have got to maintain this at a high level, and I
can't tell you, again, how grateful I am.
A friend of mine, Air Force trauma surgeon, reservist,
deployed several times, both to Iraq and Afghanistan, and he
brought up this point when I heard him speaking at one time, he
said, ``I used to, at the very beginning of these wars, tell
our troops, `I am going to try and get you everything that you
would have at home.' '' He said, ``Now it is just the opposite.
I tell them, `I want to make sure people at home get everything
that you are getting here at Bagram because of how far we have
come.' ''
And so this partnership between civilian and military has
got to exist at a greater level if we are going to be
successful, because we never know when we have to turn that
tempo up and be ready. And I think that the people are crying
for it. So if you can address what you might see are some of
the best practices as we move forward, both for Active and
Reserve, to be able to participate in those types of scenarios,
I would appreciate it, and try and drive that message.
General Chiarelli, I know I have worked with you in uniform
and out on many medical issues.
I don't know who would want to----
Mr. Maldon. Congressman, thank you very much. You know, you
are hitting at the heart of something that we care dearly about
and we heard quite a bit about as we travel extensively. In San
Antonio, Texas, as an example, and Pensacola, Florida, we
looked at the partnerships that were existing. In Chicago we
looked at the partnerships that were existing, and so forth.
I would like to have Commissioner Chiarelli talk to that
because there was some very real lessons to learn there.
General Chiarelli. This was the toughest thing for me. I go
through two combat tours in my time as Vice Chief of Staff of
the Army, and you are trying to tell me that we need to change
the way we deliver medical care in order to keep up the skills
of our doctors and our medical teams. That was hard for me to
take, and I was the one that was the hardest to convince. But I
am absolutely convinced that our MTFs are on a death spiral
right now.
What no one has talked about is we are also lowering the
number of people we have in the force. So even when you see the
numbers up there, that was with a much larger force, the number
of caseloads they are going to see are going to be even fewer
as the force gets smaller. And our recommendations don't negate
the MTFs; they give the MTFs the ability to attract and bring
in the kind of cases that will do exactly what you have
indicated, sir.
And I applaud you, because that is what makes us different.
You know, no one at Mass [Massachusetts] General is told on a
moment's notice to deploy a combat hospital to Iraq or
Afghanistan, but all these armed services are. And it is
absolutely critical that if your son or daughter is wounded on
the 1st day of battle that they get the same kind of care that
is being able to be delivered on the 13th year of battle. And
that is what our recommendations are focused on.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, that was very well put, 1st day and
13th year. It is very well put. So we will continue to drive
that message and do all we can to work with you on that. Thank
you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ranking Member.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I welcome the panel but I was remiss in not
pointing out that General Chiarelli is actually a constituent,
so I definitely want to welcome you. And as a fellow
Seattleite, we just won't talk about the Super Bowl. That is
the way the ball bounces sometimes. And the guys from New
England are smiling up here, and it is just, you know.
But welcome. And I really appreciate your work in
particular, I know the brain science work that you have done
since you got out of the military, and the foundation you
formed, the people you have worked with in the Seattle area.
That is a great group of folks who I think are really making
progress on a critical, critical area that affects so many
diseases and so many injuries that impact people.
And I want to talk about health care, so we will go to Mr.
Buyer again. And health care is critically, critically
important. And I had hip surgery about 3 months ago now. I had
no idea how important it was until after that, and my level of
appreciation and respect for the men and women who serve and
the injuries they go through and what surgery really means--and
I had, you know, relatively minor surgery--you know, the pain,
the suffering, the difficulties, the, you know, medicinal
choices that have to be made. It is an enormously important
aspect of the military. It is also enormously expensive.
And, I guess, the one thing that we really haven't talked
to--Mr. Takai made the allusion to it there and was going to go
for the record, but--is the cost. Because what basically has
happened, what has driven up the cost so much in health care is
that--and I forget the exact statistic, but I think in 1997 the
average service member paid about 27 percent of the cost of
their health care. So whatever they paid for health care for a
given year, 27 percent came out of their own pocket.
By last year, that number was down to 10 percent. And what
had happened was copays and premiums did not go up, but the
cost of health care did. And that is an enormous difference.
And I know we had our health care changed as Members of
Congress, and we are now paying a lot more for it because we
went to a higher deductible plan, and this is what is happening
all across the country.
And bottom line is, copays and premiums and deductibles are
higher. So there is more coming out of my family's pocket,
coincidentally had to be the year that we had massive amounts
of health care needs, you know, before you get to that point.
And I guess the question that isn't answered here, and I
guarantee you what we are going to get asked and the pressure
that is going to be put on us by both retired and Active Duty,
is what is coming out of my pocket.
And, I frankly--and I think some of the changes you are
talking about are great. The way you reform it gives more
choice, does a bunch of different things that I think will
improve the quality of health care. But at the end of the day,
this really doesn't work if there isn't a little bit more
coming out of the pocket of the average Active Duty and
retiree.
And just one example, we went through this with the TRICARE
for Life folks. When we raised the premium, I think, I forget
if it was like from $450 a year to $550 a year, and, you know,
there was the huge revolt over that; $100 a year, most of us
pay $500, $600 a month.
But the bottom line is, as you restructure this and as we
find savings within the healthcare system, is there going to be
more coming out of the pocket of either retirees on TRICARE or
on this new system or Active Duty folks in terms of copays and
premiums and higher deductibles?
Mr. Maldon. Ranking Member Smith, let me just say a couple
words here, then I will have my colleagues to follow on here.
First of all, nothing changes with regard to our Active Duty
military. That stays the same.
And on the readiness issue, as I am going to ask
Commissioner Buyer, as he speaks to this, to also cover
readiness a little bit too, and then I would like to have
again, I would really like to have General Chiarelli talk a
little bit more about this as it relates to the readiness
piece.
But Commissioner Buyer, will you please take the first
piece of that?
Mr. Buyer. I think because of your surgery, you had to get
up and walk around a little bit and you weren't in the room
when Congressman Turner asked me some of the questions about
what have been the lessons learned over the years when we first
created TRICARE, and I chaired the personnel committee to
today. And I gave the admission that I made an error, and the
error was that we did not index those premiums. And we should
have done that. And that is my fault. Because Congress is----
Mr. Smith. No, I heard that, but that doesn't answer----
Mr. Buyer. Oh, okay. Well, but it goes to the heart of it.
The present TRICARE system does not have utilization management
ability. And that utilization management, the private sector
does that with copays and deductibles. And when you go to the
private plan--when you go to TRICARE Choice, when they have
selection of plans, giving the ability to use utilization
management, our modeling, we feel that the savings can come
from better utilization management practices being implemented
and the program management, just restructuring it, that is
about $5.2 billion in savings.
The cost share increases----
Mr. Smith. Just so I can be clear on that, by utilization
management, you are saying that the service members will use
health care less?
Mr. Buyer. That is correct.
Mr. Smith. They will choose to use it less.
Mr. Buyer. That is correct. Because now when you do the
comparison between the utilization in the military versus an
HMO [health management organization], a PPO [preferred provider
organization] versus the HMO, you know, it is for in-patient
versus out of patient. Gosh, it is almost a 73 percent
increase, and for outpatient they utilize it 55 percent more
than civilian.
Mr. Smith. How do you deal with the troubling aspect of
whether or not that is a good thing? Because sometimes--you are
absolutely right, I mean, you look at our healthcare system, we
have more MRI [magnetic resonance imaging], we do more tests.
And because we have a fee-for-service system, you are paid to
do stuff, not necessarily to make health care better.
But on the other hand, you can argue that, you know, if
someone chooses not to get an MRI or chooses not to get an x-
ray because of the cost and they miss a problem that they could
have solved earlier, and believe me, I went through the health
care debate more than I ever really wanted to, but I just, I
never really saw the stat that sort of showed how you balance
that.
How do you know when over-utilization is a simple cost as
opposed to a smart, preventive step? I guess, I am looking at
you as the oracle to answer that impossible question.
General Chiarelli. I would argue----
Mr. Smith. Go ahead.
General Chiarelli. I would argue you go to an emergency
room and any one of our MTFs any night and you will see the
over-utilization of health care.
You will find an emergency room that is absolutely crammed
full of people who could not get an appointment when they
wanted to have an appointment, so they go and camp out in an
emergency room--and I am not kidding you--for 8, 9, and 10
hours, absolutely filled. And it causes a triage to take place
of patients that I would argue is probably not the smartest
thing we could do. And I think this is going to reverse that in
a huge, huge way.
Mr. Smith. And I think that all makes sense, but I guess I
will come back to the final question, you know, what I opened
with: What is going to be the out-of-pocket increase when it
comes to higher deductibles, copays, and premiums of the
proposal you are putting on the table?
Mr. Maldon. Commissioner Higgins, would you respond to that
question, please?
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congressman, I think I would start by saying that the basic
allowance for health care is going to cover for Active Duty
service members many of those out-of-pocket costs that you are
referring to. And when those out-of-pocket costs become--from
some catastrophic injury or illness become greater, the top 5
percent, if you will, there will be a fund to help those
families pay for those out-of-pocket costs. And those plans
that we sign them into, that they are going to choose
themselves, all are going to have some kind of a cap on
catastrophic costs. And we are going to bridge them over those
families that are severely----
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Higgins. Now--I am sorry, did you want to----
Mr. Smith. Go ahead.
Mr. Higgins. We are going to derive a lot of savings from
this greater management arena. I will take myself for an
example. I went to the emergency room one night and I had a
call 2 days later from a nurse in my health plan wanting to
know what she could do to help me prevent that emergency room
stop in the future. And it made a huge difference in my life.
That is management. That is management of utilization. It
works, I believe.
We see, and our analysts would see, and our analysts
include people outside the committee staff, see savings--and I
will just give you the rough numbers from the health care--
$11.2 billion in savings. But what you are seeing in savings is
the net, because there is a portion of that $11.2 billion that
we are plowing back in and taking advantage of those health
plans, better utilization----
Mr. Smith. Right.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. Better network.
Mr. Smith. There are others who want to get in here, so I
will stop at that. I think that is all very good.
But one of the things that I mentioned to some of you who
we met with privately before this, I think we have to be
really, really honest up front about some of the costs. And I
appreciate what you say about, you know, should it index the
premiums. I mean, that is part of it.
And I, you know, gave a speech to MOAA [Military Officers
Association of America] a year or so ago in which I said the
people who serve in the military absolutely should have the
best, cheapest health care that you can get in this country on
the job, and they will and they should and even after that
proposal they will. But it can't be what it was in 1997. We
just can't afford to keep doing that. So it is going to have to
be a little bit more that comes out of the pocket. I think we
have to be up front and honest about that if we are going to be
successful.
Mr. Buyer. It will be the gray area retirees will see the
higher deductibles, and the premiums will walk up 1 percent per
year to the 20 percent, which doesn't even get them to where we
started at the 27 percent premium back in the 1993, 1994
timeframe.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. You have been very generous
with the time. Thank you.
The Chairman. I appreciate those insights.
Mr. MacArthur.
Mr. MacArthur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I recognize that proposing sea change is much
more challenging than incremental change. And as I read your
report, I was struck that you have a balance of both. You
propose incremental change in some spots and sea change in
others. And so I just wanted to acknowledge that because that
is hard work to do that.
It also struck me, as I read your recommendations, that
your work is really about a key human process. The men and
women that volunteer for our armed services have choices, and I
wondered to what degree--and I wanted to ask you to talk about
how you looked at the other environment that they have choices
in, and that is the private sector. Because when men and women
are thinking about their life, just like you and I thinking
about our life, we look at all of our options, and that
includes a pay and retirement and health care and quality of
life and training and all of the different elements of thinking
through a life.
And so I just wanted to ask if you could talk about whether
you went out to some of the larger private-sector companies and
evaluated how they think about these same issues, about
providing benefits and quality of life and a real future for
people.
Mr. Maldon. Congressman, thank you for the question.
We did indeed do that. We spent an inordinate amount of
time, again, bringing in people, bringing in the experts. We
brought people, for example, in to talk to us about the
millennials so that we could understand better what millennials
value, what kind of things were important to them, and because
that is important to recruitment in terms of who we need to go
after and what it was going to take to be able to compete for
those very people.
We brought in other people from the healthcare side of
things and talked to them to better understand the commercial
healthcare insurance plans. We talked to the OPM people who
would be managing such plans; Thrift Savings Plan people that
have a better understanding of the health plans, the finances
around that; what it is going to take with regard to financial
literacy training to make sure that the service members had a
better understanding of how to and knowledge of what it is
going to take to be able to truly understand those plans.
Everything that we did with regard to our recommendations,
we did it, one, with an understanding that it must be the
support readiness overall; and number two, we wanted to make
sure that we address all of the preferences that the service
members told us that they were interested in from the survey
results that we got back and the people that we talked to. So
we did this in kind of a holistic way. We wanted to make sure
that we would understand what the second- and third-order
effect was, so anything that we were to do in all of the 350-
plus programs, benefit, compensation programs that we looked at
as we went through them.
So we think we took a very, very holistic approach to
looking at that, and we believe that these 15 recommendations
that we made took all of that into consideration. And these
were the areas that we thought that we could achieve
efficiencies in these areas without taking away any benefit
from the service members but, in fact, to even improve upon
those benefits in certain areas. And at the same time, we could
actually maximize the cost effectiveness of those programs,
which resulted into some significant savings.
Mr. Buyer. Congressman, we spoke with the TRICARE
contractors also. And take United and Humana as an example.
They are operating plans in the private sector, yet they are
also managing this very restricted, limited contract, and they
are very challenged and frustrated because these are two
different worlds. So there are monetary and non-monetary
incentives they can do in the private sector to affect human
behavior when it comes to health care. They cannot do those
things in the TRICARE contract.
General Chiarelli. And because the TRICARE contract is 5
years, it usually ends up being 8 years after somebody
protests. We end up with a situation where today we are sending
people to National Intrepid Center of Excellence for the
treatment of traumatic brain injury and post-traumatic stress,
giving them a treatment plan. They go back to the United States
Military Academy. They don't have people that are trained in
those skills, instructors, and now they go out on the outside
to try to get their TRICARE benefit and they won't cover 50
percent of the treatment plan we told them they needed to do in
order to get better. And this will solve that problem.
Mr. MacArthur. Well, my time is expired, but I applaud you
for that. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis, do you have other questions?
Mrs. Davis. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I could just follow up, because General Chiarelli, I
think what you were talking about are the two worlds. And by, I
guess, basically creating a military Federal employee health
benefit plan, what if we didn't do that? I mean, did you have
that discussion of whether the military folded into the
existing robust plan that you keep talking about? Where was
that in the discussion and what are the downsides, upsides to
doing that?
General Chiarelli. We did consider that, but for a whole
bunch of reasons that would probably be best taken offline, I
can tell you we came up with the solution that we did. I
absolutely think we have come up with the best solution. But
the real thing that we have to ensure is the robustness of the
MTFs [military treatment facilities]. And there will be a
tendency, as we do this, as we go to those plans, because
everybody is looking for savings, to only do that in the MTF
which takes care of the Active Component individual who relies
on an MTF. We can't allow that to happen in every instance.
What we have to be driven by in our MTFs is to maintain
that combat medical readiness. And that is the reason why, we
really feel, that this readiness command is so absolutely
essential. Someone who can advocate to ensure that we don't end
up in the medical field the same way we ended up in the dentist
field.
I used to tell my fellow commissioners, in my entire 40
years in the United States Army, I was told that my dependents
could get dental care as available, okay, and they never were
able to do that. I think my wife told me, she said, ``I was
given one appointment from 6:00 to 7:00 in the morning at Fort
Hood, Texas, because that is when the soldiers were running PT
[physical training].'' We downsized the dental corps only to
take care of the Active Component, and there was none left for
dependents, nor was there any left, as we all know, for
National Guard, as we had to work so hard to get that fixed.
Mr. Buyer. Congresswoman Davis, this idea of rolling
everyone into FEHBP does not work for several reasons: Number
one, we had to figure out how do we preserve the MTFs. And by
making them part of the risk pool, that is why our proposal is
a variant of the FEHBP.
They are also two completely different risk pools. So the
risk pool that would be with DOD that is a much younger
population, addressing different types of sicknesses and
diseases, is far different than a much older population. So
from the government standpoint, it doesn't cost us as much as
it would be enrolling in the FEHBP.
Mrs. Davis. Although, some of those costs would be greater
as well, I would think. But thank you very much.
Thank you for your work, General Chiarelli. The formulary
piece, yeah, we have got to fix that one.
Thank you.
General Chiarelli. Please.
The Chairman. Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you all for your work in this area. And I
want to address one part of it specifically, and that is the
reform of the modernization of our military retirement system,
and I want to commend you at least on the direction. I mean, I
think it is inequitable that we have a young person that comes
to the military and doesn't complete the 20 years and
essentially walks with nothing. And I just don't think that is
appropriate, and I think that there ought to be something
there, and in your plan you do recognize that.
And I would also urge you to--my late father retired from
the Army, Active Duty, I retired combination of 21 years
between the Army, the Army Reserve, the Marine Corps, the
Marine Corps Reserve, and some of the same problems existed. If
I, in Colorado, went skiing and approaching my 20th year and
was injured and then reported in for weekend drill and I was
unable to perform the physical requirements in the Marine Corps
Reserve, then I was ordered to go to a medical review board,
and then if I was deemed unqualified at the 19th year mark in
something that wasn't service-related, I got zero. And so I
think that the Reserve Component needs to be looked at as well.
Some of the same considerations exist there that exist on the
Active Duty side.
But I just think, you know, we have a system that
desperately needs to be updated. I was a young, enlisted Army
soldier on Active Duty and a junior officer in the Marine Corps
on Active Duty and then filled in the rest of the time in
Reserves. But I would think that in both of those times I would
have opted in for a system that would have enabled me to walk
with something short of 20 years rather than roll the dice and
say, do I really know as a young person that I am going to be
around for 20 years.
And so I think it is so important to update the system. And
I just thank you for coming up with some solutions to begin a
discussion in terms of modernizing our system and to make sure
that it fits the needs of the young people coming into the
military today and who are serving in the military today to
provide them that option to opt into the system.
And but let me ask the question: Did you all consider the
Reserve Component as well as the Active Duty Component when it
came to retirement? And can you tell me what your
recommendation is for the Reserve Component?
Mr. Maldon. Yes, Congressman. I am going to have
Commissioner Buyer to talk to that as--with his Reserve
experience specifically.
Mr. Buyer. A lot of the benefits as we reviewed this, when
it comes to the Reserve Components, was responsive to the,
quote, ``Strategic Reserve,'' end quote. And, you know, when
you want to bring in the chiefs, you want to talk with them and
say, so this Reserve Component we have today, is it an
Operational Reserve or is it the Strategic Reserve? Because
when I looked back at that last 13 years of war, that was an
Operational Reserve. Well, they don't want to call it the
Operational Reserve because they don't want to fund it as an
Operational Reserve.
So when it comes to the benefits though, we felt it
extremely important to be responsive. And so we are
recommending on the health piece--and I will let someone else
address the retirement piece--but on the health piece, yes, we
want the reservists to have access to health care and the
Reserve Components. And now what we are recommending, though,
that they pay a 25 percent premium share into that plan.
What that is going to do is perfect the continuity of care,
because, as we know, with all these different types of duty
status and being called Active Duty and not Active Duty and the
impact upon family and out-of-pocket costs, we want to perfect
that continuity of care, and we can do that by availing this
opportunity to participate in the plans TRICARE Choice to the
Reserve Components.
Mr. Maldon. And Congressman, if I might, please, I am going
to ask Commissioner Higgins to talk to the other piece of that.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congressman, yes, we integrated the Reserve Components into
our proposal, and, in fact, technically, it will operate in the
same way for a reservist. And the service chiefs directed that
we match the force profiles, and in our analysis the Reserve
Component with our proposal, we are going to be exactly on
target in terms of force profile. So recruiting, retention, and
that force, the Reserve Components is going to be just as good
as it is today.
General Chiarelli. If I can make one other point here. How
better off would we be today after 13, 14 years of war asking
young men and women to go on three, four, and five deployments,
how better off would we be today that when we gave them the
pink slip and said your service is no longer needed short of 20
years, that they had something that they left with? And that is
really the sad thing, that we didn't think about this a long
time ago before we got into this 13-year conflict. Because
literally, we are asking these young men and women to leave
today, some of them while they are still deployed, and they
leave with nothing if they have served short of 20 years.
Admiral Giambastiani. The Commission listened to these
young men and women talk to us about leaving with something.
And obviously the force planners, the service chiefs, and the
personnel heads would be very interested in making sure that we
can retain the right balance of people even for those who leave
with something. And we have spent a lot of time, as our
chairman has said, working these proposals to make sure we
balance retention along with allowing people to leave with
something. And I think we have designed this program in such a
way to meet both demands.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Gabbard.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, gentlemen, and thank you all for your service
on so many fronts and for being here today.
There has been some mention about some of the contracts
that are currently in place with TRICARE and this idea of
opening it up to provide more options is something I think that
is very interesting and necessary, especially in some places
where access really is an issue.
Over the last couple of years, we had an issue in my
district in Hawaii where military families and retirees who
lived on islands other than Oahu were outside of the TRICARE
prime jurisdiction and were then left with very little access
other than to jump on a plane and travel to Oahu, which is cost
prohibitive for a lot of people. So opening that up for more
options, I think, is something that would be very interesting
to families like those.
My question is about implementation, though. Given the
current construct you mentioned, Mr. Buyer, the bureaucracy
that exists within TRICARE now, what kind of timeline are we
looking at should this proposal go through and continue to get
to a point where these families would have these options?
Mr. Buyer. The way the contracts are structured, I believe
that we could actually bring those TRICARE contracts to
fruition and move to implementation. Anytime you move these big
programs you need glide paths, that is what I have learned. And
I believe, you know, you can't just say let's do this next
year. So wind these contracts down. You can do that here over
the next 2 to 3 years and then move to this new plan model. But
do this in a glide----
Ms. Gabbard. I ask specifically because the TRICARE
contract that has made this change and that covers the
jurisdiction in Hawaii will be up, I believe, in about a year.
So my concern would be that, we would get locked into something
else that would continue that limitation.
General Chiarelli. And make no doubt about it, the services
have in fact, everyone has, in fact, used access as a way to
control cost. The more pressure you put on to control health
care costs, access becomes more difficult because the number of
providers that are part of the network become fewer.
Admiral Giambastiani. We also----
Mr. Maldon. We have a 2-year implementation timeframe here
from the time that the recommendations would be adopted.
Admiral Giambastiani. If I could just add one other piece
too. I think it is important for members here to understand
that we have worked very closely with the current OPM [Office
of Personnel Management] director and his staff of which a
former deputy director of TRICARE, Rear Admiral Christine
Hunter, now retired, is working in OPM. So she's seen the best
of both worlds on each side and that really has brought a
tremendous amount of assistance to us as a Commission and
working not only to transition but how to structure the
program.
Ms. Gabbard. Right.
My next question that no one has brought up yet today is
one that is core to all military families and that is the
proposal to consolidate the commissary and exchanges. And I
would like you to comment on how that change will affect them
as well as the MWR [Moral, Welfare and Recreation] funds that
the services currently receive through the exchanges.
Mr. Maldon. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that--for your
question.
You know, we gave a lot of thought to this. We heard a lot
about the commissaries. We had people all over the map, quite
honestly, that when we traveled across the country and talked
to people about their perceived value of the groceries
discount. You know, the bottom line is after having looked at
it carefully and talked to people, we had overwhelming support
at the end of the day, where people said, you know, they
believe there was a real value here in the commissary.
So that is why we made the recommendation that we did in
terms of just consolidating it back in operations for those--
for the exchanges, the three exchanges and their commissaries.
And we believe that we could, by doing that, we were going to
continue to meet those needs of what the service members and
the families said that they preferred here with regard to
commissaries.
So we are going to continue to meet that need that they
have. And the culture belief is that there are some real
savings there in the commissaries, and we did not want to take
away from that.
We also believe that we could bring about some
efficiencies, though, by consolidating the exchanges and the
commissaries, the back-office operations type, because you are
going to take out a lot of the costs in logistics, the IT
[information technology] training, and that kind of thing.
The other piece of this, I think, with regard to cost, you
know, we were going to be able to really deliver these goods
still and take out $500 million of costs in that on an annual
basis, and we thought that was a pretty good place to be.
I am going to ask Commissioner Higgins if he'll follow up
too with some comments on the commissaries.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congresswoman, I think what I would emphasize to you is
that the core of our proposal is to preserve food, groceries,
meats, produce at cost plus the surcharge. We are going to
preserve that value. When we went around and talked to people,
the response from the force was very mixed. The retirees are
steadfastly very supportive of commissaries. The force is
changing a lot, I believe, over my experience talking to the
force over 30 years. There is a lot of mixed reviews.
There should be no illusions that DOD is not going to come
after commissary money year after year after year. They are
going to target commissaries. You are going to have a very
difficult time here in the Congress protecting commissary
funding. That means services are going to erode. What we offer
will preserve services, and if you erode services in the
commissary, hours, store-day openings, that kind of thing, if
you erode those in a retail environment, people are going to
find other places to shop.
When they do that in commissaries, the exchanges are going
to take a terrible hit. We need to reform single manager. We
can cross over those cultures, negotiate deals, the deals to
protect MWR funding. We can do that. Absolutely, we can
negotiate and protect that. We can protect some of the cultural
service interests that they have and the coordination. For
instance, the Marine Corps is very heavily invested in manpower
and coordinating their family programs as well as the exchange.
The same people do both. We can work through all those things.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. McSally.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, gentlemen, for your work on this issue. I do
want to comment on just even the opening remarks where we
talked about how the cost of personnel has gone up over the
last several years, especially with 13 years of war. I think we
are all aware of that. We can see the math. But as we all know
in this room and you all who served, we can't be at war for 13
years and expect those costs not to go up.
And the constant deployments, the health care
responsibilities, when the men and women in uniform raise their
right hand to serve and put their lives on the line, we have a
covenant with them. And although I appreciate the work you are
doing to try and see where we can gain efficiencies, I do want
to just be on the record to say we can't find those
efficiencies on the backs, you know, of those who have served.
And I know that is the work that you are trying to do, because
we can't do that on the cheap.
You know, a lot of those costs have gone up because the
compensation did not match what was happening in the private
sector, again, increased health costs related to the
deployments and the wounds of war, both physical and mental.
And so we just need to make sure--and even with all that, we
still have troops on food stamps, right. So we still have a
problem here. And we have got to make sure that we recruit,
retain the best and brightest, because freedom isn't free and
we know that.
So I appreciate the work that you guys are doing in a very
tough situation, but I am committed to make sure that there are
no cuts to those who have served and those who are continuing
to serve.
And I appreciate the work you have done specifically
related to access to child care. The unique concerns of women
in uniform, especially those who might be a single parent, and
the challenges that they have with the duty hours and the
dynamics they have. I mean, child care is the number-one
issue--not number one, but a top issue that I am hearing from
many service men and women who are trying to serve and still be
parenting with all the challenges. So I appreciate that work in
your report.
I will confess that I was one of the people who took your
survey, since I am a retiree, so it is a little bit of
undercover boss here. I will tell you I have some concerns with
the survey having taken it. The way things were questioned, you
know, and I am paraphrasing a little bit: You know, do you
prefer the commissary or access to health care? Which is more
important to you? And the reaction of any retiree, I think, is
like, yes, yes, all of the above, and then firewall to the
right. And then like, no, you can't firewall to the right,
okay. 100 and 99, 99, 99.
So, I mean, I was a flawed data point to your survey, but I
think I represent many retirees who just feel like even the
questions being asked create concern that, oh, my gosh, what
are you going to make us have to choose between based on our
commitment to serve and the commitment to us to serve.
So how much of your recommendations came from that survey?
Because I have deep concerns about that survey, is my first
question. And what is the feedback you have gotten from
veterans service organizations so far on your recommendations?
Mr. Maldon. Congresswoman, let me take your latter two
questions here, and we will get some of the other commissioners
to respond as well.
First of all, with regard to the survey, you know, this
survey was intended to really provide us with a point of data.
It was not the only point of data that we were using in making
our recommendations. Of course, it did, in fact, stack order
one benefit against the other, and we needed that. That really
kind of gave us a good indication of what service members
really prefer in terms of value, so that was important to us.
And then, you know, I will tell you that truthfully
everything that you have said here we totally agree with, and
that is the way we actually approach this. We took a lot of
time looking at every program and trying to figure out what is
the second- and third-order effect? If we made a recommendation
on one program, one benefit, looking at one benefit, what did
it do for the other five benefits? And so we took that holistic
approach in going through it, whether it was health care, it
was pay, it was retirement, and quality-of-life programs, the
commissaries and the other programs and ECHO [Extended Care
Health Option], the Space-Available travel, whatever the case
might have been with regard to quality of life. Every one of
those recommendations were made in the support of an All-
Volunteer Force.
We made sure as we went through this process that whatever
we did we would either maintain those benefits for the service
members--we all agreed to that early on--or we would improve
those benefits. So I can assure you that we took that in
consideration, and I hope that will address your concern in
that regard.
I am going to ask Commissioner Giambastiani to respond as
well.
Admiral Giambastiani. I would just say to you that I think
we agree with the vast majority of your comments. I don't think
the survey was a flawed one because I know all surveys are
flawed. And the problem is, is that you try to achieve the best
balance of how to get input from the surveys. But more
importantly, if you are smart, you not only do paper surveys or
computer surveys but you go out and talk with people.
And this Commission spent a huge amount of time engaging
with the lowest enlisted up to the most senior officers, from
the Joint Chiefs on down, up and down. And I have to tell you,
our travels around the world and around the country really made
a difference and had a substantial impact. Also, with the
family associations, if you will, wives' clubs, you name it----
Ms. McSally. Spouses' clubs.
Admiral Giambastiani [continuing]. Spouses' clubs, you name
it, and it just depends on where you go----
Ms. McSally. Right.
Admiral Giambastiani [continuing]. I would tell you that
the input we received across the board was exceptionally
helpful to help us temper these recommendations.
Ms. McSally. Great. Thanks. My time is expired.
If you don't mind in writing, your veterans service
organizations, if you could get back on that, where they are,
because my time is expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Maldon. We will.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 95.]
The Chairman. Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of you for the incredible work you put in on
this.
To Colonel Buyer and Commander Carney, it is great to see
both of you again. Thank you for your continued service.
And I know how hard this was, and I know how difficult.
This is the starting point of the discussion, and it is
critically important. I think the gentlelady from Arizona's
point was right on and spoken as someone with experience, and I
am grateful for that.
We know and, again, some of the things you tackled, the
DOD-VA collaboration, brilliant. We know that is where we need
to go.
And, General, your point was right on dental. I would add
that I went down as a first sergeant the last year before an
ETS [end term of service]. I couldn't get a troop in because
they knew VA would pay for it, and then that is the problem we
come in. So you are right. Those are the things.
Looking at SBP [Survivor Benefit Plan] offset, you tackled
one that is tough. No one wants to grab this one. You did it.
You offered up a suggestion, which I am grateful for. I think
that premium, I don't think anyone will take it, but you know
what, it brought to light what it costs to do this. So, please,
know that I approach it like this, and I am not coming at this
as the caricature of the senior enlisted guy, but that little
chip is on my shoulder. I don't see any on the Commission.
And what I am saying is, I hear you going out and talking,
and the surveys, and the gentlelady brought up--oh there he is,
yeah--brought up a good point in that the surveys are tough,
because keep in mind that prior to last April the VA in Arizona
had a 94 percent approval rating in Phoenix. We as soldiers,
how is the chow hall? Compared to what? It is good; that is the
only place I go. And so keep in mind when they are asking this,
those they are going to get.
I say this out of reality because this is first and
foremost, and I hear you echoing this, and this makes me feel
confident, readiness and national security, those are our
priorities, readiness and national security. But keep in mind
what those troops are out there. And I was with a group of 25
sergeant majors, none have any idea what was in this.
And when I started to say some of those things, here is the
things they come back to me with: Where's the Commission on the
700,000 civilian employees? Have we got any recommendations
here of that? Of course, they are going to come to this: How
big have the command staffs gotten and the support there? What
have you guys done there? They ask me, what about weapons
systems acquisitions and procurements? Have we looked at any
waste there?
Those are things they are asking for in saying we will make
the hard choices, but we are not convinced everyone else has
been asked. So I say this more to, not as a question because
you have done the hard work and you have teed it up for us. We
have got to get out there and make the case because this has to
be buy-in, as you said. You are talking to a very small
universe.
If you go out and sell this to the American public, 90
percent have no idea and they will probably agree with you. If
it saves money and you tell them it keeps them safe, they will
agree with it. The problem that we have is most of our warriors
come from the same families. And if there is a break in trust
in those families, you break the system.
And I say this only because, a small one, but I heard it
and heard it and we are going to hear it, the transferability
on the post-9/11 housing. Granted, it is huge. If my daughter,
I have benefits, she's 14, she comes to DC to go to school,
that is $85,000. That gets expensive and it gets expensive
fast, but that is phasing out.
So what I heard was this is, what about the promise made
and the promise broken? So I said, when I tee this up, and it
is more of a statement and asking all my colleagues here, we
have got to get out and make the case on national security. We
have got to see our veterans service organizations that the
gentlewoman asked about not as a detriment that they are going
to come in and protect their own and say, no. They want to have
a solution because they care first and foremost about national
security. They care about the warriors and they want to get
this right.
So I guess to my colleagues I say, we have been given a lot
of thoughtful work and some very bold suggestions. Our job now
is to see how it fits in the entire process and to get that
buy-in, especially from that very small segment of the
population that absorbs the huge brunt of this.
So I would just--any feelings or comments or as you hear
this, I know I am speaking to a group, but perceptions do
matter and we have got to get that.
Mr. Buyer. [Off mike.]
Mr. Walz. Thank you. We have been down this road a few
times, Colonel Buyer.
Mr. Maldon. Congressman, yes. Let me have Commissioner
Chiarelli to respond specifically here, then we will have a
couple more comments as well, if that is okay.
General Chiarelli. Sir, I would just ask you to realize
that this is a package of recommendations. And any one of these
recommendations, as you start to paramount and change them in
any way, there was going to be second- and third-order effects.
And I would really ask that you work with us to understand what
those second- and third-order effects are, because that is the
thing that scares me the most.
If you pull away a readiness command, I think that that
causes some real issues as we look at how we are going to
change the medical system, is an example.
Mr. Walz. Our stakeholders have to know this.
General Chiarelli. And I think it is just key that you work
with us and our staff if at any time you feel that those kinds
of adjustments need to be made.
Mr. Walz. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. Taking the general's point, I think it is a
good point, but let me reassure the gentleman that a major part
of the agenda of this committee is dealing with civilian
overhead, bloated command staffs, and acquisition reform. I
think the things the gentleman lists are exactly right. We may
not be able to solve it all in a single swoop, but it is
absolutely part of the agenda of this committee.
One of the reasons I appreciate what this Commission did is
they weren't just out to find money to cut. They were there to
see what works and what we need going into the future, and that
to me is the heart of the matter that our committee has to look
at, too.
So I appreciate the gentleman and also the work that has
gone on.
Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the Commission. And I have three sons
that are currently serving, two Active Duty and one Army
National Guard pilot. And they ask, Dad, what are you all
doing? Are you cutting our benefits? I have one that is
midrange, he is a major, one that is just captain, and they
want to know what the future holds for them. And I think the
general hit it.
There are a lot of parallels between law enforcement, which
I was 39 years, and then the military. When I first went in law
enforcement, I didn't care about retirement and I didn't care
about medical, I mean, because I was invincible, I was young.
But when I got married and had a family, all of a sudden
medical became a real big deal in regards to starting a family
and all those types of things.
Then as I got midterm and you start to decide, hey, listen,
do I really want to continue doing this or can I make more
money on the outside? And that is what I get hit with, two of
my sons, I could make more money on the outside. So why should
I stay?
Do we care about those guys and gals? Is it important
enough for us to look at their benefits? Because at that
midrange level the benefits become more and more important to
them than the recruit, at least in my experience.
Just on the Reserve side of it, the TRICARE, I will tell
you, is terrible, because my son, they were going to have a
baby, and they had, guess what, that slice of physicians that
were available was, like, zero compared to--unless they wanted
to drive three counties away to get to that physician. There
was none within that area. And so that was a huge problem, and
I couldn't believe it, but that was the case.
Even though the insurance was, you know, I think it was, I
forget what company it was, but that doctor did it on the
normal, but not on TRICARE, wouldn't see them because, hey, you
are not on the normal insurance, even though it is the same
company that was handling it. Big problem.
What you are trying to do I think is commendable. I am
concerned, and I think those that you heard from, others that
are retired, is that you can't change the plan of those that
signed up. When my kids raised their hand, you can't change it
midstream for somebody. And I think you have accomplished that,
from at least what I have read, is that that is not in the mix,
it is not changing.
Now, the healthcare portion does change. And I am concerned
about, Colonel; you said we made a mistake back then. I just
hope we are not making the same mistake this time. And I think
you have given it a lot of thought because you were down that
road.
Mr. Buyer. Absolutely.
Mr. Nugent. But I just want to make sure, because I have
100,000-plus retirees in my district and they are pretty vocal.
So I want to make sure that when I actually meet with some this
Saturday at one of the vet fairs that we are doing, health
fair, that I can say listen, you know--I want to have a better
idea because I really don't have a good handle on what it does,
what it changes for those retirees.
Your recommendation?
Mr. Maldon. Congressman Nugent, let me just respond real
quickly here to your question.
First of all, I would separate the Active Duty military out
because nothing changed there. Because of operation readiness,
we made sure, we want to protect that industrial base of the
MTFs, getting services there, and so forth. Nothing changes for
the Active Duty service members.
Let's go to the other end of the spectrum. Nothing changes
for those retirees that are Medicare eligible. They still have
TRICARE for Life as we knew it.
The TRICARE for Choice, the new proposal that we are making
here, it really includes those people in between. Those are the
retirees that are non-Medicare eligible with regard to cost
sharing. People we have talked to have indicated to us that
they understand that the timing is such that you can't continue
to stay at that 5 percent cost-share level. We have been very
comfortable there for a long time, and that has been a great
thing, but people really knew that a time was coming when you
have got to do a little bit more.
What we have tried to do is take that into consideration
and say, we are going to do a slow ramp-up of that in our
proposal that goes from that 5 percent to 20 percent over a 15-
year period of time. That is still a better deal than what the
Federal employees get in their insurance plan. So they still
would be paying a little bit less for health care than what a
Federal employee would be paying, a nonmilitary person.
Mr. Nugent. Just one last question quickly on the Reserve
Component. The TSP match that you are talking about, is that
also for Reserve Component?
Mr. Maldon. It is.
Mr. Nugent. Okay.
Mr. Maldon. It is.
Mr. Nugent. Because currently, you know, I talk to my son
and say, listen, if you can put 20 bucks away, whatever it is.
But if you are a Member of Congress or staff, they get a match
to it and currently our Active Duty folks don't get a match. So
I think that is an excellent idea moving forward.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Mr. Maldon. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And to the Chairman and members of the Commission, can I
just say how remarkable your presentation has been. And while
you have all given service to this country I believe on one
level or another, I think your service that you have provided
by virtue of this Commission is priceless.
Your recommendations are bold. They are thorough. As I have
listened to many of my colleagues push back on you, you had the
answers. And I am just, I am wowed by it.
Now, I just hope that we as members of this committee will
emulate the boldness and the thoughtfulness that you have shown
in your recommendations.
One of the things that really amazed me was to hear that
TRICARE--I have a brother who is retired, TRICARE, and we go
into fisticuffs on holidays because he thinks I am trying to
take something away from him. But what was most impressive to
me was your representation, Congressman Buyer, that, in fact,
TRICARE is not as good as----
Mr. Buyer. That is right.
Ms. Speier [continuing]. What would be offered or what
could be offered because the network is so small.
And I think part of what we need to do, and maybe you will
join us in doing so, is educate military retirees and military
personnel on the myths that have kind of grown up with the
expectation that somehow this was better than what they could
be getting and, in fact, it is not.
The fact that only 17 percent of those who serve actually
retire in the military should give us also reason to pause
because so much of those who have served to date in this 13-
year war have been reservists. And I heard loud and clear from
many of you that they want something out of this. So a TSP,
some kind of a healthcare benefit, I think all of those things
should, in fact, be factored in as well.
I am also reminded, and it should be not lost on any of us
as members of this committee, that if we do not act, and act
soon, the cost of military personnel and retirees will gobble
up the entire defense budget I believe by 2039. So we have I
think a responsibility that is grave to address this and
address it now so it can be phased in appropriately.
And I think for any of us who have served in any other
level of government, having tiers of retirement benefits and
health care is reality. Those who have retired get to keep it.
Those who are newly employed are in oftentimes a second tier, a
third tier, even a fourth tier. And I think that is something
that we have got to come to grips with.
I don't recall whether or not you addressed the issue of
the pensions that were offered up a few years ago for the
three- and four-star generals who we were told should have
their pensions bumped to keep them on Active Duty. And as I
understand it now, those pensions exceed the pension of the
Commander in Chief by about 50 percent.
Did you address that issue at all? And I don't know exactly
how much money that would accrue, but I would be interested in
anything you have to say on that.
Mr. Maldon. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. We
have two retired four-stars here on this Commission, and I am
sure they are waiting to answer that question. I am going to
start with Commissioner Chiarelli first.
General Chiarelli. We looked at it. I think someone is
giving you an inflated figure, to say that my pension is 50
percent greater than the Commander in Chief. I don't have his
numbers at hand right now, but I doubt that very seriously.
Ms. Speier. The President of the United States will receive
$200,000 a year in retirement benefits. We gave a particular
bump I believe in 2008 or 2009 to three- and four-star
generals, and their pensions now I think are at $270,000,
something like that.
General Chiarelli. I can't tell you the exact number. I
don't know it. But I can tell you that it is one of the things
that got me and other folks to remain in the service throughout
a 40-year career. You know, one way or the other, for those of
us who served a long time, we looked at it and we left it where
it is.
Admiral Giambastiani. If I could jump in here, I would just
like to put some perspective on this. What happened back in the
2006 timeframe, since I happened to work on this, is that we
were trying to encourage senior officers and senior enlisted to
remain in the service beyond 30 years.
Everybody thinks this is all about flag and general
officers. But what we did is we started paying for retirement
beyond 30 years for these senior enlisted and senior officers.
And by senior officers, I am talking about warrants and LDOs,
limited duty officers and warrant officers, senior enlisted,
for example, Sergeant Major of the Army, Sergeant Major of the
Marine Corps, Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy, if you
will, force and fleet master chiefs, these very senior guys.
And let me give you perspective. There are 4,000 people in
2006 who were serving greater than 30 years of service. Of that
4,000, 3,000 were senior enlisted and senior officers below
flag and general officer rank. And there are 1,000 of that
4,000. And this encouraged these very senior people to stick
around. Having a command sergeant major who has been in for 36
years who will stay for another 4 really makes a huge
difference. Tremendous amount of experience.
So please don't think this was all about flag and general
officers. They happened to be on the high end of this, as
opposed to the other 3,000 who were being left behind.
Ms. Speier. All right. My time has expired. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, I have been thinking over old stories, and I
won't call them war stories because I never served in the
military, but I majored in risk management, insurance, and I
was an insurance broker for 20 years. And so I sat on that side
of the table many times explaining to employees benefit
changes.
And we all know that protecting the current system is not
in the best interest of the men and women in our military or
this country. And yet there seems to be the perception that any
change is a takeaway. And I think it is probably harder here
than anywhere else because of the politics of it.
And I will tell you, I will just give you a perfect
example. The House voted several months ago to make a minor
change in cost-of-living adjustments. And we certainly had our
colleagues on the other side of the Capitol, told a lot of
stories, and there was the perception that people's check was
actually going to go down instead of not going up as fast.
This has got to be done. And changes have to be made. And I
think the financial literacy training is one of the most
important aspects of anything that you can do in this. And we
need people to know what the cost of the healthcare benefits
are.
And, General, as I heard you talking about the formulary
for what in most cases would be antidepressants and the
situation that you briefly described, that is a complex
purchasing decision where we have hired a pharmacy benefit
manager who has got different contracts with different drug
manufacturers that, quite honestly, we need to have
transparency there. And maybe we should have one pharmacy
benefit manager for all of the, instead of multiples so that
that formulary stays the same regardless of which agency or
division or whatever we want to call it is providing the
service. But there should also be transparency in those
contracts so that we get to see what is being paid for it.
And I want to give you just a great example of how paying
more and getting more are two totally different things in
health care. I have taken Zyrtec for probably 20 years now. I
used to pay $10 for it. After the drug manufacturer continued
to go up on its prices, the insurance carrier I was covered
under said, no more, you are going to have to pay $40 for it.
And that was for 1 month. Today I can buy a 90-day supply for
$19. And until the consumer becomes responsible for paying more
of the cost, the more we end up paying for it in the end
because those costs are hidden.
Now, I say that to get to the fact that I believe these
changes have to be made. But I wonder if bumping the base pay
of our people so that they know that there is not a dollar
being taken away from them, that we are shifting the purchasing
decision to them of what they do with their dollar, how much
consideration there was given to that, and how much
consideration was given to allowing somebody who is 2 or 3
years into their service to choose to move to the new benefit
plan instead of being forced to stay in the old one, at their
choice, if they chose to move.
Mr. Maldon. Congressman Scott, let me respond to the first
part of your question, then I will have one of the other
members on the Commission to respond to the second part of it.
We looked at the pay table. We talked about the 350-plus
programs that we looked at. This is part of it. The pay table
was one of the first places that we went to. And having looked
at it very carefully, we realized that it had served us very
well over the last 42 years, plus during the last 13 years of
war especially, a sound structure.
We didn't think there was a need to go there to make any
changes in that because that would have been a major overhaul
of the compensation benefit system and we didn't think that was
necessary. What we wanted to do is to look for those
opportunities to modernize the compensation program and the
systems and that is what we did, that is what our
recommendations provide here.
I am going to also ask Commissioner Higgins to talk to the
latter part of your question.
If you would, Commissioner Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Scott, good to see you again, sir. And I believe you
are referring to the retirement, about the choice, the 2, 3
years?
Mr. Scott. If I am, I am referring to pretty much the
retirement, but making sure that somebody who is just a couple
of years in, if they so chose, none of them would be forced
into the new system, but they could choose to go into the new
system if they wanted to.
Mr. Higgins. Oh, I see. The concern there is I think for
the services, their observation would be that it would make
their job a lot more complex with the uncertainty as to the
choices that people would make. From a management standpoint, I
think they would have concerns.
Certainly from our position on the Commission, we would
have concerns about how the cost of that could be modeled. We
delivered modernization. We believe we have stepped up and
given people precisely what they are looking for in their
retirement plan. And we believe that we understand the
implications on retention, recruiting, and cost.
To open up that aperture soon after the individual arrives
on Active Duty and give people the choice to stay in the old
system versus entering our solution, our proposal, that would
be very difficult to understand the implications of that on
force structure and cost, and that would be a concern of ours,
and why, frankly, we discussed that, but could not see a path
forward to deliver what we think was necessary and include that
kind of a proposal.
Mr. Buyer. Mr. Scott, on health care, with regard to the
retirees, we wanted to be very holistic in our approach.
TRICARE for Life is preserved. The pharmacy benefit is
preserved. For the gray area retirees, as their premiums
increase, I am sure you will hear someone say, oh, my gosh, I
am paying more, you are breaking the faith, how can you break
my promise? Wait. Time-out. You are tangled right now in a
subpar health system.
You are delivering to them a better health system, that
they can choose a plan that best fits their family's needs,
right, that is what you sell when you talk to your employers,
improve their access, improve their quality, and they have got
their choice, and there are utilization management tools that
benefit the employer. And with regard to the pharmacy benefit,
we are going to protect that because we are going to recommend
that that be rolled into the fund. So they are getting a
tremendous bump up for a slight bump in cost.
Admiral Giambastiani. I would also add that we are going to
be in a long-term death spiral on TRICARE if we just stick the
way we are and not change to this, if you will, smarter way to
go. Why? Because as the amount of noncopayment or premium
changes for these individuals, all the DOD can continue to do
is either, one, put more money into the pot, which drives their
costs up, or they will figure out ways to cut back on service,
cut back on benefits continuously, and it is a death spiral.
You just can't sustain this program to the manner to which we
think we won't break faith with these individuals.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for
being the last one between you and lunch, but I will be quick.
Thank you all. This is really just an impressive effort.
And I want to also give a shout-out to my friend Chris Carney
back there who I know helped with the effort here. Again, this
is really important work that you are doing.
Admiral, you were just talking about the bad choices if we
don't do anything, and the narrowing of the networks, which Mr.
Buyer referred to. I mean, in Groton most of the docs in that
area treat TRICARE as charity care and just roll their eyes
when they talk about dealing with the system. And L+M
[Lawrence+Memorial] Hospital ends up being sort of the
provider, default provider, because, again, there is just so
little acceptance of TRICARE. So doing nothing really is not a
solution to anything here.
And, Mr. Higgins, maybe just walk me through again one more
time real quick, and I will stop there, just the basic
allowance for health care, just so if a sailor asks me about it
back home I can kind of have some way to respond to it.
Assuming, again, we have this new structure, they pick Blue
Cross, there is a premium, there is a copayment, there is a
deductible, I mean, how does the basic allowance, I mean, does
that cover all of it? Does it cover part of it? And family size
we have already heard some rumblings about as an issue. So
maybe you could just address that.
Mr. Higgins. I think what we are looking at here is trying
for Active Duty family members, we want to make certain that
their costs, their copays are covered as well as their premium
amount that they would have to contribute to the health plan
effort.
Now, the big part of the health plan purchase is going to
be paid by the government. It is the 28 percent that falls to
the family. And they would receive that 28 percent, whatever
that plan cost may be. The beauty of the proposal is that there
would be a variety of plan costs out there to choose from.
Whatever that 28 percent is, we are going to pick up the
average of those selected plans by the population, and they are
going to receive that in their paycheck every month. It is
going to be transferred immediately to the health insurance
plan, that 28 percent.
But on top of that, there will be a calculation of what the
average out-of-pocket costs would be for the plan selected by
the people in our system. And those out-of-pocket costs, we
would believe, we have analyzed, would cover 85 percent of the
out-of-pocket costs that could be expected. That means there is
going to be some percentage of people that would have out-of-
pocket costs, due to maybe events, illnesses, injury, that are
greater than what would be provided to them. The important
ingredient here is, if it is not higher, they get to keep that
money that they received in their paycheck.
Now, if it is higher, there is going to be some percentage
that may have additional out-of-pocket costs. But we do
protect, we have a cap where we can ensure that those that are
stricken by catastrophic illness, injury, and indeed face very
high, extreme out-of-pocket costs, will have a fund, we would
propose that a fund be established that would afford those
families additional assistance to gap them from their extreme
cost level from what they received in their paycheck to the
catastrophic caps in the individual plans.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. So this network or exchange or whatever
you want to call it where plans are going to be offered----
Mr. Higgins. Yes, sir.
Mr. Courtney [continuing]. Is that going to be a national
array of carriers or is it going to be sort of regionalized or
localized?
Mr. Higgins. It would be a mix. And I would defer to my
colleague, Commissioner Buyer, to perhaps clarify on that.
Mr. Chairman, with your permission.
Mr. Maldon. Yes. Let me just say, number one, just on the
BAHC [basic allowance for health care] itself, that is set
regionally based on the average plan selected by the services,
not the average plans that are out there on all of them, but
the plans that are selected by the services. That is the
answer. I just want to cover that.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you for pointing that out.
Mr. Buyer. And, yes, like at the FEHBP, you get that choice
of national plans, regional plans, same type of thing that we
would recommend. So, say, you are in a particular service and
you are doing a lot of moving, you want to be in a national
plan. I am in the Navy and I know I am going to be in San Diego
for the next 10 years, I probably am going to be on a local
plan.
But one thing that is really powerful about our holistic
recommendations, it goes back to, I hate to be redundant, Mr.
Chairman, but we are trying to empower the individual, whether
it is in the financial literacy, about making those right
judgments which would help them transition to civilian life,
but also what are the best judgments for you with regard to
your family on the health care. And that also helps them
transition also to civilian life. So when we do that, it will
have a tremendous impact upon our society also.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Just to take the burden off Mr. Courtney, I
want to detain you just a moment longer and ask just a couple
things.
Mr. Chairman, a lot of what you all have to do is estimates
of costs, of how people are going to react to various
incentives, and so forth. Can you just give me a feel for your
confidence in the estimates and modeling approach that you all
used in understanding what the consequences of various
proposals would be?
Mr. Maldon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, we did our own analysis, of course. We
had others that came in and we asked them to assist us with
that. We used a company like RAND. RAND did on our retention,
all of our retention stuff, they did the modeling for us there.
On our health care, we had IDA [Institute for Defense Analyses]
that actually provided a lot of modeling and analysis for us on
the healthcare pieces of things. And there may have been some
others here that----
Admiral Giambastiani. I think DOD Actuary, for example----
Mr. Maldon. Exactly.
Admiral Giambastiani [continuing]. Is a place where we
spent a lot of time, and they are well respected in this area.
We have had staff engagement with the Office of Management and
Budget, CBO [Congressional Budget Office]. This has really been
quite across the board. And we have tried to reference, the
staff has done a very good job of referencing where the
analysis and data has come from and who did the analysis and
who looked at the data for us. Obviously we are ultimately
responsible for it.
Mr. Buyer. Mr. Chairman, our confidence is high, but we
welcome constructive critique.
The Chairman. I think it is just important for us to know
that you and the people who have helped you have done the
homework. Nobody is perfect in predicting the future, but
trying to understand as best we can what is going to happen.
I guess the last thing I would do is just offer each of you
an opportunity to mention either--Mrs. Davis asked about
``aha'' moment--but a key insight or a key consideration you
think we need to keep in mind as we move forward on examining
and considering the recommendations that you have made. And I
would appreciate it if each of you could, if you have
something, could share that with us.
Mr. Maldon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I think the ``aha'' moment here for me, and I
believe I speak for the whole Commission when I say this, these
recommendations we proposed, we proposed them in a holistic way
and believing that they are best done or adopted as a whole as
opposed to doing some of them separately, because they all are
interrelated in a way.
For example, financial literacy training, we actually put
that recommendation in there because just the changes that we
are proposing here with regard to health care and with pay,
retirement, one needs to really understand what that means and
how they can best benefit from those programs or take advantage
of the benefits that are offered in those programs. So having
financial literacy training, as an example, would be very
important to the totality of those recommendations that we
offered, as an example.
For me, personally, we actually did 15 as opposed to doing
150 recommendations because we really looked at this and felt
like these 15 recommendations were absolutely important to
actually modernizing the system, the pay and compensation
system, so that it would be in the best interests of the
service members.
And I will now yield to, let me start with Commissioner
Chiarelli to my left.
General Chiarelli. I will tell you, I really believe that
these recommendations are interrelated and so much of it is
interrelated. I entered into the Commission thinking that it
was Congress that had messed up TRICARE, that it was Congress
who directed DOD to charge 10 to 15 percent below Medicare
rates, only to find out that it wasn't. Congress told DOD to
come closer to Medicare rates and DOD kept going.
I didn't know that we used TRICARE certification of
provider to control the network. You can control costs two
ways. You can control cost by price and you can control cost by
the size of the network and what is available for people to
use.
And that is one of the reasons why, if you get into the
details of what we did in health care, we took very careful
steps to ensure that people can't get in and do the same thing
with this benefit that we have laid out that they have done
with other benefits in the past. And to me, that is a critical
piece, and I think it demonstrates the interrelationship of a
lot of what we have done and how complicated it really is.
Mr. Maldon. Commissioner Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. I can certainly tell you the happiest moment
was very early in the process when we were sitting with
Chairman Maldon and it became very clear that we were not going
to be a cost-cutting drill. That was a very important moment to
me. And I think we lived that spirit literally in everything we
have done and I was most impressed with that.
The second happiest moment I would say was when we began to
formulate our proposals, that we found that we could deliver as
good and better benefits to people and feel good about what we
had done and still demonstrate that those proposals could be
more efficient than what we are doing today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Maldon. Commissioner Buyer.
Mr. Buyer. I think mine was on health care, Mr. Chairman,
to answer the question, can we do better?
And so when we looked at it and said, well, if we go to
this TRICARE Choice and we bring the MTFs in and we want to
preserve that high quality and the combat medical readiness at
the MTF, what impact really is there going to be if we have
better utilization management, better program management, there
will be an increase in the cost shares for the gray area
retirees, and if we then shift to an accrual funding for the
non-Medicare-eligible retirees? Do the math. What is that
really going to be? And when we did the math, we said, that is
about $11.2 billion in savings and delivering a better quality
product for all? That is an ``aha'' moment.
Mr. Maldon. Commissioner Giambastiani.
Admiral Giambastiani. As the anchorman here, let me say
that I think if the House Armed Services Committee, you,
Chairman, and all the members could take away, this is a 100
percent unanimous report. I know that doesn't happen all the
time. And if you could remember one thing, that it is a
unanimous report.
The second item I would tell you is that in my four decades
in the military and since retirement I have not seen any study
or survey, and I am not saying this because I am on this
Commission, but I have not seen anything anywhere that has been
as comprehensive and all-encompassing as this.
Now, I have to commend you and the Senate for giving us the
tools and the funding to hire an incredibly professional staff
to support these nine commissioners in coming up with this very
significant look, the first real look at how the All-Volunteer
Force has done over the years. It has confirmed the structure
of a lot of it. But we hope we have given you the kind of
recommendations that will sustain us into the future.
The Chairman. Well, all of us have seen lots of reports in
this town, some of which are less than helpful. But I just want
to repeat what I said at the beginning, you all have done what
we asked you to do.
And, Mr. Chairman, you have been blessed, as I am sure you
know, with some outstanding folks who have worked with you on
this Commission. And we are incredibly grateful for the work
that each of you have contributed.
This committee is going to work on the proposals you have
made very seriously. And I am sure that we will continue to
draw upon you, both at the subcommittee level and as we work
with the Senate, to see exactly what we move ahead with in
legislation.
So, again, thank you all for being here. Thank you for your
work.
And with that, the hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:37 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

February 4, 2015
===================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 4, 2015

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 4, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

February 4, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SANCHEZ

Mr. Maldon. The Commission's recommendations do not ask taxpayers
to pay more. The Commission's health care recommendations, taken in
their entirety, save taxpayers more than $2.7 billion annually, in
FY2016 dollars, once they have been fully implemented. These savings do
not diminish quality of care, but actually improve it by offering
greater choice and access for the beneficiaries.   [See page 12.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FORBES
Mr. Maldon. Offering Service members who join after the new
retirement system is implemented the option of selecting the current
retirement system would be problematic in that it would create
inequities and pragmatic issues. People who opted in to the old
retirement system and then left service before retirement would lose,
relative to their peers, because they would not have received any
government-funded retirement savings. Those who opted for the old
system and then stayed to retirement would have differing retirement
values, and ultimately would be compensated differently for their
service than their peers. New Service members could also select
retirement systems based on the cultural difference of their respective
Service, creating an inequitable system among Services. Offering this
option also would create a long-term issue of different normal cost
contributions into the Military Retirement Fund and might make
retention analysis more difficult because retention models are based on
a standardized retirement system.   [See page 13.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. O'ROURKE
Mr. Maldon. It is difficult to determine a specific dollar amount
associated with this recommendation. The GAO Electronic Health Record
report (February 2014) indicated there is no evidence of DOD/VA
collective cost analysis of the abandoned iEHR compared to the separate
VA (VistA evolution) and DOD (Commercial Acquisition) course of action
currently in progress. A strategic uniform formulary would likely
translate to increased costs for VA; however, the costs can be off-set
by using joint contracting with DOD, prime vendor contracts, Federal
Supply Schedule (FSS), and Federal Ceiling Price (FCP). Adding
pharmaceuticals to the formulary does not require actually purchasing
and having an inventory on hand. VA could use the Pharmaceutical Prime
Vendor (PPV) contracting mechanism for real-time ordering and
inventory. The Commission was unable to determine the costs of a
strategic uniform formulary. This cost can only be determined when the
formulary has been developed jointly by DOD and VA and all procurement
options have been explored. For resource sharing in general, the VA and
DOD do not have a centralized tracking mechanism for resource-sharing
generated savings. It is difficult to estimate future savings without a
baseline or agreement on a standardized way to measure savings.   [See
page 19.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TAKAI
Mr. Maldon. The Commission made four health care recommendations.
Taxpayer outlays for the health care recommendations would be $0.3
billion for Recommendation 5 (joint readiness), -$3.2 billion for
Recommendation 6 (health care), and $0.2 billion for Recommendation 7
(ECHO). Net funding changes for Recommendation 8 (DOD-VA collaboration)
are dependent upon the initiatives that are pursued by the Departments
and were not included in the Commission's cost estimates, although the
Commission anticipates this recommendation would create a net reduction
in federal outlays. The Commission's health care recommendations, taken
in their entirety, save the taxpayers more than $2.7 billion annually,
in FY2016 dollars, once they have been fully implemented. The effect on
the defense budget of each recommendation is provided in the table
below (values in parentheses indicate savings):
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

For federal outlays (as opposed to budget authority), the costs
(savings) are provided in the table below:
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. McSALLY
Mr. Maldon. The Commission recognizes the value of feedback from
Veterans' Service Organizations (VSOs), and engaged in extensive
conversations with the Military and Veteran Service Organizations
during the last 2 years. However, the Commission feels that the VSOs
are in the best position to express their positions and thoughts on the
recommendations.   [See page 36.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

February 4, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SHUSTER

Mr. Shuster. To what degree did your survey conclude that issues
pertaining to health and benefits are a primary driver for people to
leave the military?
Mr. Maldon. Although survey results clearly showed Service members
view various aspects of health care benefits for their families as
important, it is not possible from the data collected to measure
Service member intentions to stay or leave military service. The
Commission's survey measured the degree to which Service members prefer
alternative features and levels of particular pay, retirement, health
care, and other compensation benefits. For example, the survey showed
strong preferences for an expanded health care benefit for family
members, along the lines of the Commission's recommendations. Active
Component (AC), Reserve Component (RC), and retirees all identified
choice of health care provider as the highest valued attribute from a
list of six health care attributes. Access to a large network of
providers was the second most valued attribute for AC and RC members
and third for retirees.
Mr. Shuster. Do you believe that this package of recommendations
will slow the loss of top talent from the military?
Mr. Maldon. Yes, the Commission's recommendations enable the
Services to maintain current force profiles as reflected in retention
modeling by RAND. They also provide additional flexibility that enables
the Services to adjust force profiles based on their respective
personnel requirements. For example, the Commission recommends a new
Continuation Pay at 12 years of service (YOS) that would provide
additional mid-career retention incentives. The recommendations also
would allow the Services to adjust YOS requirements to qualify for the
defined benefit portion of the retirement plan, which in turn could
allow the Services to retain members longer in key career fields and
slow the loss of top talent from the military.
Mr. Shuster. You state that more than 150,000 current and retired
Service members responded to the Commission's survey. What where the
most common items of concern raised by survey respondents pertaining to
the changes the commission is suggesting?
Mr. Maldon. The Commission's survey did not explicitly probe for
areas of concern, but instead explored Service members' preferences for
current and alternative features of various components of their
compensation. For example, the survey asked about various levels of
health insurance premiums and copayments compared to what Service
members currently pay. It also asked about automatic enrollment in the
Thrift Savings Plan and possible government matching contributions. The
information gathered by the survey enabled the Commission to better
understand the features of a compensation system that Service members
would most prefer. Although the survey provided important insights into
Service member preferences for various alternative features and levels
of pay, retirement, health care, and other compensation benefits, it
was only one of several sources of information the Commission relied on
to inform its deliberations and decision making.
Mr. Shuster. Do you believe these changes will disproportionately
affect any specific element of the Active Duty, Reserve, or retired
force?
Mr. Maldon. The Commissions' retirement recommendation will have a
positive effect on junior Service members and those who do not reach 20
years of service. These Service members will receive a benefit
(retirement funds) for which they are ineligible under the current
system. The Commission's recommendation also will have a positive
effect on Active Component (AC) family members and members of the
Reserve Component (RC) by offering them more choice, access, and value
in their health care options without additional costs. Retirees also
receive additional choice, access, and value in their health care, but
the Commission recommends the premium cost share of retirees increase
1% per year over 15 years. Additionally, the Commission's
recommendations will benefit AC and RC members, retirees, and their
families by protecting access to and savings at commissaries and
exchanges, improving access to DOD-sponsored child care, safeguarding
education benefits, better preparing Service members for transition to
civilian life, ensuring Service members' nutritional needs are met,
expanding Space A travel, and tracking the effects of military life on
children's school work. The Commission is confident that its
recommendations maintain or improve the overall value of the current
benefits package.
Mr. Shuster. You cite utilization management as a way to achieve
some degree of cost savings. Do you foresee any negative effects on
preventative health as a result of these anticipated lower utilization
rates? How do you define ``overutilization''?
Mr. Maldon. The Commission does not foresee a negative effect on
preventative health as a result of any reduction in beneficiaries'
utilization of health care services. Under the proposed TRICARE Choice
model, the Commission anticipates health care plans would fully
capitalize on available techniques for improved care management, which
would in turn reduce over-utilization of health care and improve health
outcomes. Over-utilization occurs when health care resources and
procedures are used even when the care is not warranted on medical
grounds, the care could produce greater harm than benefit, or the
additional expense of a more costly service outweighs the added
benefits the service was intended to provide. Currently, TRICARE
beneficiaries use health care services at a substantially greater rate
than civilian health insurance beneficiaries. Enrollees in TRICARE
Prime used inpatient services 73 percent more than civilians with HMOs
during FY 2013. Similarly, TRICARE Prime outpatient utilization rates
were 55 percent higher than those for civilians. The design of the
current TRICARE system does not allow for effective management of the
rate at which users consume health care because it has limited use of
monetary and nonmonetary incentives to influence beneficiaries'
behavior and promote better health outcomes. The relatively low out-of-
pocket expenses--deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance--experienced
by TRICARE beneficiaries compared to their civilian counterparts
encourage over-utilization in the TRICARE system. TRICARE does not
employ nonmonetary tools available in the private sector, such as
identifying high-risk patients, managing complex cases, keeping chronic
diseases under control, and promoting wellness and preventative
services. These tools lower utilization by reducing avoidable emergency
room and urgent care visits, addressing health care needs before a
hospital admission becomes necessary, shortening inpatient stays, and
avoiding readmission. Additionally, many argue that nonmonetary
techniques also lead to better health care outcomes. Under the proposed
TRICARE Choice model, the Commission anticipates health care plans
would use the complete range of both monetary and nonmonetary
techniques to affect beneficiary behavior and improve health care
outcomes through disease management, wellness, and better coordination
of care.
Mr. Shuster. The many different Reserve statuses were formed over
time to differentiate between changing authorities and funding
requirements. Would the reduced number of statuses restrict any State
or Federal authorities? Further, did the services express any concerns
with their ability to implement these changes such as significant
changes to information technology infrastructure?
Mr. Maldon. The reduced number of statuses would not restrict any
state or federal authorities. Before making its recommendation, the
Commission consulted extensively with leadership of the Reserve
Component, human resource specialists in the different Services, and
reserve members who would be affected by the change. The Commission
received consistent support for its proposed changes, especially since
consolidating statuses would improve the consistency of Service
members' benefits. The proposed system would also alleviate RC member
mobilization difficulties. While there may be some associated
information technology and training costs, the Commission believes that
they are worthwhile given the advantages of streamlining RC statuses.
Mr. Shuster. Medical billing and insurance oversight are not
current core competencies of our military medical providers. In your
opinion, what actions must the services first take before they would be
able to implement the types of changes you've provided in medical care?
Information technologies, training programs, personnel increases, etc.?
Mr. Maldon. In the civilian sector, medical providers do not
typically handle medical billing or insurance. These functions are
usually handled by administrative or support services. There are
companies that provide billing services to major health systems in the
United States today. The companies also provide training for coding,
billing procedures, collections, and related processes. The Military
Health System (MHS) could use such a professional service.
Alternatively, the MHS could expand its current third-party billing
activities to handle the medical billing. If this approach were taken,
the MHS would need to ensure that existing administrative personnel
were trained to perform such duties and that efforts currently underway
to modernize MHS information technology (IT) would support this task.
In 2014, DOD awarded a contract to General Dynamics to build the Armed
Forces Billing and Collection Utilization Solution (ABACUS) to generate
medical claims, pharmacy claims, invoices, and governmental billing
forms at 136 military medical treatment facilities globally. ABACUS
will replace legacy IT systems and automate, consolidate, and
centralize the Army, Navy, and Air Force's separate health billing and
collection IT systems. Regardless of which approach to billing is
chosen, adequate time will be required to set in place coding, billing,
collections, and related systems, which is, in part, why the
Commission's proposed legislation includes a 2-year implementation
period before moving beneficiaries into the new system.
Mr. Shuster. I recently received a constituent complaint regarding
the inconsistency in care the member has experienced while
transitioning from active service to the care of the VA. If the
committee's recommendations were accepted, how long do you think it
would take to reach the level of collaboration and standardization
required to prevent these types of issues?
Mr. Maldon. The transition from DOD health care to VA health care
presents challenges on many fronts. The DOD-VA Joint Executive
Committee (JEC) already exists to coordinate efforts between the two
agencies. The Commission recommended the JEC be granted additional
authorities and responsibilities to standardize and enforce
collaboration. The JEC should develop a strategic plan for DOD-VA
collaboration and require certification for common services and planned
expenditures. Creating a stronger JEC requires on-going implementation
and may take 2 to 3 years.
The Commission recommended the JEC be given authority to create a
process by which a strategic uniform formulary is developed to include
all drugs determined by the JEC to be critical for transition from the
DOD health care system to the VA system. It is important that the JEC
begin immediately with aligning DOD and VA drug formularies for the
pain and psychiatric classes of drugs. The Commission views the uniform
strategic formulary as a relatively easy means to implement
improvement, and believes it could be accomplished within 6 months.
The Commission also found that a single electronic health record
(EHR) system is the ideal solution for improving Service member health
care and minimizing overall EHR costs. To that end the Commission
recommended the JEC require VA to establish health care records for all
current military members. The legislative language proposed by the
Commission indicates this record should be created within 180 days of
enactment of the recommendation. The Commission also recommended that
the JEC require EHR compliance with national Health Information
Technology standards for both DOD and VA. The standardization of data
transfer between DOD and VA EHRs is likely to take longer to implement.
An electronic health care record compliant with national data
standards, a uniform formulary, and healthcare resource sharing between
DOD and VA are critical to an initial framework, but are not a final
solution in delivering seamless health care.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ZINKE
Mr. Zinke. Under the fifth recommendation, it states ``Congress
should establish a four-star command to oversee all joint readiness,
especially medical readiness.'' How does the establishment of another
four-star command decrease the bureaucracy and lower the cost to DOD?
Mr. Buyer. The establishment of a four-star Joint Readiness Command
(JRC) to oversee joint readiness, especially medical readiness, is
intended to fill a critical gap, rather than increase bureaucracy.
Currently, joint medical requirements generation and service medical
requirements validation; joint and service medical readiness monitoring
and reporting; and joint medical sourcing and standardization do not
fall under any DOD entity's responsibility. This situation presents a
critical gap in operational medicine. In addition to filling the gap,
the concept of Essential Medical Capabilities (EMCs) warrants a four-
star champion who can elevate joint medical readiness and training to
the level of readiness and training of the line components. The cost
estimate of standing up a four-star command presented by the Commission
is conservative, in that it assumes no use of already designated funds.
Some of the functions and personnel resources of the disestablished
Joint Forces Command exist in J7, J7-Suffolk, J4, and TRANSCOM and,
along with combat service support functions from the Defense Health
Agency, could be reorganized into the proposed JRC, thus reducing
costs.
Mr. Zinke. If these recommendations were to be adopted with no
changes, would any existing member (active or retiree) be forced to
change anything in their plans in the immediate? In other words, if a
member and their family are completely satisfied with their current
coverage, retirement and/or compensation package would they be allowed
to keep everything the same or would they be forced to make any changes
in the immediate?
Mr. Buyer. The retirement pay of those who are currently serving
and those who have already retired will not be affected by the
Commission's recommendations; as required by NDAA FY 2013 it is
``grandfathered.'' Individuals serving at the time the recommendations
are enacted will have the option to switch to the new retirement plan
if they prefer. Similarly, the Commission's Survivor Benefit Plan (SBP)
recommendation would give members an additional SBP option, but would
also offer the opportunity to choose the present plan. The Commission's
health care recommendations will require Service member's families,
Reserve Component members, and non-Medicare-eligible retirees to decide
on a health insurance plan offered in TRICARE Choice. Health care for
active-duty Service members and Medicare-eligible retirees will not
change, nor will pharmacy benefits change for any beneficiaries. The
proposal for nutrition assistance will sunset the FSSA program (which
only enrolled 285 Service members in 2013) in the United States and
other territories. The Commission expects and encourages eligible
beneficiaries in the United States to apply to the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), which is typically more generous.
The Commission's recommendations would also sunset the housing stipend
for dependents using transferred post-9/11 GI Bill benefits starting in
2017. The Commission's recommendations for joint readiness, DOD-VA
collaboration, commissaries and exchanges, family members with special
needs, Reserve Component statuses, financial literacy, transition
assistance, the military student identifier, space available travel,
and child care maintain or improve Service member benefits while
reforming the programs to make them more effective and efficient.

[all]
