- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-16] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2016 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-16]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2016

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS HEARING

ON

ALIGNMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE

INVESTMENT AND RISK AND DEFENSE

STRATEGIC REQUIREMENTS

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 3, 2015

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

___________

U.S. GOVERMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-218                       WASHINGTON : 2015

______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman

ROB BISHOP, Utah                     MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
Michael Miller, Professional Staff Member
Brian Garrett, Professional Staff Member
Katherine Rember, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Bordallo, Hon. Madeleine Z., a Delegate from Guam, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................     2
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Readiness............................     1

WITNESSES

Ballentine, Hon. Miranda A.A., Assistant Secretary of the Air
Force, Installations, Environment, and Energy..................     5
Conger, John, Performing the Duties of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense, Energy, Installations, and Environment................     3
Hammack, Hon. Katherine, Assistant Secretary of the Army,
Installations, Energy, and Environment.........................     4
McGinn, Hon. Dennis V., Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Energy,
Installations, and Environment.................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Ballentine, Hon. Miranda A.A.................................    85
Conger, John.................................................    39
Hammack, Hon. Katherine......................................    64
McGinn, Hon. Dennis V........................................    98
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................    37

Documents Submitted for the Record:

``Not Moving DGRC-Impact'' chart displayed by Mr. Bishop.....   115

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Gibson...................................................   119
Mr. Scott....................................................   119

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bishop...................................................   132
Ms. Bordallo.................................................   131
Mr. Shuster..................................................   132
Mr. Wittman..................................................   123

ALIGNMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT AND RISK AND DEFENSE STRATEGIC
REQUIREMENTS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, March 3, 2015.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:33 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Robert J.
Wittman (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Wittman. We will call to order the Subcommittee on
Readiness for the House Armed Services Committee. Today's
hearing is on ``Alignment of Infrastructure Investment and Risk
and Defense Strategic Requirements.''
This is the first hearing of the 114th Congress. I would
like to welcome back our returning members, especially the
gentlewoman from Guam, Ms. Madeleine Bordallo. Thank you so
much.
As our ranking member she has done a fantastic job, and I
look forward to another Congress where we can continue to work
together and get great things done to solve the complex
problems that we face in this nation's military readiness.
And I want to welcome our new members here today as well.
And I won't go name by name, but I look forward to working with
each of you. And we have some very important and challenging
issues ahead for us this year.
For this hearing I would like to welcome our distinguished
panel of experts. This afternoon we have with us Mr. John
Conger performing the duties of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense, Energy, Installations and Environment; Ms. Katherine
Hammack, Assistant Secretary of the Army, Installations, Energy
and Environment; Mr. Dennis McGinn, Assistant Secretary of the
Navy, Energy, Installations and Environment; and Ms. Miranda
Ballentine, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force,
Installations, Environment and Energy.
And this hearing today is critically important in helping
us understand and evaluate this year's infrastructure budget as
it relates to readiness. Although we recognize that the
Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 provided some release over the
last 2 years, even if funded at the current President's budget
request level, the Department continues to take risk in
infrastructure in its effort to balance force structure,
modernization, and readiness.
The infrastructure budget that we have before us today
includes $8.4 billion for military construction, family housing
and BRAC [base realignment and closure]; $10.8 billion for
facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization,
representing 81 percent of the total sustainment requirement;
and a request for an additional round of base realignment and
closure with a $10.5 million request for BRAC analytical
efforts.
As the witnesses today testify, I would ask that you
address the following questions. How has the Department aligned
infrastructure investments with the long-term defense strategic
requirements? What level of risk in installations has the
Department taken on? And what mitigation efforts has the
Department implemented or plans to implement in the
installations portfolio?
I would like now to turn to our ranking member, Madeleine
Bordallo, for any remarks that she may have. Madeleine, thank
you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 37.]

STATEMENT OF HON. MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, A DELEGATE FROM GUAM,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I too--it is an
honor to serve with you again as the ranking member on the
Readiness Subcommittee. And I thank all of our witnesses for
their testimony today.
This committee's focus is on the readiness of our armed
services. Though sometimes overlooked, the Department's
infrastructure is the platform from which it generates the
military readiness. The airfields our military operates from,
the ranges where they train, and the facilities that support
the maintenance of weapons systems all contribute to the
overall readiness of the force.
In recent years the amount of investment in infrastructure
has assumed a certain level of risk due to budget pressures
placed on the Department. And this has meant deferring
maintenance of facilities and postponing the recapitalization
of aging infrastructure.
As this committee begins its review of the President's
budget request for fiscal year 2016, I am encouraged to see the
increased level of investment in our military's infrastructure,
especially to support the rebalance of the Asia-Pacific region.
However, if we are to sustain and continue this important
investment, it is absolutely critical that Congress removes the
Budget Control Act. Failing to repeal sequestration will
undermine our Nation's military, including these infrastructure
investments.
The current budget proposal already assumes a level of
risk. But going below these levels is simply, simply
unacceptable. These infrastructure investments support the
Department's ability to generate readiness. And we have placed
significant risk on future readiness by delaying needed
maintenance and recapitalization of our facilities over the
last several years.
The President's budget is a step in the right direction.
But we cannot let the investment go below that level.
So I am encouraged by the progress being made in the
realignment to the Asia-Pacific region, and I believe there are
important investments to support this strategy in the fiscal
year 2016 budget submission.
In cooperation with the government of Japan, a steady
stream of funding has been programmed to support the
realignment of Marines from Okinawa to Guam, and the
infrastructure investments associated with the move. And I
fully support this continued effort.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman. And I look
forward to the testimonies of our witnesses.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you so much, Ms. Bordallo.
Witnesses, as you can see from the length of mine and the
ranking member's opening statement, we intend to keep today's
opening statements brief. So I would ask, if you would, if you
have an opening statement, we will take everything that you
have for the record. But I would ask that in your opening
statements that you keep things brief and to the point so that
we can maximize the interaction between members and our
witnesses.
Mr. Conger, we will begin with you.

STATEMENT OF JOHN CONGER, PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF THE
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT

Mr. Conger. Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member Bordallo,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the
opportunity to discuss the Department's fiscal year 2016 budget
request for energy, installations and environment.
My written statement addresses the budget request in
detail. So instead of summarizing it, I would just like to
raise two topics for you to consider as we enter into today's
discussion.
First, we cannot contemplate the budget request without
considering the context of the Budget Control Act [BCA] caps.
The Department submitted a budget request that was $35 billion
higher than the caps and $38 billion higher than last year.
Forcing us to adhere to the caps would have reverberations
across the budget.
The President's budget request includes a significant
increase for facilities over last year's request. That is
nearly $2 billion increase in MILCON [military construction]
and $2.5 billion in facilities sustainment and
recapitalization.
Legislation will be required to provide relief from the BCA
caps. And the relief provided--like the relief provided by the
Bipartisan Budget Act a couple of years ago.
If you must adhere to the BCA caps, Congress will have to
cut $35 billion from our request, and that will certainly
have--it will certainly have to consider cutting funds from the
request for facilities.
The second topic that I wanted to raise for your
consideration as we go forward is BRAC. It should be no
surprise that we are again requesting authority to conduct a
BRAC round.
As we deal with this constrained budget environment, with
considerable force structure decreases since 2005, we must look
for ways to divest excess bases and to reduce the cost of
supporting our smaller force structure. A few key points I
wanted to lay out in support of our request for BRAC.
First, the Army and Air Force have done analyses indicating
that they have 18 percent and 30 percent excess capacity,
respectively. And I will note that the Army's analysis is based
on a 490,000-soldier figure, not the projected 450,000. This
aligns with our prediction based on the analysis performed in
2004 that we have significant excess capacity that would point
to the need to have a BRAC round.
Second, partially in response to Congress's urging, we
conducted a BRAC-like review of European facilities, delivered
to Congress in January of 2015, which we project will save more
than $500 million annually once implemented. I would be happy
to discuss that as well.
And third, in this budget environment a new BRAC round
would have to be focused on efficiencies. I know BRAC 2005 was
unpopular. But the recommendations from that round that were
designed to save money, did.
And the reason that the round cost so much was because we
accepted a large number of recommendations that were not
designed to save money. If you break out the roughly half and
half of the recommendations, half of the recommendations were
not designed to save money within 7 years.
Those cost $29 billion and only had $1 billion of recurring
savings annually. That is not based on a business case. That
was based on things that we decided we needed to do.
The other half of the recommendations were designed to save
money, and they cost $6 billion and returned $3 billion a year
annually. Spending $6 billion to get $3 billion a year, that is
a good business case. And what that shows is when we do try to
save money, we can.
The new issue that I have heard raised this year is that we
can't expect Congress to pass our legislative proposal for BRAC
because it mirrors the 2005 BRAC legislation. I understand the
reality that no matter how many times the administration
asserts that a future BRAC round will be about cost savings,
Congress may want more than just our assurance. We can't just
say trust us.
And so let me be clear. We are open to a discussion on this
point. And I would like to solicit your suggestions as to
specific changes in the BRAC legislation that would make it
more acceptable. We want to know what would address your
concerns.
Thanks for the opportunity to testify. And I look forward
to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conger can be found in the
Appendix on page 39.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Conger.
Ms. Hammack.

STATEMENT OF HON. KATHERINE HAMMACK, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY, INSTALLATIONS, ENERGY, AND ENVIRONMENT

Secretary Hammack. Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member
Bordallo and other members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the Army's 2016 military construction
budget.
The velocity of instability around the world has increased.
And the Army is now operating on multiple continents
simultaneously in ways unforeseen a year ago. Although we
believe we can meet the primary missions of the Defense
Strategic Guidance today, our ability to do so has become
tenuous.
Fiscal challenges brought on by the Budget Control Act
strain our ability to bring into balance readiness,
modernization and end strength. Even as demand for Army forces
is growing, budget cuts are forcing us to reduce end strength
and base support to dangerously low levels. We face a mismatch
between requirements and resources.
Although for 2016 the Army is asking for a 26 percent
increase from fiscal year 2015 in military construction, family
housing and the base closure activities, our $1.6 billion
request is a 33 percent reduction from 2014 and a 55 percent
reduction from 2013.
As force structures decline we must rightsize the
supporting infrastructure. We must achieve a balance between
the cost of sustaining infrastructure and Army readiness.
Degraded readiness makes it more difficult for us to
provide for the common defense. The BCA increases risk for
sending insufficiently trained and underequipped soldiers into
harm's way. And that is not a risk our Nation should accept.
We need a round of base closure and realignment in 2017.
Without a BRAC and the realized cost savings, the only
alternative is to make up for shortages in base funding by
increasing risk in readiness.
We conducted a facility capacity analysis, as John Conger
mentioned, based on our 2013 audited real property data, and
determined that our excess facility capacity will be 18 percent
when we reach 490,000 at the end of this year. As we shrink
further, more excess capacity is created. We must size and
shape Army facilities for the force we support.
The European Infrastructure Consolidation [EIC] review
addressed excess capacity in Europe. For the Army an investment
of $363 million results in annual savings of $163 million,
which is less than a 3-year payback.
We are now facing critical decisions that will impact our
capability and capacity for the next decade. It is important
that we make the right decisions now. Without savings from a
BRAC round, the risk is that the installations will experience
larger cuts than would otherwise occur.
We look forward to working with Congress to ensure the Army
is capable of fulfilling its many missions. And on behalf of
soldiers, families, and civilians in the best Army in the
world, thank you for your support and the opportunity to
discuss the Army's budget. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Hammack can be found
in the Appendix on page 64.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Hammack.
Ms. Ballentine.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIRANDA A.A. BALLENTINE, ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF THE AIR FORCE, INSTALLATIONS, ENVIRONMENT, AND ENERGY

Secretary Ballentine. Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member
Bordallo, esteemed members of the committee, it is my honor and
privilege to be here to testify before you today to discuss the
Air Force's installation, environment, and energy budget.
I thank you for your support in giving the Air Force much
needed relief in 2014 and 2015 from untenable sequestration
levels. Without Budget Control Act relief in fiscal year 2016,
the risk assumed to Air Force infrastructure could have sober
impacts to Air Force readiness. The Air Force strives to ensure
airmen have ready installations, resilient environmental
infrastructure, and reliable energy.
As of today I have been on the job for 135 days. I have
visited 10 bases in those 22 weeks. And I have looked at
hundreds of facilities where our aircraft are maintained, where
our airmen work, and where our military families live. And from
those travels I can tell you there is more we can do to improve
the affordability and viability of our installations, which
today are simply too big, too old, and too expensive to
operate.
The Air Force has about 30 percent excess infrastructure
capacity, as Mr. Conger alluded to. Our facilities have an
average age of 40 years old, and many are much older. In fact
about a quarter are over 50 years old. And if you combine
excess infrastructure capacity with aging buildings, the bottom
line is that our facilities and installations are simply too
expensive.
When facing unaffordable installations, there are really
only two ways to get at the problem. You can either spend more
money on them or you can make them cost less. It is a pretty
simple equation.
Therefore, rather than living with forced sequestration
levels, we are requesting installation budget figures in fiscal
year 2016 substantially closer to what we need. And the Air
Force is supporting OSD's [Office of the Secretary of Defense]
request for a base realignment and closure round in 2017, which
will allow us to comprehensively, transparently align
installation and infrastructure with our mission imperatives.
The fiscal year 2016 budget that the Air Force is
requesting allows us to begin to chip away at the backlog of
infrastructure recapitalization needs and maintenance that has
contributed to the degradation of our combat readiness. Our
$1.6 billion fiscal year 2016 MILCON request is more than 65
percent higher than last year. Our $3.2 billion PB [President's
budget] 2016 request for FSRM [facilities sustainment,
restoration, and modernization] is more than 35 percent higher
than last year.
In addition to MILCON, O&M [operations and maintenance],
and BRAC, I am also really excited about accelerating the use
of additional tools to help our installations be more
affordable. Tools like enhanced use leases have proven
successful in leveraging other resources to meet our
requirements.
Power purchase agreements and energy service performance
contracts have helped the Air Force cut electricity prices and
get renewable energy with no capital outlays. Community
partnerships, which you may know as P4 from some of your
communities, allow us to leverage the resources and
capabilities of our community members.
Taken together, improved MILCON and facilities O&M budgets,
plus BRAC, and the range of other tools and programs that I
have described really make me optimistic that we can restore
the Air Force infrastructure to the place it needs to be.
Chairman, Ranking Member Bordallo, members of the
committee, thank you again for the opportunity to represent
America's airmen today. And I ask for your full support of the
fiscal year 2016 request, and look forward to taking your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Ballentine can be
found in the Appendix on page 85.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Ballentine.
Mr. McGinn.

STATEMENT OF HON. DENNIS V. McGINN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY, ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND ENVIRONMENT

Secretary McGinn. Chairman Wittman, Ranking Member
Bordallo, members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to present the Department of the Navy, Navy and
Marine Corps' shore readiness overview.
The difference between requirements and resources equals
risk. And I think the focus that, Mr. Chairman, you laid out is
right on the mark. We need to assess how much that risk is, how
it manifests itself, and what we can do to mitigate it.
I am glad to report that in our budget submittal for this
year we are starting to make progress in addressing the delta
between our requirements and our resources. However, we still
have a ways to go. And there are risks that persist.
As Ranking Member Bordallo pointed out, these installations
do represent the jumping off platform and the place you come
home to after going to serve our Nation's security in all parts
of the world.
And our Navy and Marine Corps team deserve the absolute
very best in terms of mission readiness that is delivered
through our shipyards, our readiness centers, our bases that
support them, in many cases in real time while they are
conducting operations overseas in combat.
So thank you again for holding this hearing. And I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary McGinn can be found in
the Appendix on page 98.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. McGinn.
In the interest of making sure that we get to all of our
committee members today for questions I am going to delay my
questions until the end. And we will go now to Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate all our guests being here. I appreciate your
testimony. There are many things upon which I think we can
agree. And you have also given us a chance to say no again. So
I appreciate that testimony.
Ms. Hammack, if I could address you with a parochial issue
I would appreciate that opportunity. As you know the DGRC
[Defense Generator and Rail Equipment Center], the rail
facility at Hill Air Force Base in my district, I have not
heard much from that lately. Are the negotiations progressing
in moving that antiquated facility?
Secretary Hammack. No. The Army has no plans to move the
DGRC that is currently located----
Mr. Bishop. Okay.
Secretary Hammack [continuing]. At Hill Air Force Base.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. Thank you for the answer. Not a good
answer, but I thank you for the answer.
As you know, the enhanced use lease project is going to
create another 15,000 jobs, hopefully that will give us a
chance to force train re-modernize that particular base. As you
understand, let me just show you. This area is your facility
right through here.
[The chart displayed by Mr. Bishop can be found in the
Appendix on page 115.]
Mr. Bishop. This is obviously what Utah Transportation
Authority is going to have to do to go around you at a great
deal of expense, obviously, to the State of Utah. But what that
does, if you can see, is it puts you outside the parameter of
the gate, which simply means that there will have to be an
additional gate for that facility which would require
additional guards 24/7.
Hill does not have for this Army facility on an Air Force
base--they are not the--Air Force is not giving additional
manpower billets to Hill. So how does the Army want to help
account for this extra requirement and cost that building a new
gate as well as facilities and maintenance of that particular
area?
Secretary Hammack. The Army does not have the budget to
move that mission and there is no military reason to move the
mission.
Mr. Bishop. Well, let me--oh, good. I am glad you said that
because the Army Corps of Engineers recently did a study and
they estimated the cost of relocating to Anniston, minus
personnel costs, would be approximately $11 million.
However, I understand that you are planning in your budget
to appropriate $11 million to fix up the rails that are going
into that antiquated building, just the rails alone, not the
building itself.
The Army Corps also did in their study said that you would
recoup that money within 11 years if you are actually moving
that into a modern facility that can actually meet the needs of
the Army.
So since you are going to spend the amount of money one way
or the other, why would you actually--why in the world would
anyone want to spend that much money for the rails into an
antiquated facility when you can actually get a better facility
if you just spend the money the first way of moving it, which
is the right thing to do? Why in heaven's name would you not
want to do that?
Secretary Hammack. The cost to move is estimated at $17
million.
Mr. Bishop. That is not what the Army Corps of Engineers
did in their study. It is $11 million, $11 million. You are
spending the same amount of money.
Secretary Hammack. And the cost----
Mr. Bishop. Why are you still so stubborn about this?
Secretary Hammack [continuing]. To fix the tracks is
estimated around $9 million.
Mr. Bishop. Once again that is not what the study came up
with.
Secretary Hammack. We seem to have different numbers. Right
now----
Mr. Bishop. We certainly do.
Secretary Hammack [continuing]. There is no military reason
to move the mission off of Hill Air Force Base where it has
been since the 1940s.
Mr. Bishop. Then how are you going to fund the extra gate,
the extra manpower, the extra maintenance equipment? How are
you going to fund that? Or are you just going to shove that
onto the Air Force so they have to fund the extra stuff.
Secretary Hammack. Currently the enhanced use lease has not
moved into this area. They have not developed this area. And we
have not seen a timetable for their planned development.
Mr. Bishop. Ms. Hammack, you know it is moving to that
area. We have the timetable. We have the plans. You have seen
that not only from the State, but also from the Air Force.
You still are not moving that. If you are going to spend
$11 million one way or the other, why not do it the intelligent
way?
And maybe you can tell me from whence is this $11 million
coming in the first place? What pot have you found that to try
and redo the rails and only the rails going into an old
building?
Secretary Hammack. The rail improvement has to do with
life, health, safety reasons for the current mission at Hill
Air Force Base.
Mr. Bishop. So from what pot of money is that coming?
Secretary Hammack. It is coming from sustainment,
restoration, and modernization.
Mr. Bishop. So you couldn't use that to actually put it
into a new modern facility that would recoup its benefits
within 3 years?
Secretary Hammack. No. That would take military
construction and we don't have the budget to move that
mission----
Mr. Bishop. Oh. So you can't move money from one budget to
another one? You insist on finding a way from moving your--from
moving the same amount of money from one pot to the other pot.
Is that what you are telling me?
Secretary Hammack. I would say if you approve a BRAC this
would be something that would be----
Mr. Bishop. If we approved a BRAC nothing would change at
all. If you have got the money, you have got the money. If you
don't have the money, you don't have the money.
But this is one of those things that I don't understand the
stubbornness of the Army in not looking at the broader issue
and realizing there is a better way of doing this.
And with that, if you have a response that is going to make
me happy within the next 34 seconds because that is all I got,
go for it. Otherwise, I will still be mad.
I will still be mad. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary McGinn, I have a question for you. Can you give
me an update on the expected release date of the final
supplemental environmental impact statement, and the record of
decision regarding the Marine realignment?
And the second part of the question also can you comment on
why the Navy has requested funds for the live-fire training
range at Northwest Field, even though the NEPA [National
Environmental Policy Act] process has not concluded yet?
Secretary McGinn. I will answer the second question first.
We have requested those funds in anticipation that the NEPA
process will have been completed, in order to execute those
funds in fiscal year 2016.
The process leading us through the supplemental
environmental impact statement is going well. We anticipate
being able to sign a record of decision no later than the end
of this spring. And we are working very, very closely with
other Federal entities to make sure that there aren't any
showstoppers between now and then.
As you know, there has been a lot of work that has gone
into this, a lot of analysis. But I feel confident at this
point to say that we will bring the process to a successful
conclusion and we will have a record of decision. And we will
be able to execute those funds for the live-fire training
facility.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Conger, can you give us an update on the EAC [Economic
Adjustment Committee] process regarding impacts to Guam
associated with the Marine realignment? And can you discuss the
findings and the results of last year's meeting? Has anything
changed regarding civilian infrastructure requirements over the
past year?
Mr. Conger. Sure. So as you recall, last June we had a
formal EAC meeting, Economic Adjustment Committee meeting. It
is a Federal interagency meeting. You were there. The governor
sent remarks. And we were able to discuss the fact that the
plan has significantly changed.
The impacts are going to be significantly reduced. But we
needed to still assess what those impacts were going to be and
come up with cost estimates for how we were going to be able to
mitigate the impacts that we were going to have through the
rebasing action that we were contemplating.
That analysis is ongoing. But based on what I have seen
preliminarily, the cost will be significantly less than what we
were originally projecting based on the original EIS
[environmental impact statement]. I think that makes sense.
When you significantly reduce the footprint you are going to
have significantly smaller impacts.
I think the Department is committed to mitigating the
impacts that we have. But the final study with those cost
estimates will not be released until or approximately the same
time as the ROD [record of decision] comes out, because we want
them to agree.
We are working in conjunction with the folks working the
supplemental EIS. And they are going to be synergistic
documents.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Chairman, I have a couple other questions. But if
we do a second round I will continue. So I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you. We will definitely do a second
round.
We will now go to Ms. Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all the
witnesses here today. My question is for Ms. Hammack.
Noncommissioned officers [NCOs] are the backbone of the
armed services. They are responsible for executing missions,
training younger enlisted service members, and guiding young
junior officers.
NCOs are such a strategic feature in the U.S. Army. And the
President's fiscal year 2016 budget permits the construction of
an NCO training center at Fort Drum in New York's 21st
District, which I have the honor of representing.
The academy will be built in place of the current
dilapidated World War II-era buildings. Regrettably, this
imperative project runs the risk of being cancelled due to
sequestration and the Budget Control Act.
Can you share with the other members here today other
examples of failing Army infrastructure due to fiscal year 2013
sequestration, or lack of maintenance and modernization
efforts, or potential projects or missions that will be
discontinued?
Secretary Hammack. Thank you for the question. You are
absolutely right. Due to the impacts of sequestration in fiscal
years 2013 and 2014, we have an increasing number of failing
facilities.
Right now 7 percent of Army's facilities are in failing
condition, yet they still have operating units in them. Twenty-
four percent of Army facilities are in poor condition. And the
number of failing or poor increases every year.
Sustainment is the lowest cost method of maintaining a
building. You sustain it. If you do not sustain a building
properly, if you underinvest, then it falls into restoration
and modernization.
Instead of fixing one leak you have to replace a roof. It
is much more costly. And so we saw a 9 percent increase in
requirements for restoration and modernization directly due to
impacts of underfunding in 2013 and 2014 due to sequestration.
The risk is, though, as we do not have enough money in
restoration and modernization, you increase those buildings
that are failing, and those are the ones that have to be
replaced with MILCON, which is even a much higher cost. So we
are increasing the cost for future generations due to
sequestration right now.
Ms. Stefanik. My follow-up question, you just stated the
high percentage of installations that are in failing condition
or poor condition. As we continue to have this conversation
about BRAC, shouldn't the Army be doing its job and investing
in installations that are in poor or failing condition?
Secretary Hammack. The Army is working to invest in failing
facilities. As a matter of fact, some of the projects that are
on the MILCON list for fiscal year 2016 are to replace failing
facilities. One is the wastewater treatment plant at West
Point. And so the low amount of dollars we have we are using to
invest in failing facilities.
The challenge is that facilities are failing at a rate
faster than we are being funded. So we get into a requirements-
versus-resources issue. We are underfunded and we have more
requirements than the budget is allowing us to fix. So that
results in an increasing number of failing facilities.
Ms. Stefanik. For the record I want to state my support of
the construction of the NCO training center at Fort Drum. Thank
you for the answers to the question. I do believe that we need
to be focused on making sure that our poor or failing condition
installations receive the funding that they need, especially
Fort Drum.
And I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Stefanik.
We will now go to Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses. First of all I just want to again publicly
acknowledge Mr. McGinn, your work with the State of Connecticut
at the Groton sub [submarine] base.
The microgrid project, which is a collaboration between the
State government, private utility stakeholders, as well as the
Navy, is in my opinion the model for how to sort of deal with
that basic infrastructure, particularly for coastal areas where
climate change is going to require hardened sources of energy.
Again, you have been doing great work and it is much
appreciated.
During the testimony this afternoon your colleagues were
pretty specific about analysis that was done to identify excess
capacity. I think it was 30 percent in the case of the Air
Force, Ms. Ballentine, and Ms. Hammack it was 18 percent.
Your testimony didn't include that kind of analysis. And I
am curious whether the Navy has looked at a similar projection
that you could share.
Secretary McGinn. We have not yet done a capacity analysis.
As you may know, starting in 1991 with the very first BRAC, the
Department of the Navy, and since then, has closed 56 major
installations. We have closed overall all installations over
250.
As a result, the match of our force structure, our end
strength, and our facilities is a little bit closer, perhaps,
than my colleagues in the Army and the Air Force. However, we
would welcome a BRAC and its disciplined analysis in which we
are able to make business cases for having the alignment right
or not.
But we are prepared, and we worked very closely with Mr.
Conger and his staff, and coordinate with my service
counterparts to make sure that we are using the best tools
available to determine if we do have excess capacity.
Mr. Courtney. So, again, looking recently Admiral Greenert
when he was asked about BRAC, and I am quoting him right now,
``I am always open to a BRAC. It is a good process. But I am
satisfied with the Navy's infrastructure as it exists today,
base infrastructure, in that in the Navy I am satisfied with my
base laydown there in that regard.''
So again, just so I understand better the value of a BRAC
to the Navy. It is really just kind of a stress test? Or you
know----
Secretary McGinn. It--that is a good analogy I think, a
stress test. And I would say that had we not had prior BRAC
rounds, we would be in really, really rough shape in terms of
our shore readiness, our infrastructure mismatch. And I think
that is the case certainly across the whole Department of
Defense.
So we would welcome it. We always look for ways to do the
right thing in terms of matching the resources where they can
do the most good in terms of readiness outcome. But--and we are
prepared to participate fully in another round of BRAC.
Mr. Courtney. Okay. Thank you for your answer.
Mr. Conger, in your testimony, which I didn't get a chance
to get around to, you talked about housing issues that you are
in charge of or overlooking. The privatization of base housing
has been, in my opinion, a great success.
The transformation that has occurred at the Navy base in
Groton, which again, was actually kind of disgraceful in terms
of the conditions that sailors and their families were living
in, has been just again completely changed because of the
infusion of new capital that the developers have sort of
brought to the table.
But I would just share with you. There is one unintended
effect, which is again the terms of these developments is that,
again, military personnel get first dibs. Federal employees get
second dibs. And if there are unoccupied units then the units
are made available to nonaffiliated families.
In Groton right now there are about 100 to 130
schoolchildren that are attending Groton schools because the
development is property tax exempt. And they get no Impact Aid
because they don't fall into the Impact Aid sort of
classification. The host community ends up taking the hit in
terms of the per pupil expenditure for schools there.
And I am on the Education Committee. We looked at this
question a little bit in terms of the ESEA [Elementary and
Secondary Education Act] bill. It is not something that really
is ripe yet for an amendment.
But we are working with the Impact Aid community out there.
And I hope, again, we can reach out to you and your staff in
terms of trying to get an acceptable situation.
The host communities are doing the right thing educating
these kids when their parents are off serving the country. And
we should make sure that again, they don't get sort of left
holding the bag in terms of the cost of that. And with that, I
would yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Courtney.
And now we are going to go to Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And one of the questions--and I am not as some of my
colleagues are absolutely opposed to BRAC. I am not. But I
haven't been convinced that we are in a position--I see the
numbers. I--particularly I know the Army's numbers in regards
to reductions.
What I am concerned about is 3 years from now, 4 years from
now we change the metric and we change where we are with
regards to reduction of forces. Because I think that most of us
on Armed Services agree that we are not in a good spot in
regards to our force structure.
So putting all that into place that we actually could be
above those numbers or equal to the numbers that we are at this
year, how do you fix that so you are not coming back here 4
years from now or 5 years from now saying oh my gosh, you know,
you all got your act together. You got rid of sequestration. We
are actually funding the military at the proper level. And now
we need more capacity. How do you assure us of that?
Secretary Hammack. When we look at BRAC we look at many
different factors. And we also look at a 20-year force
structure plan. But if you think back, the Army at World War II
was a force of 8 million. We built warehouses and barracks and
office buildings and training locations for a force of 8
million.
And through the years we have reduced our excess
infrastructure. But we have excess infrastructure left over
from World War II, whether they are barracks or office
buildings or dining facilities or stuff that we have never
completely sized down to a force of 490,000, which is where we
will be at the end of this year.
Mr. Nugent. So if we go back to 562,000, let's just say,
for the sake of argument, if you resize your capacity in
housing and structures, how is that going to affect us if we do
go back to that number?
Secretary Hammack. There are many different things that we
can do. One of the highest military values is training lands,
land on which you can train soldiers. When you talk about
housing soldiers, there are many different ways to house
soldiers. Whether you are talking about tents or whether you
are talking about two per room.
In the last 10 years we have doubled the size of a dorm or
a barracks room to the point where you can put a bunk bed in
there and it can be just as comfortable as a dorm room at a
university. So we have the surge capability to expand and
contract the Army.
What we want to do is what we did in the European
infrastructure analysis, which is consolidate to our most
critical, most important assets to give us that flex capability
to better manage the budgets that we have. Otherwise we are
spreading a smaller budget across the same number of
installations. And when you underman or when you have empty
buildings they decay faster than occupied buildings.
We would like to put some of these buildings into
productive reuse in communities. And if you look at BRAC there
are many success stories in communities where there are now
community colleges or business parks.
One is in Massachusetts, Fort Devens where there is now a
movie studio. There is a billion-dollar Behr manufacturing
plant. The Guard and Reserve are using the training lands. The
old cantonment area, there is a new hotel in there. There are
restaurants in there.
It has turned into a very vibrant business park. And it
supports the Reserve and Guard mission. So I think there are
many opportunities for us to become more efficient in our real
estate so that we can continue to support the military for the
long term.
Mr. Nugent. I would hope it would not--BRAC, if it ever
gets to that point, that the training facilities is paramount.
I have three sons currently in the Army, two Active Duty, one
National Guard Black Hawk pilot. And their ability to have
those areas is paramount to their mission.
And I just want to give you a side note. When my older son
came back from Afghanistan, and I want to say it was 2008-2009,
back to Fort Bragg, and there was a huge, if you remember,
there was a huge uproar because they were supposed to come back
to new barracks and they came back to the same junk that they
were in when I saw my son off, my wife and I.
So what you have done, though, has been remarkable. I will
tell you the privatization at Fort Rucker and other areas where
I have had other--my other sons at, they have done an excellent
job. I will give you credit that you have really done a good
job in those areas.
So I want to thank you for that. And I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Nugent.
And we will now go to Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to begin by asking Ms. Hammack to follow up on a
comment that she made. It seemed like you were providing us a
choice between sustaining infrastructure that we might not need
and readiness. And I would like you to sharpen that point, if
you will, and tell us just exactly what is at stake in terms of
the readiness.
Secretary Hammack. What is at stake in readiness is our
ability to fund training, our ability to ensure that soldiers
are trained and equipped. So when we look at our budget it is a
balance. And as we are reducing force structure, we can't
reduce force structure at the same pace as we are asked to
reduce budgets.
So then you look at reducing training. Well, we don't want
to deploy an untrained solider. Then you look at reducing
equipment. But we don't want to underequip a soldier.
And so the last part of the budget pot is sustainment on
our installations. And we have cut that to bare bones level. We
are right now maintaining or sustaining our installations to
life, health, safety levels.
Mr. O'Rourke. Can you--you also touched upon this, but I
wondered if you have some numbers to really drive it home. You
talked about the cost of deferred maintenance.
You know if you are going to patch a leak in the roof in
year 1 and you don't and you wait until year 10 and you have
got to replace a whole roof. What--in numbers what is that
costing us, that opportunity to fix it today versus waiting for
it to metastasize 10 years down the road?
Secretary Hammack. Let me give you a scale of costs. If you
think just bare sustainment in a building, and that is just the
structure itself, it is about $0.30 a square foot. If you don't
patch that leak in the roof and you now have to replace the
roof that gets to about $30 a square foot. If you don't fix the
roof in time and the structure decays and you have to replace
it, that is $300 a square foot.
So the lowest cost is to adequately sustain a building. But
right now we are $3 billion backlog with 5,500 major work
orders in sustaining Army installations.
We do not have the funding to sustain installations because
we are putting our funding into training and equipping and
maintaining the force so that we can do the missions asked of
us by this nation. It is a tough decision.
We are not maintaining the installations the way I would
like to. We are not sustaining the installations the way I
think we should. But we are deploying our soldiers the way I
think we should.
Mr. O'Rourke. We are supposed to be down to a force of
450,000 by 2017?
Secretary Hammack. 2018; 490,000 by the end of this year
and then by 2018 down to 450,000, which has risks associated
with that.
Mr. O'Rourke. What happens if we don't do anything, if we
don't follow these recommendations, if we don't ultimately
address the 18 percent of overcapacity that you have within the
Army?
And I guess what I am getting at is will there be a
recommendation for a further drawdown so that the force that we
do have is ready, albeit smaller, and at a level where we are
sustaining the infrastructure? Is that potentially a choice
that we are looking at down the road?
Secretary Hammack. The risk right now, we are doing an
analysis, a Supplemental Programmatic Environmental Assessment
to see where we would take the cuts in manning to go down to a
force of 450,000. Some bases we are evaluating cuts of 15,000
personnel, both uniform and civilian.
So if you have a base of 30,000 and we take a cut of 15,000
in order to live within the resources we have, that means fully
50 percent of the structures on that base could be
underutilized or empty or decaying to a point where they are
failing. So they have no use to the community and they have no
use to the Army. And if we ever have to surge, we would have to
rebuild and build new.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thanks. That helps me to better understand
this issue. And before I yield back to the chair I just want to
thank you for your accessibility and responsiveness on issues
that we have brought to your attention in the 2 years that I
have been here. We really appreciate your support at Fort
Bliss.
With that, I yield back to the chair.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke.
I just want to get a perspective question here. I think it
is the right time. To Mr. Conger, can you tell me from the 2005
BRAC when you expect to accrue positive savings from that BRAC?
Mr. Conger. So we are accruing approximately $4 billion of
savings a year. The investment that----
Mr. Wittman. Net for the entire period of time. Tell me
when you will recover what you spent for that BRAC.
Mr. Conger. So based on the $35 billion of investment and
$4 billion of recurring savings, it nets out in 2018. I will
note, however----
Mr. Wittman. 2005 to 2018 is--I am not a good
mathematician, but 13 years.
Mr. Conger. Yes. The implementation period does not have
the spend evenly across. That doesn't--the savings was not $4
billion a year from the beginning, but it was from the end.
There was a factor in the middle of that. But the figure is
2018 for the breakeven point.
Mr. Wittman. In a proposed--if you were given permission to
pursue a BRAC, tell me the savings that you would accrue within
the Fiscal Year Defense Plan, better known as the FYDP, in
other words, money that you can actually plan to spend.
Mr. Conger. So we have done a projection. Obviously
everything depends on the specific recommendations. But we have
a projection that we are using for planning.
And within that projection we expect to spend--and oh, by
the way, we based it on the kind of inefficiency BRAC round
that we anticipate that includes the ones we did in the 1990s
and the efficiency recommendations from the 2005 round. That
kind of pattern, spend plan.
We expect to spend approximately $6 billion within the
scope of that 6-year period. And we expect to recoup
approximately $6 billion in savings within that 6-year period,
and $2 billion a year from then on out. That is based on a 5
percent infrastructure reduction.
So I would also note that, to address the previous
question, if we anticipate that we have 20 percent, whatever
the--18 percent to 30 percent of excess, that is not--we are
not proposing to eliminate all of the excess. This is the
lowest military value property that we have that we would
target.
Mr. Wittman. So your net would at best be questionable
within a period of time where you could actually save the
dollars. And if you are going to use the same spend plan
assumptions that you used in 2005, which underestimated costs,
overestimated savings and took 13 years to accrue savings, it
is questionable at best about the dollars that would be
available within the FYDP.
So the assertion that those dollars would be available for
readiness I believe certainly leaves much for analysis to
consider what would actually be able to be planned to be spent
in readiness accounts.
Mr. Conger. I think it is fair to say that we would not
complete the implementation of a BRAC round within the scope of
a FYDP because by definition it takes longer.
Mr. Wittman. Yes. And there is a lot of money that has to
be spent up front in order to get a BRAC going----
Mr. Conger. You spend money to save money. There is no
question about that.
Mr. Wittman. Yes. But asserting, like Ms. Hammack did, that
somehow that tomorrow our men and women in uniform are going to
get that training because we are going to start to close bases
I think is a bridge too far.
With that, we will go now to Mr. Gibson.
Mr. Gibson. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman. And appreciate the
panelists being here.
After 13 plus years of war we are now looking to reset the
force, restore some full-spectrum capabilities, enhance our
ability to strategically maneuver. And so my question is going
to be about the Global Response Force.
My last year, which was in 2010, I culminated as the 2nd
Brigade commander of the 82nd. We were the ground component for
the Global Response Force. A lot to be proud of there in many
ways, but underwhelmed by our ability as a country to sort of
pull together and support strategic maneuver from an
installation platform perspective.
So, Mr. Conger, I am interested to know you know--and to
illustrate you know we have Pope--we had Fort Bragg and then we
had Pope Air Force Base, which we had merged, which I think was
a move--emotional to be sure, but a move in the right
direction. But C-17s are hours away, and even the C-130s there
we now have moved away.
So from the DOD's perspective what is being done to
complement the reset and to look from an installation
standpoint that would support strategic maneuver? That can be
the Army-Air Force integration, which I think is particularly
needing focus. But it can also be from a Navy and Marine Corps
perspective too from East Coast and West Coast.
I am interested in any of that. And then the other
panelists can jump in too.
Mr. Conger. So, my instinct is to let the other panelists
jump in first. I don't have a specific answer to your question.
I would have to take it----
Mr. Gibson. Well, you know----
Mr. Conger [continuing]. For the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 119.]
Mr. Gibson [continuing]. Candidly, with due respect, I mean
that is really reinforcing my point is that I think we have
really lacked a national perspective on this.
It is certainly not in your inbox, per se, at this moment.
But I mean from--take it back that you know as a guy who was
the brigade commander for the Army's element that was the
Global Response Force, I was looking for more joint
perspective, more national support.
For example, unexpectedly, and I think the President made
the right call. He deployed us to Haiti in the immediate
aftermath of the devastating earthquake that occurred there in
January of 2010.
And my paratroopers, I mean we 3 days into this deployment
we had 200 paratroopers on the ground because we didn't have
the platforms. The platforms were being directed toward
Afghanistan.
We had significant challenges in cycling. And this was an
important mission the President had directed. And so you know
from an installation standpoint, you know I think that
ultimately we have got to do better as far as crafting the
force so we can be a strategic deployment platform.
So I do think that that is going to require more DOD
involvement. I think there has got to be some modeling and
simulation that comes and the Joint Staff is involved in that.
But since it appears that you would like to go out to
your--to the services here, I would be interested in if any of
them have anything to say as far as strategic maneuverability
or deployability, what initiatives you may have afoot.
Secretary Ballentine. I would also take that one for the
record. It is a little bit outside of the purview of my
portfolio. But we will get back to you with some more details.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 119.]
Secretary Hammack. We do want to ensure that our
installations are strategic deployment platforms. And that does
require an investment.
You are absolutely right. Right now there is a focus on the
Middle East from much of the Army's perspective. And the
concern that the chief has is, are we able to have multiple
deployments at the same time.
We are challenged right now with the areas that we are
deployed in around the world. And will we be able to respond to
something on a moment's notice?
We are concerned right now that the readiness levels within
the Army are some of the lowest they have ever been. And that
is because we do not have the money to invest in it.
We are at about 33 percent readiness if I remember the
numbers right. We don't agree that that is where we should be.
But we have not been resourced.
So we are challenged as we are reducing our installation
funding as low as we possibly can so that we can put money in
training to try and increase the readiness, so that we can put
money in our equipping so that we can equip our soldiers.
But the challenge right now is with 50 percent of the Army
budget in manning, and the increases in pay and benefits every
year, it is getting bigger and bigger every year and forcing
the Army to take risk in some of these other areas. It is not
an equation that is in balance right now.
Mr. Gibson. Ma'am, thank you very much.
Chairman this is--I know you know I have been on this point
for some time, but----
Mr. Wittman. Yes.
Mr. Gibson [continuing]. You know as we are looking to
really restore deterrence, which is very important to us peace
through strength, we have got work to do to restore this
capability, the Global Response Force, we have been working on
it for a number of years. But part of it is including
installations.
Mr. Wittman. It is.
Mr. Gibson. So thank you for the opportunity.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Gibson, thank you. I think that is a great
point, making sure there is strategic alignment. Any time that
you are looking at the idea of installation capacity you want
to make sure that as you are looking at that, alignment takes a
front stage when it comes to making sure we are making the
right decisions.
And with that, we will go to Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think the hearing today obviously is really a good point
for why there have been BRACs in the past. And there is just no
question that Members of Congress, and for that matter I think
a lot of the personnel on our installations also weigh in at
these times. And it is sometimes very difficult to see where
the benefit will be moving forward.
But I wonder. I really need to press you to go a little bit
further with this because I think that you know this is the
Readiness Committee, and so it seems logical that one would be
able to capture the resources that are needed out of our
infrastructure to move in a different direction. And I think
you have spoken to that.
But it is not convincing, I think, to a lot of the members
because the benefits do not accrue for some time with base
closures. So how do you make the argument then, how do you move
forward with why it is essential to do this at this time?
You have talked about money that is not being spent if we
don't have to sustain some of the installations. Clearly the
room that we need is not necessarily where it is available. And
so that is--there is just no way of aligning some of those
things across the country.
I am just wondering, how are you going to move forward with
these arguments? Because I see a real benefit in doing that,
from my community I have seen it. But on the other hand I know
how possessive people are on a number of our facilities as well
for giving up an inch of land.
Secretary Hammack. Congress asked us to take a look.
Secretary McGinn. If I might----
Secretary Hammack. I will give it to you in just a minute.
Congress asked us to take a look at our European
infrastructure and to get that in balance. And that is
something that we have done. And we have demonstrated that we
have the analytical capability and we have the intellectual
capability to balance our installations, to consolidate into
locations that enable us to fight the fight for the next 50
years.
Some of the things that we are closing and consolidating
out of in Germany are just the same issues that we have here:
remnants and leftovers from World War II that we are closing
out that are inefficient to operate. We need to do that same
kind of analysis.
The fact that it has less than a 3-year return on an
investment for the Army is the same kind of analysis that we
need to do here, and present to a commission, to give you
something to take a look at to see where we can achieve those
savings.
We believe there are savings to be achieved through
consolidating onto our most efficient platforms that give us
the highest military value so that we are poised for the next
50 years. That is what we are asking for.
And Mr. McGinn.
Secretary McGinn. We think in terms of near-term, mid-term,
long-term investments and risks, risk assessments. And as Mr.
Conger, in answer to your question, Mr. Chairman, pointed out,
the return on investment of a BRAC round is not any time soon.
But I would just like to make the point that when you want
to close that resources and requirements gap, and reduce risk
in the form of better readiness, the best way to do it is to
put more money in. And that is why we are consistent in--and I
know that the committee supports this as well--in our support
for the President's budget.
Or even more to get away from the bad things that happen as
a result of sequestration. The things that are manifesting
themselves since it first went into effect in fiscal year 2013.
And we are still digging our way out of the hole on the shore
readiness as well as in the platforms.
Mr. Conger. Let me just sort of close out on this [point].
From the past five BRAC rounds we are saving $12 billion to $13
billion a year right now, avoiding the costs. If we had not
done them before and said well those savings are far out, we
would have a much deeper hole to dig out of today.
This is good government. It is the thinking about the
future. And it is not necessarily about today's immediate
problem because as we have pointed out, this is a medium-term
savings we are looking at. We think it pays for itself within
the implementation period, but even so it is not going to solve
the $35 billion problem we have today.
The way we end up doing that is by making pennywise and
pound-foolish decisions like underfunding, taking risks in
sustainment or smaller MILCON requests. That is the way we have
had to deal with it because we have had an immediate problem to
deal with.
Facilities degrade slower than readiness does. And we have
acknowledged that. And yes, it is the smart thing to do to take
risk in facilities before you take risk in readiness.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Secretary Ballentine. Can I weigh in on this briefly from
the Air Force's perspective as well?
If you look at the 2005 BRAC, that cost the Air Force about
$3.7 billion and we are already saving $1 billion a year. I
haven't been in the Air Force very long, as I told you all from
the very beginning. But I come from the business community, and
that is a darn good return on investment.
EIC is costing the Air Force $1 billion and we are going to
be saving $315 million a year. That is a good return on
investment.
Our readiness challenges are not going to be solved
overnight, I am afraid. So we need to get after this
infrastructure as soon as possible so that we can start piling
that money back in.
And I think it is an important question to ask; are we
looking at today's Air Force that is stretched too thin when we
are looking at a 30 percent excess infrastructure? And will we
come back 5 years from now if the force structure is closer to
where we need it to be, and say oh darn, we closed some things
we shouldn't have closed?
And I will tell you that we will, in a BRAC analysis, do a
very careful, thoughtful analysis to ensure that we are making
sure we have got the right equipment in the right places for
the right force structure.
We have got to preserve some surge. We have got to preserve
some plus up. And that would all be part of the analysis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mrs. Davis.
We now go to Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
follow up, if I could, on one of the previous questions just
for the statement.
You know, your budget request is for $251 million for BRAC
and then an additional $2 billion in increased spending on
military construction. And I think from my standpoint as
somebody who represents a lot of the men and women who are
going overseas and fighting, I would rather see that money
spent in readiness right now, making sure that the men and
women that are being deployed have the training and the
equipment that they need, than seeing it built in facilities
that will not come online for the next several years to come.
And so when we talk about short-term versus long-term needs
I think the priority is making sure those men and women are
trained prior to leaving. And that is one of the things that we
have to balance.
I understand the request for a BRAC is going to continue to
come. I understand that at some point there will be a BRAC. And
there is a tremendous divide I think, an extreme lack of trust
between Congress and the administration. And I would suggest to
you from my standpoint that I think the administration has well
earned that lack of trust from the way I see it.
I would like to ask a specific question about the Air
Force, Ms. Ballentine. Last year the Air Force said that they
had a 24 percent excess capacity. This year the testimony is
that it is a 30 percent excess capacity. Did the process change
that the Air Force used to determine that? And if not, what
accounts for the additional 6 percent?
Secretary Ballentine. Thanks for the question. Same
process, and the 24 percent number that the Air Force testified
to last year was from the 2004 analysis conducted for the 2005
BRAC round. We updated using the same methodology and in fact
many of the same input looking at updated force structure.
Since 2004 our overall force structure has come down about
10 percent. That is about 10 percent in both personnel and in
planned aircraft. So when we reran the analysis with updated
numbers, that is where we get to the roughly 30 percent excess
infrastructure capacity.
Mr. Scott. But to--just to make sure I understand you
correctly, you used the 2004-2005 as the foundation for your
analysis.
Secretary Ballentine. We used the same process that was
congressionally and GAO [Government Accountability Office]
approved at that time. And the same process as 1998.
Mr. Scott. What were the major facility categories that
contained the excesses?
Secretary Ballentine. So we looked at nine categories. And
I can certainly meet with you separately or provide for the
record much more detail on precisely what we looked at. But we
looked at nine specific categories ranging from parking aprons
to depot labor, space operations and a number of others within
that, and subcategories within those.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 119.]
Mr. Scott. I would very much appreciate it if we could
have--if we could schedule that meeting to look at that--those
individual issues.
Secretary Ballentine [continuing]. Happy to do that----
Mr. Scott. And certainly hope if you are visiting Robins
Air Force Base or Moody Air Force Base that you will let me
know, that both of those are in my district.
Secretary Ballentine. Would love to do that as well, sir.
Mr. Scott. And I guess the other question I have, Mr.
Conger, would be for--you know as we talk about BRACs and the
numbers that the Department continues to give us, it seems the
Department already knows and has some ideas of where they want
to make some of these cuts.
And I guess my question is you ask us to keep trusting you
with a BRAC. And my comments earlier were certainly not geared
towards you. You ask us to keep trusting you with a BRAC
though. And I am asking you that you trust us with providing
that list of where you expect to make those cuts, either by
category or by base.
Mr. Conger. So I guarantee you that I do not have some sort
of a secret list. The figures that we have provided are all
parametrically based. We try to do that very----
Mr. Scott. Well, let me--then--and I apologize for
interrupting. You know I get short on time here. Is it too much
housing? Is it too much industrial infrastructure, too much
headquarter space, too many missions?
Surely by category if you can tell us that one year it is
24 percent and one year it is 30 percent in one of the
branches, surely that you can tell us the same thing for the
Army and the Navy. And you can tell us by category where that
excess capacity is.
Mr. Conger. We can certainly give you a copy of the 2004
study and the categories are there. And it will show you where
the excess was at that point in time. We haven't done a
comprehensive e-service across the board, a redo of that
analysis today.
Mr. Scott. Then how can you be so confident it saves money?
Mr. Conger. So because the--if you look at the excess that
we had then, what small amount we closed in 2005, the reduction
in force structure amplifying that excess, we are convinced
that there is excess to get after.
The BRAC study will identify the low military value
locations that we are--we would look to consolidate and close.
And we projected based on a straightforward percentage
reduction in infrastructure what those costs and savings would
be.
Mr. Scott. As somebody who majored in risk management I can
tell you, you have got a lot of multipliers in there.
Mr. Conger. Yes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
Ms. Gabbard.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is for Mr. McGinn. With regard to the expected
growth in the Navy force structure and the continued shift
towards the Pacific, I am wondering how the Navy is
reevaluating its infrastructure capacity and requirements.
And specifically how do the infrastructure requests in this
fiscal year 2016 support this rebalance towards the Asia-
Pacific? And how this investment is working to facilitate
continuing to move the Marines from Okinawa?
Secretary McGinn. As you probably know, that is a long-term
or I would say midterm project. We will see the first Marines
moving actually into Guam around 2020-2021. And it will take
several years to complete it.
We are starting already in terms of spending MILCON
dollars. In fact, the question that Ms. Bordallo asked earlier
about spending money to prepare live-fire training ranges in
Guam is an example of that where we are 5 years in advance in
order to make sure they are ready when those Marines come
because they are going to be a rapidly deployable force.
And we are also looking across the board at support
structures like housing, for example, for Marines and their
family working with the United States Air Force at Andersen Air
Force Base to make sure that we are going to have Marines and
Air Force personnel and families using that area instead of
doing it separately.
So I guess the short answer is simply we are very carefully
going through what the requirements to maintain a ready
deployable Marine force with live fire, with air combat
element, ground combat element, and special forces moving back
from Okinawa to Guam and to Hawaii as well.
Australia is another area. The Chief of Naval Operations
was just down there. But we are looking at this very carefully.
And also not just counting the troops, but what is it in terms
of infrastructure and the projects that will improve or create
that infrastructure that will make them truly ready?
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
And Ms. Hammack, you know the number of troop reductions
that we are projecting now and that we will continue to see
should sequester continue obviously is of deep concern to many
of us. In Hawaii there have been proposed very deep cuts both
at Fort Shafter and at Schofield Barracks.
And I am wondering if you can speak to really what are the
real-life impacts on this Asia-Pacific focus on programs like
General Brooks' Pacific Pathways of reaching out and
proactively engaging many partners in the region how this cut
would affect that mission.
Secretary Hammack. When we are taking a look at how we are
downsizing we are taking into account the many missions that
the military has. General Odierno in a hearing end of January
made a comment that sequestration is impacting Pacific
Pathways. And we will not be able to do as much as we think we
should do, or as General Brooks thinks we should do there.
When we are looking at force structure reductions we are
having to take a look at every location that has a BCT [brigade
combat team] on it to determine how and how much we can take
force structure down.
Focus on Pacific is important. We have a lot of forces
stationed in Korea, South Korea right now in support of that.
It is one of those things that we have to evaluate and we have
to balance. They are very tough decisions that we are making
right now.
In the listening sessions that we have had we have heard a
lot from the communities and that comes into play. Military
value does come into play. Op plans come into play.
We are taking a look at everything and trying to put
together a tough decision to reduce the force to levels that we
don't think is appropriate, whether it is 450,000 or even
deeper to 420,000 where we would be if full sequestration stays
the way it is right now. So as I said, there are tough
decisions that are going to affect almost every State because
it is going to affect Guard and Reserve as well.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you. I think it is important that we
share this understanding and these impacts not only on the
local economies or the districts or the States that are
affected by these sequester cuts but really how it affects the
mission, how it affects our readiness, and how in places like
the Asia-Pacific and particularly in the Korean peninsula where
we continue to see the saber-rattling coming from North Korea.
These are not theoretical things. These are things that
have a very real impact on real people and the safety and
security of the American people. Thank you.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Gabbard.
Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a
relatively quick question.
Ms. Hammack, you were mentioning before about some of the
places where redeveloped real estate, movie theater, this and
that. Did we sell the real estate to private investors? Or do
we own it in the hopes of turning a profit? How does that work?
Secretary Hammack. One of the rules that Congress put in
play under BRAC is the ability for special transfer authority
and working with the local reuse authority. So the community
sets up a local reuse authority that has a say in how that
property is developed.
Some of the other authorities we have to close bases, and
we do have other authorities to close bases. We essentially
close the base and give the real estate to GSA [General
Services Administration] to sell to the highest bidder.
The community doesn't have a say in redevelopment. The
redevelopment comes along with grants, structured payment
plans. The land is transferred usually at or below market cost,
in many cases below market cost.
There is some value that comes back to the Army or the
Department of Defense. And quite often that value received is
used for environmental cleanup. So that is what helps fund our
environmental cleanup on bases. Some require more than others.
Dr. Wenstrup. So there are several components to this
before an action is taken and several ways that you can go
about it. Are there some areas that we are leasing? Or are we
basically turning these areas over just to kind of get out from
under?
Secretary Hammack. Many cases it is we are trying to find a
buyer for it so that we can entirely get out of any caretaker
or real estate responsibility. But meanwhile, to your point,
the Army does have leases around. And we are working to move
things back on bases and to some of the empty real estate.
But even so, we have more capacity than we have the need
for right now. So BRAC is a way for us to do that kind of
rebalance, consolidations, and evaluate where we need to be for
the future.
Dr. Wenstrup. I think hearing some more of these
situations, success stories, potential failures as we go
forward it is always good to hear about how we are managing
that situation. So thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Dr. Wenstrup.
Mr. Conger, I want to pursue a line of questioning that we
had talked about earlier, and that is the context in which the
concept of BRAC is proposed. Today we find ourselves in a
threat scenario that is probably more complex than it has been
at any time in our history, one that changes almost on a daily
basis.
We are also facing budgeting issues through sequester. We
are also looking at where our end strength ultimately ends up
being. We also look at what is the national security strategy,
what should it be?
Should it be to fight and win a war on one front and hold
serve elsewhere, to fight and win a war just on one front, to
fight and win on two fronts? I think that is part of the
discussion that has to take place. And in that realm of
uncertainty now comes the proposal to resize the capacity
within the military.
And one of the assumptions I think you have to have going
forward in what the right capacity is, is some certainty about
what the overall strategy for the Nation is, what the security
risks are, the issue of sequester and where are we with
certainty with the budgeting process, which I would argue we
are not anywhere close yet.
Hopefully we get there. And where we are with end strength.
All of those in my mind have a very particular impact on the
assumptions that you would put into doing a BRAC.
Give me your perspective on how we go about doing a BRAC,
rightsizing capacity in the face of all that uncertainty. And
show me that when we end up there, if we were to go down that
path, that we end up in the right place.
Mr. Conger. Sure. I think that the best way for me to
answer that question is to talk a little bit about what we did
in Europe. And then I will bring it back to the specifics at
hand.
When we did the European Infrastructure Consolidation
effort, which was a very BRAC-like process, we looked at excess
capacity that we identified. We looked at the military value of
the various sites and installations in Europe. And then we
analyzed a variety of proposed scenarios, very much like the
way a BRAC would work.
When we did that we already incorporated the ability to
have excess for contingencies and that was made part of the
requirement. That was not excess per se. We incorporated that
into the analysis. And we made a conscious decision to only
look at and only accept recommendations that did not reduce our
operational capacity.
So in other words, how can we do the same thing for less
money? What we are looking for in the context of a BRAC round
is how do we do the same thing for less money?
If--I understand the strategic uncertainty of what is our
ultimate force level going to be. We rely on the Joint Staff to
provide that input, the installations folks don't make it up.
Historically they provided a 20-year force structure plan
that has been required. There is--but as you pointed out there
is uncertainty.
In the sequestration-BCA environment is the Army going to
be at 450,000 or 420,000? What procurement programs are or
aren't going to go forward? Are we going to have A-10s or not
A-10s?
These are all things that factor into the calculus, and I
understand that. But nonetheless, when you look at the BRAC
analysis, it is based on retaining those places that have the
highest military value, not those places that are not empty.
And so the idea would be well, what happens if you reduce
force structure to a particular location, but that base has the
best training ranges or that base has the best maneuver acres,
et cetera, et cetera.
You don't close that base. You fill that base. And those
are the dynamics that have to be contemplated within a BRAC.
You are only looking at divesting those installations that are
of the lowest military value.
Mr. Wittman. As we look at this in context, obviously we
are coming out of conflicts, Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation
Enduring Freedom; coming into a realm of a more dangerous
world; coming into a time of reset. If there is one thing we
have seen historically about reset is we always get it wrong.
We have a hard time determining what the future may hold.
But in that realm of uncertainty, do you believe that there
should be a logical process to say let's cross off a few of
these other uncertainties on the list first before we get to
the point of doing a BRAC?
In other words, shouldn't there be a little more certainty
about what truly is the strategy? What are we going to do to
address the sequester in the long term? Where are we going to
end up with end strength? What is going to happen with the
world around us as far as the threat scenarios?
Wouldn't it be logical in your mind to say let's determine
a little bit more certainty in those areas before we go about
setting capacity that if we don't get that right we can't dial
it up like a radio dial and say whoops, sorry, we made a
mistake, we will just dial it back up; because it is hard to
dial back up that capacity once it is lost.
Mr. Conger. I think it is. It all depends on how much you
expect to cut. If I identified a parametric excess on the order
of 20 percent, am I going to cut 20 percent of my
infrastructure? No.
During the BRAC 2005 round we had identified parametrically
an excess of approximately 24 percent. What we ended up cutting
was 3.4 percent of our point replacement value. And I know it
is apples and oranges. It is two different metrics. But it is
what we could measure.
The idea is we are not going to pursue recommendations in
the name of savings that accept so much risk that that would be
an issue. That is where we are coming from. We are looking for
savings.
We found it in the European analysis fairly
straightforwardly. We were able to identify many
recommendations without accepting what we deemed to be
operational risk. And we were still able to retain significant
enough excess to be able to deal with contingency operations.
I think that where we are going with a BRAC isn't to give
us BRAC authority so we can close all of our excess, because
that would be foolish, right. What we are looking to do is
having the authority to find those business cases and those
scenarios which make the most sense that enable us to fully
utilize our installations of highest military value.
Because we can't refill them right now because we are
prevented from closing the places where we have lower military
value and filling those up. We have constraints on what we can
do.
I understand Congress' concern about the risk that we would
accept. And I welcome ideas about how to constrain the
authorities that Congress would provide so that you feel more
comfortable with the authority you are giving.
Mr. Wittman. If Congress were to consider the idea of
directing the service branches to do an analysis based on a
certain set of conditions or reality, would that be something
that you could bring back to Congress within the year to give
more context and more definition to what a BRAC might entail,
including all these uncertainties, including what the end means
are for a BRAC and what the ends might be?
In other words, is it to save money? And if it is, how much
is saved in the FYDP? Obviously not identifying bases, but
looking across those general categories.
Mr. Conger. So I think that it is important to recognize
that when you--we could do a parametric capacity analysis like
the----
Mr. Wittman. I just want to interrupt you. If you will, put
in context, tell us what a parametric analysis is.
Mr. Conger. So if you are looking at excess capacity, you
are looking at aircraft per apron space or brigade combat teams
per training acre aggregated across the entire enterprise.
You are not looking at, at Camp Swampy do I have--how much
excess do I have in that particular location? You are adding it
all up and developing a percentage based on what might have
been the loading at a different period of time, how much have
we vacated.
That is the kind of analysis we do in order to avoid any
sort of bias in the analysis that would point to a particular
installation. We are very careful about that. We believe that
any time you do a comprehensive BRAC analysis based on
certified data where all bases are treated equally, that can't
be influenced by a proposed list.
I already know I want to do this or I already know I want
to do that. We don't want to pollute the process that we see as
transparent, analytical, and apolitical by influencing it with
sort of a here is where we are going type of thing.
Mr. Wittman. I am going to end with this and then I want to
go to Ms. Bordallo.
Would you believe it to be helpful to be able to answer
some of the questions that I think you hear from the
subcommittee members today, and also other questions that are
out there, to be able to pursue such an analysis where you can
look at those parameters?
Do that analysis, put some scenarios in there where members
can at least understand how you addressed the uncertainties
that are around BRAC so they have a better sense, as you heard
from Mr. Scott, a better level of trust in that those issues
that they feel are important with this are addressed in that.
And that they have some level of surety that if Congress were
to go down the road of a BRAC that there is some context in
which they have made the decision.
Rather than what happened in 2005, which was let's do a
BRAC and then do the analysis. It was kind of the cart coming
before the horse.
Mr. Conger. Right. I think that it is fair to request an
excess capacity analysis across the government. I think the
Army and the Air Force have already done ones. But I think we
can do one that is comprehensive. I mean, we have been
contemplating that ever since the language you inserted into
that House bill last year.
The specifics of how we would do that I think are fair to
discuss. But I think that we think that it is important to do.
We wouldn't be able to do base-by-base types of things in this
context without a formal BRAC process.
Mr. Wittman. Well, we--and we wouldn't expect that because
I think that is what the BRAC is intended for is to do a base-
by-base comparison. But to look overall, as you said, within
the parameters and then address those different uncertainties
that are out there.
Say this is how we factor in to provide for if this
uncertainty were to happen within this range. The worst case
scenario to the best case scenario here is how we have factored
in what this would be. And here is how a BRAC could and would
address that. I think those issues are very important in
people's minds.
Mr. Conger. Let me sort of plant this seed as well. What
that parametric analysis does, what the excess analyses that
the Army and the Air Force have done is that they point to
excess where it creates the trade space in which you can make
some specific decisions.
In EIC we did the same sort of thing. We said ah, we see
there is force structure reducing in Europe. We know that there
is trade space here. Let's go in and look at the specifics. And
the specifics didn't necessarily have to do with the specific
places where there was excess created.
But we knew that there was the room to move around in that
space. The specific places where we might identify excess won't
end up necessarily being where the recommendations are. But
they provide the trade space, this swing space that might
afford an opportunity.
I will leave you with a thought. In EIC, I will use an Air
Force example, we have enough fighters in Europe to basically
completely fill two fighter bases. Well, we have three fighter
bases in Europe. But those were among the highest military
value installations that we have on the continent.
So instead what we contemplated and what we ended up
recommending was taking a facility that had a support function,
Mildenhall, and taking the assets there and filling up the
fighter bases so it had--so that Spangdahlem in particular had
multi-mission.
We were able to preserve bases we deemed to be the highest
military value. And so what we have proposed wasn't necessarily
where the excess was. Does that make sense?
Secretary McGinn. Mr. Chairman, if I could just add?
Mr. Wittman. Sure.
Secretary McGinn. Especially in this committee or this
subcommittee you hear the expression ``train like you fight.''
That is right at the essence of achieving readiness. And we
all, across all of the services across the Department, work
encroachment issues all the time, whether it is jet noise or
operations at sea, ground combat maneuvering, et cetera.
And I just wanted to make the comment that this is a key
aspect of military value that Mr. Conger was talking about. And
it isn't based on necessarily only a future BRAC issue or to
not have one. It is happening right today, every installation.
And preserving that ability to train like you fight directly
contributes to our readiness.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. McGinn, I think that is a great point. It
is one of the questions that comes up too all the time with the
BRAC. And that is if you get to a point of releasing facilities
that again you may need in some capacity in the future, to be
able to reconstitute that becomes impossible to go back to
those existing bases because then encroachment occurs.
So then it becomes very difficult to train like you fight.
And then you have to go to different areas where the costs are
increased either to obtain the land or to pursue operations
there.
And you heard Mr. Gibson bring up a very good point, and
that is the strategic location, too, of those facilities, which
also has to be part of an analysis. It is one of those areas
that I think doesn't normally come up at the beginning of an
analysis. But it has to be part of that so we understand what
the secondary effects of that might be.
With that I go to Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you. I think this has been very important and we have received
a lot of information from this hearing.
I am curious. Ms. Hammack and Mr. McGinn and Ms.
Ballentine, if you could comment briefly, how are you
leveraging privatization efforts, public-private partnerships
or other innovative authorities to mitigate the risk in
infrastructure investments and achieve financial savings? We
will start with you, Mr. McGinn.
Secretary McGinn. We use all of the tools that Congress has
given us the authorizations: enhanced use leases, energy
savings performance contracts, utility energy services
contracts, power purchase agreements, to be able to get private
sector investment in our installations, that do a couple of
things.
They give us better, cleaner power. They get us more
reliable power to the extent that we get distributed
generation. And it is really good for the economy of not just
the local area but the Nation and seeing putting this capital
to work.
At the same time, we in the services get the immediate
benefits from seeing these deals occur, these contracts occur
over a very compressed period of time measured in months, not
years. And we--as soon as those projects are completed, we are
reaping the benefits in lower utility bills, in better,
cleaner, cheaper energy and a more robust backbone for
distributed generation.
Ms. Bordallo. Very good.
Ms. Hammack.
Secretary Hammack. Thank you, Representative Bordallo. You
know we have been leveraging partners for quite a while.
Housing is one of our most successful ones where we have
privatized housing to deliver better housing for our service
members.
Most of our bases have lodging for visitors and for
soldiers who are PCSing [permanent change of station] or for
training missions. And we have privatized lodging, which has
increased the quality of the lodging that we provide service
members.
We have also worked to privatize utilities, whether it is
electricity, natural gas, or wastewater. And the private sector
comes in and invests in the infrastructure, which actually then
makes it much more efficient and then reduces our operating
costs. So we found that utilities privatization helps save us
cost in the long run.
And now we are looking at a fourth category, which is how
do we privatize some of our base operations. And quite often we
call it the Monterey model because Presidio of Monterey,
located in Monterey, California, is entirely surrounded by the
city of Monterey.
And what we have done is privatize all of our base
operations facilities so the city of Monterey runs the Presidio
of Monterey. And it has resulted in reduced operating costs.
We look to see where we can apply some or parts of the
Monterey model through legislation that Congress authorized
just last year. They clarified it.
And some of our installations, many of our installations
are located in remote locations, not in a location where a city
or a county is available to provide services. But we are
investigating where there are opportunities to leverage core
competencies that might be outside the base so that we are not
duplicating services on the base.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. And Ms. Ballentine.
Secretary Ballentine. So the Air Force, like our sister
services, looks at a number of other opportunities and tools in
the tool kit.
As I said at the beginning, when you have unaffordable
installations, it is really simple. There are only two ways you
can get after it. You can spend more money on them or you can
make them cost less. And one of the things that really excites
me is beyond just MILCON and FSRM and BRAC we have a range of
other tools in our tool kit.
So of course privatization of housing has been very
successful. We are also working down the path of privatizing
utilities. But there are a range of other tools as well. And I
will give you a couple of examples.
Enhanced use leases [EULs] is an exciting area of
opportunity. Most folks have heard about the wastewater
treatment plant down at Nellis. And in return they built a
state-of-the-art fitness center.
We have got another really exciting enhanced use lease down
at Eglin Air Force Base where the Holiday Inn has built a hotel
and we have put our radar on top. Our radar tower was on the
ground and less effective because the other hotels were
building up next to it. So we needed to build the radar tower
anyway.
Not only did they put the radar on the top, they painted it
like a beach ball. So this thing has become kind of a landmark.
And it is really a neat story. And the Holiday Inn then pays us
a percentage of their gross revenues every year. It is a great
opportunity. So those are a couple of EULs.
Power purchase agreements allow us to get cleaner energy on
our bases, provide some energy resiliency. We just did our
largest solar array in the Air Force to date, 6.4 megawatts at
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base. That thing is providing 35
percent of the base's power. At peak sun it is providing over
100 percent of the base's power. And it is saving them a half
million dollars a year.
That is another tool that helps get at the fact that these
bases cost too much money, and gets at the energy resiliency.
And there are a number of other examples like that. So this is
one of the areas that I am really excited about and keeps me
optimistic.
Ms. Bordallo. Well, thank you. We see these at home. We
have a large Air Force base and Navy base, and I see these
partnerships ongoing. And I think it brings the military and
civilian community together in a big way. And I think that is
important.
I have one last question, Mr. Chairman. Okay.
Ms. Ballentine, in recent years a large percentage of the
Air Force's military construction budget has been focused on
supporting combatant commander requirements such as the
headquarters facility for U.S. Strategic Command and the U.S.
Cyber Command and new mission beddowns such as the KC-46 and
the F-35.
Now, can you describe the impact these requirements have
had on the Air Force's ability to focus on the recapitalization
of infrastructure supporting current missions?
Secretary Ballentine. Yes, ma'am. So General Welsh, our
chief of staff, has said quite clearly that we have in the last
several years been underfunding our existing mission
infrastructure, things like nuclear infrastructure, space
infrastructure, test and training ranges. And those bills are
now due.
This year's PB 2016 MILCON budget I think is really the--
strikes the right balance between three priorities. First,
continuing to focus on COCOM commanders' needs. That is around
21 percent of this year's MILCON budget.
Second, focusing on the Secretary's three top priorities:
nuclear, space, cyber. Those combined are about 17 percent. And
much of that is what might fall in that category of existing
mission recapitalization. We have got three very important
nuclear recapitalization infrastructure projects in that
bucket.
And then the third pillar of the MILCON strategy is really
balancing that existing mission infrastructure recap
[recapitalization] with beddown of the new weapons systems. And
those two are about 26 percent for existing mission
recapitalization, things like firehouses and runways and the
like, and 16 percent for F-35 and KC-46 beddown.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving me the second round
of questions.
Mr. Wittman. Absolutely, Ms. Bordallo. Thank you.
I have one housekeeping item. I ask unanimous consent to
include into the record all members' statements and extraneous
material. Without objection, so ordered.
Panelists, thank you so much today for joining us. And we
appreciate the time you have spent with us. Obviously all of
our members got to ask questions, all of I think significance
as we look about how we address a variety of challenges,
obviously one of them being installation capacity in the
context of what happens with sequester, end strength, and
national security strategy.
So thank you all so much for providing that perspective to
us today. And we will continue the dialogue as we head forward
into the National Defense Authorization Act.
Thank you so much. And with that, the subcommittee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:13 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 3, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 3, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 3, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

March 3, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GIBSON

Mr. Conger. The Department's global infrastructure network supports
the mission requirements of a defined force structure. As such, the
Department continuously evaluates its infrastructure as strategic
objectives, force structure and mission sets evolve. The Department
strives to ensure its infrastructure is aligned with force structure
requirements, supporting both steady state activities and rapid force
projection, while promoting efficiencies (such as joint use of
facilities) to the greatest extent practicable. That is why it is so
important for Congress to authorize a new BRAC round--it is only
through BRAC that the Department can effectively accomplish that
objective.   [See page 18.]
Secretary Ballentine. The United States Air Force continues to
successfully support strategic maneuver to include XVIII Airborne Corps
Global Response Force (GRF) and others with assets not co-located with
Sister Service forces. Per coordinated discussion with the United
States Air Force and Air Mobility Command, divestment of the 440th
Airlift Wing (Pope Army Air Field--AAF) will have negligible impacts to
XVIII Airborne Corps' GRF Joint Forcible Entry (JFE) capacity and
capability. Under the current installation landscape, DOD can deliver
the GRF direct to an objective around the globe via USAF assets non-
collocated at Pope AAF. Given sufficient strategic warning, the GRF can
be forward staged, and the JFE executed via an integrated package of C-
17s and C-130s. Additionally, 100 percent of current deployment
requirements of the XVIII Airborne Corps are met through units external
to Pope AAF.
The USAF remains committed to supporting US Army airborne training
requirements through the Joint Airborne/Air Transportability Training
(JA/ATT) Management System (JMS) program. Using JMS, the US Army can
schedule additional JA/ATTs to make up for the sorties currently flown
by AFRC C-130Hs based at Pope AAF. The Air Force--via the JA/ATT
construct--also supports 100 percent of the missions at Fort Benning,
Fort Campbell, and many other Army, Marine Corps, and Special
Operations Command units, whether or not they have co-located transport
aircraft. In 2010, the 18th Air Force, XVIII Airborne Corps, and 82d
Airborne Division senior leaders began to formalize what is now known
as the quarterly JFE Readiness Symposium to allow Army and Air Force
senior leaders to prioritize training objectives, to maximize training
outcomes, and to resource joint exercises that enhance JFE readiness of
both Army and Air Force units.   [See page 18.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Secretary Ballentine. The Air Force January 2015 strategic,
headquarters-level CONUS capacity analysis considered nine broad
categories comparing simple ratios relating capacity to force structure
and determined the Air Force has approximately 30% excess
infrastructure capacity. The categories include Reserves Parking Apron;
ANG Parking Apron; Education & Training Parking Apron; Small Aircraft
Parking Apron; Large Aircraft Parking Apron; Education & Training
Classroom Space; Depot Labor; Space Operations; and Product Centers,
Laboratories and Education & Training Facilities.   [See page 22.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 3, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN

Mr. Wittman. Under constrained resources, the Department is
balancing risk among force structure, modernization, and readiness to
meet defense strategic requirements. The infrastructure investment
accounts have taken a large portion of the risk.
a) Explain how the Department aligned infrastructure investments
with the defense strategic requirements?
b) If Congress adopted the President's Budget in fiscal year 2016,
how would the infrastructure investments impact readiness? What are the
risks to infrastructure and readiness already inherent at this
investment level?
c) If Congress fails to repeal sequestration, how would the
corresponding decrease in infrastructure investment impact readiness?
What are the risks to infrastructure and readiness that would be
assumed under a budget constrained by sequestration?
d) Do you have any examples of failed or failing infrastructure
based on the risks taken under sequestration and the Bipartisan Budget
agreement?
Mr. Conger. a) The Department's infrastructure investment supports
the defense strategy identified in the 2014 Quadrennial Defense Review.
Our 2016 budget request prioritized infrastructure investments to
ensure that our military has mission capable facilities as necessary to
protect the homeland, to build security globally, and to project power
and win decisively. Our budget request also prioritizes infrastructure
investments to ensure the life, health and safety of our military and
civilian workforce, while maintaining a high quality of life for our
service members and their families.
b) The President's FY 2016 budget requests $8.4 billion for the
Military Construction (MilCon) and Family Housing Appropriation to
invest in facilities that address critical mission requirements and
life, health and safety concerns, to include the bed-down of forces
returning from overseas bases, restoration and modernization of
enduring facilities, and acquisition of new facilities where needed to
ensure mission capability and readiness. This figure represents a 30%
increase over the FY 2015 enacted level. This increase begins to
reverse the high risk to readiness experienced since sequestration
began. While the FY 2016 MilCon request ($6.7 billion) includes
projects in support of the strategic shift to the Asia-Pacific,
projects needed to support the realignment of forces, and projects that
are crucial to ensure that we can deliver the quality of life necessary
to attract and retain an all-volunteer force, it is still not at the
level to allow DOD to address recapitalization needs that have been
delayed due to sequestration.
c) If the Department's FY 2016 budget request is reduced to the
Budget Control Act levels, the infrastructure investment will likely be
impacted similar to the FY 2015 funding levels. At these reduced
funding levels, DOD could see the $1.8 billion increase in military
construction, $2.5 billion increase in facility sustainment and $946
million increase in restoration and modernization disappear, which
could then have DOD Components continue addressing only facility life,
safety and health issues. As we continue to stress the infrastructure
associated with our readiness platforms, the risk to missions also
increases and home and workplace quality of life suffrage continues to
erode.
d) A few examples of failing/failed infrastructure related to
sequestration can be seen in the following:

China Lake Airfield. Deferral of major asphalt overlays
caused all 3 runways to deteriorate into a compromised state of
readiness simultaneously. In early 2014, pieces of the crumbling runway
caused damage to an F/A-18F.

Patuxent River Airfield. A restoration & modernization
project had to be phased due to limited availability of funds resulting
in delayed restoration and increased operational risk. As a result of
deteriorated conditions, the right door and the external flap of the
engine exhaust nozzle on a BF-5 aircraft was damaged.

Dam Neck Combat Systems Training Facility. Navy was
unable to fund an restoration & modernization project to repair the
roof and building envelope of a Fleet training building at Dam Neck
Annex. As a result, radar training must be suspended during inclement
weather so computer equipment can be turned off and covered with tarps
to prevent damage.
Mr. Wittman. In conjunction with the fiscal year 2016 budget
request, the Department of Defense is submitting a legislative proposal
seeking an additional base realignment and closure (BRAC) round.
a) Has the Secretary of Defense completed an updated assessment on
whether excess infrastructure exists in the Department?
b) What empirical support can the Department provide to support a
request for additional BRAC rounds?
Mr. Conger. a. Army conducted a programmatic analysis of real
property needed to support an end-strength and corresponding force
structure of 490,000 active component Soldiers. For inside the United
States, they report that their excess capacity ranges between 12 and 28
percent, depending on facility category group, with an average of
approximately 18 percent.
Air Force has also completed a capacity analysis, comparing current
infrastructure capacity to projected force structure and mission
requirements. The results indicate the Air Force has approximately 30
percent excess infrastructure capacity. This excess capacity results
from decreases in Air Force personnel and force structure outpacing
reductions in infrastructure. Since the last BRAC round in 2005, the
Air Force has 50,000 fewer personnel and 500 fewer aircraft in its
planned force structure.
b. The opportunity for greater efficiencies is clear, based on
three basic facts that have not changed over the last year:

In 2004, DOD conducted a capacity assessment that
indicated it had 24% aggregate excess capacity;

In BRAC 2005, the Department reduced only 3.4% of its
infrastructure, as measured in Plant Replacement Value--far short of
the aggregate excess indicated in the 2004 study;

Force structure reductions subsequent to that analysis--
particularly Army personnel (from 570,000 to 450,000 or lower), Marine
Corps personnel (from 202,000 to 182,000 or lower) and Air Force force
structure (reduced by 500 aircraft)--point to the presence of
additional excess.
We project that a new efficiency-focused BRAC round will save about
$2 billion a year after implementation with costs and savings during
the six-year implementation period being a wash at approximately $6
billion. Our projection is based on the efficiency rounds of the 1990s.
Mr. Wittman. According to the Department's report, implementing EIC
actions will not reduce the operational force structure or military
capabilities in Europe, only excess infrastructure.
a) Please explain the process and factors the Department used to
ensure military capabilities in Europe were not reduced?
b) The Department has stated that a BRAC-like process was used to
inform the EIC decision process. Can you describe any lessons learned
from the EIC effort that should be considered as the Department manages
its overseas infrastructure moving forward?
Mr. Conger. a) A defined force structure plan provided by the Joint
Staff served as a baseline for the EIC analysis. The process did not
allow for any reductions in or changes to that force structure.
Additionally, maintaining military value as a primary analytical factor
helped ensure that no military capabilities were compromised.
b) The EIC process showed that overseas capacity should be reviewed
from a theater perspective to the greatest extent practicable, with a
focus on joint use of infrastructure.
It also demonstrated substantial savings are possible from
realignment actions on scales much smaller than returning an entire
installation.
Mr. Wittman. The infrastructure investment accounts have taken a
large portion of risk the last several years under constrained budgets.
a) Within the President's Budget in fiscal year 2016, what level of
risk has your Service taken in infrastructure?
b) Do you have any examples of failed or failing infrastructure
based on the risks taken under sequestration and the Bipartisan Budget
agreement?
c) Can you discuss how you are leveraging privatization efforts,
public-private partnerships, or other innovative authorities to
mitigate the risk in infrastructure investments and achieve financial
savings while improving the quality of infrastructure or services?
d) Due to sequestration, the Army announced force structure
reductions in 2013 bringing the Active Duty end-strength down from
562,000 to 490,000. The Army is currently assessing options to
implement further reductions to its end-strength and has stated it may
need to go to a force of 420,000 if sequestration-level funding returns
in fiscal year 2016. If these force structure reductions are
implemented, will the requirements for, or scope of, any of the
military construction projects contained in the fiscal year 2016 budget
request be impacted?
e) The Army's military construction budget is primarily focused on
recapitalization to support current missions. Can you discuss the
process used by the Army to prioritize military construction projects
funded in fiscal year 2016 versus those contained in the Future Year
Defense Program (FYDP)?
Secretary Hammack. a) The Army continues to take risk in this
budget to maintain, restore, or modernize its facilities and
infrastructure. While fiscal year 2016 limitations present challenges
across all Army installations, further budget reductions would
substantially increase risks to readiness and wellbeing. What the Army
needs is consistent, predictable funding to apply to the life cycle
management of its facilities and infrastructure. The FY 2016 budget for
Facility Sustainment, Restoration and Modernization (FSRM) will fund
those most critical projects that meet the criteria established by the
Army Facility Investment Strategy in the project prioritization review
process in FY 2016.
b) All projects in the FY16 President's Budget request address
failed or failing facilities or address critical capability shortfalls.
Some examples include constructing a new pier to replace the failed
Pier #2 at Military Ocean Terminal Concord, California; improving Army
cyber capability with a command and control facility for the US Army
Cyber Command Headquarters and the Joint Forces Headquarters--Cyber at
Fort Gordon, Georgia; replacing the obsolete and failed Waste Water
Treatment Plant at West Point, New York; replacing the failed and
obsolete WWII-era structure at Corpus Christi Army Depot to modernize
the Army's only organic, depot level facility for the repair, overhaul
and maintenance of rotary wing aircraft and aircraft components; and
replacing WWII-era facilities at Fort Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania,
providing a safe and efficient space to store, maintain, and fabricate
training devices. All of these projects address pressing failed or
failing infrastructure risks that are being addressed in the Army's
FY16 President's Budget request.
c) The Army is leveraging public-private partnerships such as the
Residential Communities Initiative (RCI) privatized housing, the
Privatization of Army Lodging (PAL), and utilities privatization (UP)
programs. These programs have realized significant savings and cost
avoidance for the Army since their inception. These programs have
greatly mitigated the risk in infrastructure investments by leveraging
private sector expertise and funding to improve the overall quality and
long-term sustainability of infrastructure services.
The Army is leveraging private industry investment to improve
facilities and infrastructure through authorities for energy savings
performance contracting, utilities privatization, and power purchase
agreements. The Army has the most extensive energy savings performance
contracting and utility energy services contracting program in the
Federal Government with over $2.26 billion of third party investment
leveraged to provide energy and water savings facility improvements.
These efforts use private industry technical expertise to develop,
construct, operate and maintain more efficient facility infrastructure.
We have privatized over half of our installation utilities
infrastructure through the utilities privatization that not only
improves the condition and reliability of installation utilities
services, but also has resulted in substantial savings in natural gas
and water. Our Office of Energy Initiatives is also utilizing the power
purchase authority to attain mandated renewable energy goals and
provide energy security infrastructure to installations, partnering
with private industry to develop commercial scale renewable energy
systems on our installations.
The Army is in the process of implementing its plan to use the
public-public partnership authority first published in NDAA 2013 and
updated in NDAA 2015. This updated authority broadens the ability to
realize cost savings or cost avoidance, as well as gaining efficiencies
in the conduct of installation support services through the use of
intergovernmental support agreements (IGSAs). Internally, the Army will
communicate with its commanders through official orders and Army Senior
Leader correspondence, to spread the word that IGSAs may now use legal
instruments other than FAR-based contracts. The Army will also ensure
that commanders fully understand the process of submitting IGSA
partnership concepts for approval.
Externally, the Army will host a public-facing webpage to convey
partnership information to the general public, as well as to the Army
Commands. In addition, the Army will participate in public forums with
the Association of Defense Communities, Association of United States
Army, Society of American Military Engineers and others to engage with
the communities and States that are interested in partnering with us.
The Army will continue to assist commands with their Army-Community
partnering meetings, identification of partnership opportunities,
concept development and agreement consummation. These engagements
provide valuable insight and lessons learned which help us to refine
the partnership program and ensure it remains meaningful for all Army
Commands.
d) The MILCON projects requested in the FY16 Presidents' Budget
request are neutral with respect to pending force structure decisions
associated with end-strength reductions and will continue to be
required regardless of the final force structure decisions made as
informed by the Supplemental Programmatic Environmental Assessment
e) The Army prioritization process for fiscal year 2016 projects is
the same process used for all projects in the Future Year Defense
Program.
To facilitate an objective assessment of the MILCON programming
process the MILCON Integrated Programming Team (IPT) was established.
This body consists of representatives from across the Army Staff and
the Reserve Components along with subject matter experts on critical
project related issues. The MILCON IPT acts under a charter which
grants it formal recognition as an official Intra-Army Committee by the
Administrative Assistant to the Secretary of the Army. The factors used
in the prioritization process are aligned with the Army's Facility
Investment Strategy (FIS).
On an annual basis the MILCON IPT develops an integrated,
prioritized 1-N (order of merit) list for MILCON projects. This list
includes the following appropriations: MCA, MCNG, MCAR and AFHC. The
factors that are considered in the project's ranking are: Existing
facility condition and functionality (capability of the facility to
meet its mission) from the ISR (Installation Status Report);
Demolition/disposal/facility reduction; Facility shortfall versus
requirement from RPLANS (Real Property Planning and Analysis System);
Army Focus Facilities--facility types identified for expeditious buyout
of deficits; and Command priority
For projects in the first two years of the FYDP, the MILCON IPT
conducted a comprehensive risk analysis to ensure those projects will
be executable in the near term.
The MILCON IPT then met to deliberate on every project to ensure
Congressional language, OSD, or Army leadership adjustments and
priorities, and supplemental or clarifying information are considered.
The MILCON IPT made appropriate adjustments to the prioritization of
the project. Finally, the MILCON IPT program recommendation went
through a vetting process consisting of a series of briefs culminating
in program approval by the Under Secretary of the Army (USA) and Vice
Chief of Staff of the Army (VCSA) level.
Mr. Wittman. The Army has again proposed to defer investments in
facilities sustainment, budgeting across the services at 80% of the
model, on average, versus the recommended 90%.
a) Why did the Army elect to take risk in the sustainment accounts
versus more risk in restoration and modernization and recapitalization
activities?
b) Can you explain the long-term effect of a delay in funding the
facility sustainment account?
c) Can you quantify the current backlog of facility sustainment,
restoration, and modernization requirements across the Army?
Secretary Hammack. The Army continues to take risk in Facility
Sustainment, Restoration and Modernization (FSRM). The Army's priority
is to maintain Unit and Soldier readiness. With the budget caps under
current law, the Army can only afford to fund sustainment at 80%
(increase of 10% from FY15) of the Facility Sustainment Model. The
Restoration and Modernization funding request represents 67% of our
critical requirement.
Long-term effects associated with deferring facility SRM varies
based on a number of factors, including facility type, materials,
geographical location, age, and use. Over time, deferred sustainment
causes a more rapid decline in facility life-spans and increases R&M
and MILCON requirements. Further reductions in SRM will negatively
impact operational readiness, training, and Soldier well-being, by
increasing facility maintenance backlogs, steepening facility
degradation rates, and increasing facility component failures.
The Army has a $3B sustainment maintenance backlog. This equates to
an estimated 5520 major work orders. The Army has made significant
strides in reducing the routine demand maintenance order backlog since
FY13 when sequestration caused the deferral of over 100,000 routine
demand maintenance orders per month.
Mr. Wittman. The infrastructure investment accounts have taken a
large portion of risk the last several years under constrained budgets.
a) Within the President's Budget in fiscal year 2016, what level of
risk has your Service taken in infrastructure?
b) Do you have any examples of failed or failing infrastructure
based on the risks taken under sequestration and the Bipartisan Budget
Agreement?
c) Can you discuss how you are leveraging privatization efforts,
public-private partnerships, or other innovative authorities to
mitigate the risk in infrastructure investments and achieve financial
savings while improving the quality of infrastructure or services?
Secretary Ballentine. a) We assess our infrastructure investment
risk as moderate. In our previous budget requests, the Air Force
attempted to strike the balance between a ready force for today with a
modern force for tomorrow under constrained budget levels. To help
achieve that balance, the Air Force elected to accept risk in
installation support, military construction (MILCON) and facilities
sustainment. These reductions were critical to maintain adequate
resourcing across the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP) for some of
the Air Force's unique capabilities. However, in the FY 2016 request,
the Air Force begins to reduce the impacts of that risk by increasing
funding for installations in all three of the areas noted above.
b) The Cape Canaveral Range Communications Facility that we are
seeking MILCON funding for in the FY 2016 request is a perfect example
of the risks in infrastructure the Air Force was required to take under
sequestration and the Bipartisan Budget Agreement. The original 1950's
vintage facility has had long standing leak problems that were made
obvious during Tropical Storm Fay in 2008 when the building experienced
severe flooding. This project has been the Air Force's number one
current mission space infrastructure MILCON requirement since 2013 but
has been unable to be funded under the constrained budget levels
previously mentioned.
c) The Air Force is committed to making every dollar count. As
such, the success of money and time-saving innovations are critical to
the Air Force's ability to operate in this fiscally constrained
environment. Budgetary constraints are motivating our Department of
Defense, our installations and community partners to re-evaluate the
way we do business and seek alternatives to the status quo for methods
to support our missions and maintain quality of life programs for our
Airmen and their family members. The Air Force can achieve these goals
by exploring partnership opportunities with stakeholders that include
local cities/counties/states, utility companies, universities, and
private sector property managers, developers and financiers. There are
now 48 installations in the AF Community Partnership Program who with
their community partners have identified over 1,000 initiatives across
the spectrum of installation services and mission support; many of
these initiatives are undergoing further refinement and development
with potential application Air Force-wide. Initiatives identified to
date include: agreements with communities to operate waste water
treatment plants; medical, security, emergency response and civil works
training; refuse management; grounds or pavements maintenance;
construction/maintenance of ball fields; operation of Airmen support
services such as libraries, golf courses and youth programs; and
airfield operations and maintenance services. There has been much said
regarding Section 351 (10 USC 2679) and how his new authority will
facilitate our Department of Defense, our Air Force and the other
Services to enter into intergovernmental support agreements with local
governments. It will, since this authority will enable partners to
provide, receive or share installation support services. However, there
are many existing authorities that enable us to innovatively partner
now to include the areas of enhanced use leasing, utility privatization
and energy initiatives; Federal Acquisition Regulations and financial
parameters. We want to highlight that the Air Force is committed to
working with the appropriate DOD offices, the other Services and the
Small Business Administration to ensure it addresses small business
concerns consistently. This includes the effects upon small business
prior to making a secretarial determination and working with local
communities to mitigate impacts when feasible. More and more you are
going to hear how the Air Force is committed to innovate and partner to
achieve our mission and Airmen support goals and objectives.
Mr. Wittman. The term ``energy security'' is defined by the QDR as
having ``assured access to reliable supplies of energy and the ability
to protect and deliver sufficient energy to meet operational needs.''
a) How is the Air Force developing renewable energy projects on its
installations that are compatible with this goal, and providing
redundant power in the event of a failure of the public grid?
b) How is the Air Force doing on the advanced metering program? Not
just in regards to the installation of the meters, but also the
supporting infrastructure necessary to collect the data and use it to
help manage the installation energy program?
Secretary Ballentine. a) Traditionally, the Air Force has ensured
all critical operational power needs through use of emergency
generators and emergency backup battery systems if commercial power
fails. Efforts to develop renewable energy projects on Air Force
installations have historically been driven by economics using third-
party financing mechanisms, and not mission requirements or energy/
mission security. The Air Force is looking beyond financial
considerations and accepting in-kind considerations that improve its
energy security posture without increases in the rate it pays for
electricity, while still pursuing a third-party financing strategy.
This third-party approach uses Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) and
Enhanced Use Leases (EULs) to develop renewable energy projects; both
are accompanied by either financial benefits or in-kind considerations.
A recent example of a third party approach that improves Air Force
energy security is the Phase II solar photovoltaic project at Nellis
AFB, NV. Under the agreement, the installation will purchase the
electricity at the tariff rate (i.e., no discounted rate) in favor of
an in-kind benefit from the Phase II land lease. Specifically, this in-
kind consideration is a $10 million substation and associated feeder
lines, providing system redundancy. Under this set up, the electricity
generated by the PV system will flow through the installation before it
goes to the commercial grid.
b) Due to financial constraints and technical issues, the Air Force
was unable to achieve the 2012 target set by 42 USC Sec. 8253 for the
installation of advanced metering systems. The Air Force has developed
a Meter Data Management Plan and intends to invest $42 million through
FY2020 to ensure cyber-secure advanced meter reading systems (AMRS) are
installed at its highest consumption installations. This plan puts the
Air Force on track to capture 60% of the Air Force's total energy
consumption by the end of FY2020. After reaching the 60% milestone, the
Air Force will conduct a business case analysis to determine whether it
is cost effective to deploy additional advanced metering systems.
Mr. Wittman. According to the EIC report, implementing EIC actions
will not reduce the operational force structure or military
capabilities in Europe, only excess infrastructure. Please provide
additional information on how losing the fuel capacity and ramp space
at RAF Mildenhall in the United Kingdom does not reduce military
capability in Europe.
Secretary Ballentine. Military capability in Europe was preserved
by consolidating missions at installations that have excess
infrastructure. For example, the Air Force will not compromise any
military capability by relocating the Special Operations and tanker
units from RAF Mildenhall to Spangdahlem AB and Ramstein AB in Germany.
By taking advantage of the excess infrastructure (fuel, ramp space,
etc) at Spangdahlem and Ramstein, we can divest the costly and
unnecessary infrastructure at Mildenhall. It should also be noted that
our EIC analysis also accounted for the infrastructure requirements
necessary to support current Operational Plans and anticipated
contingency operations.
Fuel storage and ramp space requirements being met by RAF
Mildenhall today will be met by the redeployment of units to
Spangdahlem AB (CV-22 and MC-130J) and Ramstein AB (KC-135 tankers) in
Germany.
Mr. Wittman. The Air Force has again proposed to defer investments
in facilities sustainment, budgeting across the services at 80% of the
model, on average, versus the recommended 90%.
a) Why did the Air Force elect to take risk in the sustainment
accounts versus more risk in restoration and modernization and
recapitalization activities?
b) Can you explain the long-term effect of a delay in funding the
facility sustainment account?
c) Can you quantify the current backlog of facility sustainment,
restoration, and modernization requirements across the Air Force?
Secretary Ballentine. a) We are not deferring investment in
Facility Sustainment. We continue to fund Facility Sustainment at 80%
of the OSD Facility Sustainment model. With our asset management
principles, we can sustain this level of investment indefinitely.
b) We use asset management principles to make more effective use of
existing resources, thereby reducing facility risk. This requires
improved asset visibility. Based on an increasingly fiscally
constrained environment, the FY 2016 budget focuses on ensuring
investment in the most critical facility requirements to support Air
Force priorities, while continuing to enable streamlining of business
operations and enhancing operational efficiencies. The Air Force will
fund Facilities Sustainment at 80 percent of the calculated OSD
Facilities Sustainment Model (FSM) to continue driving efficiencies
while ensuring the proper level of support. Centralization and
prioritization of replacement and repair projects using Asset
Management tools will ensure investment in the most critical facility
requirements.
c) The Air Force's calculated backlog is $11.1B.
Mr. Wittman. The infrastructure investment accounts have taken a
large portion of risk the last several years under constrained budgets.
a) Within the President's Budget in fiscal year 2016, what level of
risk has your Service taken in infrastructure?
b) Do you have any examples of failed or failing infrastructure
based on the risks taken under sequestration and the Bipartisan Budget
Agreement?
c) Can you discuss how you are leveraging privatization efforts,
public-private partnerships, or other innovative authorities to
mitigate the risk in infrastructure investments and achieve financial
savings while improving the quality of infrastructure or services?
Secretary McGinn. A) Department of Navy (DON) installations provide
the backbone of support for our maritime forces, enabling their forward
presence and providing our training ranges and care for Sailors,
Marines and their families. However, the Department is taking risk in
our shore infrastructure in support of operational readiness. One
example of this risk is our facilities sustainment levels. The
President's FY16 budget funds the Marine Corps at 81% and the Navy at
84% of the Department of Defense facilities sustainment model. The OSD
guidance is to fund 90% of the requirement. We are aware that
underfunding facilities sustainment increases the rate of degradation
of our shore infrastructure, which leads to more costly repair,
restoration and new construction in the future.
B) The fiscal challenges we face today will be exacerbated and
significant challenges will be forced on all Services if FY16
sequestration reductions are implemented. We continue to evaluate long-
term impacts of sequestration. Although the Marine Corps has made
significant progress over the last 8 years in replacing old and
unsatisfactory buildings, delayed or canceled military construction
projects will have long term impacts on the future operating budget,
force posture, and the overall welfare of our Marines. The Navy has
been compelled to reduce funding in shore readiness since FY 2013, and
as a result, many Navy shore facilities are degrading. At sequestration
levels, this risk will be exacerbated and the condition of our shore
infrastructure, including piers, runaways, and mission-critical
facilities, will further erode. Specific examples of recent failures
include:

China Lake Airfield. Deferral of major asphalt overlays
caused all 3 runways to deteriorate into a compromised state of
readiness simultaneously. In early 2014, pieces of the crumbling runway
caused damage to an F/A-18F.

PAX River Airfield. A SRM project had to be phased due to
limited availability of funds resulting in delayed restoration and
increased operational risk. As a result of deteriorated conditions, the
right door and the external flap of the engine exhaust nozzle on a BF-5
aircraft was damaged.

Rota Communications Facility. Due to funding shortfalls,
the Navy was unable to perform required repairs to the facility. In
early 2015, the facility suffered extensive flooding due to heavy rain.
Flooding compromised multiple spaces, with some water entering through
the foundation walls. This resulted in significant mold, and
accelerated foundation/structural degradation which could have been
avoided if repairs had been accomplished in a timely manner.
If sequestration continues, examples of potential future DON
impacts include:

Lack of airfield maintenance will cause foreign object
debris (FOD) that could damage aircraft

Lack of pier maintenance could compromise Navy's ability
to resupply, maintain and deploy ships

Deferred sustainment of our training ranges impacts
warfighter training and readiness

Unresolved HVAC problems can lead to mold and health
issues in our barracks

Delaying roof repairs can lead to leaks that will
deteriorate the building structure and interior, making operational and
maintenance facilities unusable
The Department of Defense released an assessment of sequestration
impacts in an April 2014 report, ``Estimated Levels of Sequestration-
Level Funding,'' and we continue to review and refine this assessment
as conditions warrant.
C) We continue to look for ways to leverage private sector
investment and partner with our community to improve our infrastructure
and services ashore. Our public/private ventures continue to provide
quality family housing and the new Renewable Energy Program Office is
working with industry to establish cost-effective renewable energy
projects to improve our energy security. However, partnerships will not
offset the harmful effect of sequestration. A return to sequestration
in FY 2016 would necessitate a revisit and revision of the Defense
Strategic Guidance.
Mr. Wittman. a) The fiscal year 2016 military construction budget
for the Department of the Navy includes a number of investments in
energy-related construction projects on Navy and Marine Corps
installations. Can you explain how these projects either improve
mission effectiveness or demonstrate a return on investment that
supports their prioritization over other projects?
b) The Secretary of the Navy established energy goals that far
exceed the requirements for the other military services, including 50%
alternative energy ashore by 2020, 50% decrease in non-tactical vehicle
fossil fuel consumption by 2015. What is the impetus for these targets,
and why do you believe this is critical to national security?
Secretary McGinn. a) The Department's FY2016 budget requests
several utilities MILCON projects to increase our Energy Security
ashore and improve the mission effectiveness by providing installations
with reliable and resilient power. The Department of the Navy has
accepted risk in our Shore infrastructure in order to support
warfighting readiness and operations, and the condition and age of our
utility infrastructure is a special concern. These MILCON projects will
increase our Energy Security improving our ability to provide reliable
electrical power to critical infrastructure during normal operations as
well as during natural or manmade events. The projects are summarized
below:
P610, Electric Repairs Piers 2, 6, 7 and 11, NS Norfolk, VA
$44,254,000 The electrical conduit and cable systems on the double deck
piers have failed in many locations and continue to have outages caused
by storms. Without this project, system failures and expensive
recurring repairs will continue as well as significant life/safety
concerns for electricians and other personnel in the area will remain.
Each power failure results in the loss of shore power capability
requiring vessels to produce their own power.
P416, PMRF Power Grid Consolidation, PMRF Barking Sands, HI
$30,623,000 The project will consolidate separate electrical
distribution systems at Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) Barking
Sands. Without this project, sharing and distribution of loads as well
as renewable energy sources throughout the installation would not be
possible. Providing continuous and reliable electrical power is
essential for the mission of PMRF which is to provide Training, Tactics
Development, and Test & Evaluations for air, surface, and sub-surface
weapons systems and Advanced Technology Systems.
P614, Upgrade Waterfront Utilities, Norfolk Naval Shipyard, VA
$45,513,000 The electrical service in Dry Docks 2, 3, and 4 are
severely undersized, severely inefficient, and were constructed as
early as 1967. Upgrading the utility systems is imperative to
maintaining ship repair schedules. Several breaks and outages have
already occurred and interrupted ship repair schedules. The shipyard
will continue to lose man-hours to install and remove temporary utility
systems.
P715, UEM Interconnect STA C to Mamala, Joint Base Pearl Harbor-
Hickam, HI $6,335,000 The project will install an electrical
interconnection between former Naval Station Pearl Harbor and former
Hickam Air Force Base power grids, establish new interconnections of
high voltage circuits, modernize switch stations, and replace aging
infrastructure. The project will enable load sharing and optimized
power distribution across the Joint base, resulting in increased system
efficiency and reduced energy costs.
P670, ICS INFRASTRUCTURE, SUBASE Kings Bay, GA $8,099,000 Providing
continuous and reliable electrical power is essential at SUBASE Kings
Bay. This project improves electrical distribution reliability and
redundancy through the installation of programmable, digital protective
relays. Any unplanned electrical outages delays mission readiness and
increases fuel use and manpower requirements to produce onsite power.
Under contingency conditions where commercial power is curtailed, the
installation can't provide power in an emergency or reliable dispatch
power from the Central Control Center to all base loads. This project
also enables faster deployment of repair personnel in the event of a
water or thermal system malfunction, which will reduce commodity losses
and mission impacts.
b) The Navy and Marine Corps' strength is the ability to provide
presence; to be in the right place, not just at the right time, but all
the time. That takes energy. The Secretary's goals are focused on
delivering that presence and increasing our combat capability.
The goals drive improvements in the energy efficiency of our
weapons platforms that enable us to go further on a tank of gas or a
battery charge. That focus on efficiency will be even more important as
we deploy emerging weapons systems like the rail gun and directed
energy weapons that will rely on electricity generated by the same fuel
that powers a ship's engines. The goals promote fuel diversity to
improve operational flexibility and ensure that we remain interoperable
with the commercial logistics chain. And, they encourage energy
efficiency, load shedding, and the use of distributed generation at our
shipyards and other installations. The energy security and resiliency
of our installations is critical given the role they play in enabling
operations and readiness. Fulfilling the secretary's goals decreases
the chances that we will experience power outages, and enhances our
ability to recover in the event the grid does goes down.
Mr. Wittman. The Navy has again proposed to defer investments in
facilities sustainment, budgeting across the services at 84% of the
model, on average, versus the recommended 90%.
a) Why did the Navy elect to take risk in the sustainment accounts
versus more risk in restoration and modernization and recapitalization
activities?
b) Can you explain the long-term effect of a delay in funding the
facility sustainment account?
c) Can you quantify the current backlog of facility sustainment,
restoration, and modernization requirements across the Navy?
Secretary McGinn. A) Over the last several years, the Department
has taken risk in our shore infrastructure in order to support
operational readiness and capabilities. This risk includes both reduced
sustainment and deferral of many needed projects that restore and
modernize our facilities, ranges and support infrastructure ashore. Our
FY2016 budget requests funding to execute most critical projects to
enable the Department to support the three pillars upon which the 2014
Quadrennial Defense Review is based: protect the homeland, build
security globally; project power and win decisively.
B) We are aware that underfunding facilities sustainment increases
the rate of degradation of our shore infrastructure, which leads to
more costly repair, restoration and new construction in the future.
C) Deferred maintenance backlog for the Department of Navy is
$41.1B, which includes $38.66B based on the Commander Navy
Installations Command 2014 annual report and $2.45B based on the Marine
Corps Installations Command 2014 annual report.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. BORDALLO
Ms. Bordallo. I understand you have partially privatized the
lodging at Joint Base San Antonio where the Air Force is the operating
service branch. Since this is a joint base where combining operating
efficiencies is an important part of reducing costs, can you leverage
the privatized lodging program to include the Air Force, non-privatized
lodging? Would doing so extend the privatization benefit across the
entire installation, support the mission of joint basing and eliminate
the non-privatized lodging dependency on the Federal Government?
Mr. Conger. The Army, through their Privatization of Army Lodging
(PAL), had privatized 983 units on Fort Sam Houston prior to the
establishment of the Joint Base. It operates under the supported
component's contract but the function transferred to the Joint Base.
The Air Force has currently chosen not to exercise the authorities for
privatized lodging, but retain their lodging as a nonappropriated fund
(NAF) operation. There is not a plan to include the Air Force
facilities in the Army PAL inventory at this time.
Ms. Bordallo. I understand you have partially privatized the
lodging at Joint Base San Antonio where the Air Force is the operating
service branch. Since this is a joint base where combining operating
efficiencies is an important part of reducing costs, can you leverage
the privatized lodging program to include the Air Force, non-privatized
lodging? Would doing so extend the privatization benefit across the
entire installation, support the mission of joint basing and eliminate
the non-privatized lodging dependency on the Federal Government?
Secretary Ballentine. The Fort Sam Houston lodging facility was
included in the Privatized Army Lodging contract, prior to Joint
Basing. According to the Government Accountability Office (GAO), July
2010 Report to Congressional Committees on Defense Infrastructure
titled, ``Army's Privatized Lodging Program Could Benefit from More
Effective Planning'', the Army's decision to privatize lodging was
directly related to the poor condition of their facilities and the high
estimated cost to repair them. The Air Force has maintained a dedicated
Lodging Fund, separate from the Morale, Welfare and Recreation Fund,
managed by Air Force accounting and hospitality professionals since
1974. This allows the Air Force to sustain lodging facilities to mid-
level commercial lodging standards. Our Civil Engineers continue to
program adequate funding for sustainment, restoration and modernization
of facilities, resulting in lodging facilities AF-wide that are in
overall good condition. Looking forward, we've programmed additional
funds for recapitalization efforts at 15 properties over the next four
years.
The Air Force is very engaged in identifying opportunities to
increase efficiencies and effectiveness in Air Force Lodging. The
Army's privatized lodging is one model the Air Force is reviewing. We
continue to analyze their results, and that of other military lodging
and commercial hotel models to help identify areas for improvement.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BISHOP
Mr. Bishop. The Air Force's current Program of Record at Hill AFB,
Utah associated with Phase 2 of the Falcon Hill Enhanced Use Lease
(EUL) has the existing location for the Army's Defense Generator and
Rail Equipment Center (DGRC) being placed outside the Air Force's
Security Perimeter beginning as early as 2018, making the DGRC
completely isolated from the rest of Air Force property. This raises a
number of questions:
a) What is the Army's plan to construct or otherwise provide an
adequate security perimeter around the DGRC which meets DOD Force
Protection standards? Please provide cost estimates, and indicate
whether these costs are reflected in the Army's FYDP.
b) How many additional personnel billets will be required for the
Army to staff its own security perimeter and at what estimated cost?
c) Since the DGRC will no longer be within the Air Force Security
perimeter, it will no longer be receiving base support services such as
garbage and snow removal services from the 75th Air Base Wing. How will
the Army procure these needed services and at what estimated cost?
Secretary Hammack. DGRC is a DOD mission for which the Army is the
DOD executive agent. The DGRC mission is a tenant activity at Hill Air
Force Base, which is real property managed by the Air Force acting on
behalf of DOD. Support agreements outline what services are provided
between DOD components. The applicable support agreement in this case
includes the provision of security and base operations services by the
Air Force. The Army does not have any plans to make changes to security
perimeters, security personnel, or other base support services. These
matters are the responsibility of the installation host.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SHUSTER
Mr. Shuster. I am pleased to hear of your efforts to reduce the
Navy's energy footprint, as highlighted by its adoption of energy
efficient tubular LED (T-LED) on board ships. I understand that to
date, almost 13% of the Navy fleet has converted to T-LED lighting,
which has been successful and yielded energy and cost savings. In this
regard, can you please advise on the Navy's efforts to bring T-LED
lighting to shore on bases?
Secretary McGinn. The Navy believes strongly in the potential for
new technologies, including LED lighting, to improve lighting quality
and reduce energy and maintenance costs on our shore bases. In order to
enable our adoption of these technologies as quickly as possible, we
have expanded our use of Energy Savings Performance Contracts (ESPC).
These contracts allow contractors to identify and install, where
appropriate, technologies that provide energy savings and also share in
those savings. We expect LED's to be widely evaluated and used in these
contracts. We also intend to work with industry to address any
technical issues relating to the compatibility of existing fixtures
with T-LEDs. We hope that engagement will enable us to more broadly and
quickly adopt the technology.
Mr. Shuster. Given the energy and cost savings that have been
realized from T-LED lighting on ships, would you agree that the Navy
should consider revising the uniform facilities criteria (UFC) to allow
for the option of T-LED technology on bases?
Secretary McGinn. The existing Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC)
supports the installation of T-LED systems in new construction. The UFC
also supports the replacement of existing lighting systems with T-LED
systems (full fixture and tube replacement). In the case of
retrofitting non-LED fixtures with T-LED bulbs, we intend to work with
industry to address any technical issues relating to the compatibility
of existing fixtures with T-LEDs. We hope that engagement will enable
us to more broadly and quickly adopt the technology.

[all]
