- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-6] THE FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST: A VIEW FROM OUTSIDE EXPERTS: ALTERNATIVE BUDGETS AND STRATEGIC CHOICES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-6]

THE FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET
REQUEST: A VIEW FROM OUTSIDE
EXPERTS: ALTERNATIVE BUDGETS
AND STRATEGIC CHOICES

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

FEBRUARY 11, 2015

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-093                         WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado                   Georgia
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
PAUL COOK, California                GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             PETE AGUILAR, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Kari Bingen, Professional Staff Member
Michael Casey, Professional Staff Member
Aaron Falk, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Bensahel, Dr. Nora, Distinguished Scholar in Residence, School of
International Service, American University.....................     6
Crotty, Ryan, Fellow and Deputy Director for Defense Budget
Analysis, International Security Program, Center for Strategic
and International Studies......................................     7
Donnelly, Thomas, Resident Fellow and Co-Director of the Marilyn
Ware Center for Security Studies, American Enterprise Institute    10
Harrison, Todd, Senior Fellow, Defense Budget Studies, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments............................     4
Thomas, Jim, Vice President and Director of Studies, Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments............................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Bensahel, Dr. Nora...........................................    55
Crotty, Ryan.................................................    67
Donnelly, Thomas.............................................    90
Harrison, Todd...............................................    49
Thomas, Jim..................................................    79

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]

THE FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST: A VIEW FROM OUTSIDE EXPERTS:
ALTERNATIVE BUDGETS AND STRATEGIC CHOICES

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, February 11, 2015.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. Committee will come to order.
Our hearing today should help clarify some of the hard
choices we face for our country's security with the coming
budget cycle. We live in a time when fiscal problems and
mounting debt coincide with unprecedented national security
challenges in a volatile world.
Since the end of the Second World War, the U.S. has enjoyed
the freedom to act in our national interest anywhere on earth.
Few nations in history have been so privileged and few nations
have thrived so well.
But all of us should recognize that, depending on the
choices we make, we may be in the sunset of that era. The
National Defense Panel cautioned that since World War II, no
matter which parties control the White House and Congress,
America's global military capacity and commitment have been the
strategic foundation undergirding our global leadership. The
way we resource the Department of Defense [DOD] forms that
strategic foundation of our global leadership.
Today, experts from some of the leading think tanks in
Washington will present their views on the budget choices
facing us. All of them, I think, provide valuable insight into
some of the threats and choices and different futures which
this committee has been looking about.
All are here to present the difficult options before us,
and some of those difficult options range from the loss of
important manpower and equipment to military bases to
discarding strategic responsibilities.
Dr. Kissinger said in the Senate testimony earlier this
month that the United States has not faced a more diverse and
complex array of crises since the end of the Second World War.
Our task is to manage a difficult combination of external and
internal pressures on our defenses and be true to the heritage
which we have enjoyed.
I would yield at this point to the distinguished ranking
member, Mr. Smith, for any comments he would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think you have
succinctly described the challenge that we face. We have an
increasingly dangerous world, with national security threats
emerging in many different areas, from Russia to the Middle
East and North Africa, obviously the ongoing struggle against
ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant] in Syria and Iraq.
It is a dangerous world. It is, you know, not--just because
we have fewer troops deployed now that we are out of Iraq and
significantly drawn down in Afghanistan, you know, there is no
such thing as a peace dividend at this point. We are in the
exact opposite position, facing an array of complex threats
that are going to require, you know, both resources and
considerable creativity to figure out how best to confront.
At the same time, we are in a budget crisis. And if you
went back 4 years and looked at the Department of Defense's
projections, their FYDP [Future Years Defense Program], the 5-
year plan and then their 10-year plan, for what they expected
they were going to have to spend and what they have now, it is
substantially less, in large part because of the Budget Control
Act, but also because of, you know, government shutdowns and
CRs [continuing resolutions], and basically the significant
budget dispute here on Capitol Hill.
So more complex, challenging problems, less resources. That
is the challenge that we face.
And we will be very interested to hear from you all about
how best you think we should confront that, because, you know,
it is at times like that when you really need to get smart. It
is the famous quote, I think it was from Winston Churchill--I
will attribute it to him anyway--it is, ``Gentlemen, we are out
of money; now we have to think,'' and try to figure out how
best to use that money.
I will say just two final things about that. First of all,
we could help ourselves enormously if we got rid of
sequestration. I think there is a budget fight still to be had,
and the deficit is down significantly but it is still
substantial. The debt is still substantial.
We need to figure out a solution to that, to get a 10-year
plan going forward for the budget. But sequestration is just a
horrible place to do that.
And it is interesting to note that when sequestration was
passed, when the Budget Control Act was passed in 2011, the
goals that it set, it basically said that you had to achieve
$1.5 trillion in deficit savings over the course of the next 10
years--you have to come up with a plan for achieving that by
the end of 2011. We didn't, so sequestration became law.
We have, however, achieved far more than the amount of
savings that was called for in the Budget Control Act. But yet,
we are still stuck with sequestration.
Our number one is get rid of sequestration. But number two
is, if we are going to have to live with it, and even if we get
rid of sequestration, we still are going to have less money
than they thought we were going to have.
We are going to have to start making some choices about
programs, about personnel, about Guard and Reserve, about a
whole array of things within the defense budget. And
unfortunately, the default position to most Members of Congress
is to protect their own. You know, if you are thinking about
shutting down a weapons system, well, if it is made in my
district or located in my district then I am going to be
against it.
We are running up against the Guard and Reserve problem.
Nobody wants to reduce anything in terms of personnel costs
because of the political implications.
But if we have got the budget we have got, we have to make
some kind of choice. And I would submit that, for those of us
who serve on this committee, it is not our primary job to
protect everything in our own districts. It is our primary job
to protect the country.
I will give you a personal example. When I represented
Joint Base Lewis-McChord, they have a ROTC [Reserve Officers'
Training Corps] program out there--college students who come
out, like 3,000 in the summer, and, you know, it is some
business. And they wanted to move it to Kentucky, they being
the Department of the Army.
And, you know, the local people freaked out and everybody
wanted us to, you know, stop this, and they came to me and
said, ``This must be stopped.''
And I was like, ``Yes, if DOD thinks this is the best thing
to do then we will be okay at Lewis-McChord. There are other
things to do, and let's not get in the way of everything that
the, you know, Department of Defense wants to do for parochial
reasons, because if we do that we paralyze their ability to
make smart choices and adequately provide for the national
defense.''
And I know many past chairmen have been fond of quoting the
thing that is apparently down there on the front of our
committee, Article 1, Section 8. Article 1, Section 8 doesn't
say, ``Make sure that as much defense money as is humanly
possible comes into your district.'' That is not what it says.
And in times like this I think we need to be a little bit
wiser about how we make those choices.
So, look forward to hearing from you what you think those
choices ought to be, and if we don't like what the Pentagon is
offering, what are the alternative suggestions.
So with that, I yield back. Look forward to testimony.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Let me welcome each of the witnesses.
We start with Mr. Todd Harrison, with the Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments [CSBA], who, I understand
Mr. Harrison is the one who ran the exercise that all of the
organizations participated in.
Then Dr. Nora Bensahel, who is currently a distinguished
scholar at American University, but was with the Center for New
American Security [CNAS] when this exercise took place.
Mr. Ryan Crotty, with the Center for Strategic and
International Studies, CSIS; Mr. Jim Thomas, with Center for
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments; and finally, Mr. Thomas
Donnelly, with American Enterprise Institute [AEI], who used to
be a staff member of this committee and was the last one to get
his testimony in, I noticed, which may be a connection, I am
not--I don't know.
But we really do appreciate each of you not only being
here, but for putting the time, effort, and resources into
analyzing these different budget options that are before us.
And so with that, Mr. Harrison--and without objection, your
full written statements of all of you will be made part of the
record.
And, Mr. Harrison, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF TODD HARRISON, SENIOR FELLOW, DEFENSE BUDGET
STUDIES, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND BUDGETARY ASSESSMENTS

Mr. Harrison. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith,
members of the committee, I want to begin by thanking you for
the opportunity to testify today.
Approximately one year ago, CSBA convened a group of
scholars from four think tanks, represented here today on this
panel, and asked them to develop alternative approaches to
rebalance DOD's budget and capabilities in light of projected
security challenges and fiscal constraints. I should note that
the views and choices expressed through this exercise represent
those of the people who participated and should not be
construed as the institutional positions of their
organizations.
The purpose of our exercise was to foster a greater
appreciation for the difficult strategic choices imposed by the
Budget Control Act of 2011 [BCA]. The ground rules were that
each team could vary its defense strategy as it saw fit, using
the 2012 Defense Strategic Guidance as a starting point. The
teams used their own expertise to assess the future security
environment and associated risk, and they were free to modify
and reprioritize roles and missions for the military
accordingly.
The teams then used an online tool created by CSBA to
implement their strategy and capability choices. CSBA's
Strategic Choices Tool allows users to quickly add and cut
items from the current program of record using more than 800
pre-costed options. The tool allows the users to see the
resulting budget and force structure impacts in real time.
The tool, I should note, does not assess risk or make
judgments as to the sufficiency or wisdom of one's choices.
Such subjective assessments are better left to the experts
here.
We also limited the degree of choices available to the
teams to impose some political reality. For example, we limited
how quickly they could cut end strength in each of the
services. We also did not give the teams the ability to count
savings from additional efficiencies or compensation reform
beyond what was already included in the President's budget
request.
And we did this for two reasons. First, the purpose of the
exercise was to focus on the major strategic choices facing
DOD, and while we all agree the Department should always do
more to pursue efficiencies, efficiencies do not typically rise
to the level of a major strategic choice.
Second, the President's fiscal year 2014 budget request,
which served as the baseline for all adds and cuts in this
exercise, already assumed well over $200 billion in efficiency
savings and compensation reform. Since this was already built
into the baseline, the teams already had the benefit of these
savings and it would not be realistic to allow the teams to
assume even more savings on top of these. And it also made the
job harder for all of these guys.
Each of the teams was asked to rebalance the DOD budget
over 10 years, spanning fiscal year 2015 to 2024, under two
different sets of budget constraints. The first set of
constraints used the BCA budget caps currently in effect, and
the second set used a slightly higher level of funding, roughly
consistent with the President's fiscal year 2015 request.
Allowing the teams to vary their strategies and using two
sets of budget constraints for each team allowed us to discern
which choices were budget-driven and which were strategy-
driven.
For example, each of the teams made different choices with
respect to the Marine Corps force structure, which suggests
that these choices were dependent on the teams' strategies. In
other instances, such as the decision to retire Active
Component A-10s, all of the teams made the same choice, which
suggests this decision may be independent of strategy.
We also look for instances when individual teams made
different choices under the two levels of budget constraints.
For example, all of the teams made cuts to readiness funding
under the full BCA budget constraints; but when the budget
constraints were loosened, they changed their readiness cuts.
This suggests that cuts to readiness funding were budget-
driven.
Conversely, we found that each team made roughly the same
cuts to personnel levels, particularly civilian and support
contractors, in the two budget scenarios, which suggests that
these personnel cuts were not budget-driven.
Despite the budget constraints imposed, all of the teams
chose to make substantial investments in new capabilities, even
though these new investments required them to make larger
offsetting cuts in other areas. All of the teams, for example,
increased spending on space, cyber, and communications
capabilities. This suggests that the teams felt DOD's plans did
not adequately address the challenges the military is likely to
face in this area.
Much has changed in the security environment since this
exercise was conducted a year ago, but the long-term fiscal
constraints of the Budget Control Act remain the same. What our
exercise helps illuminate, and what my colleagues will speak to
in their testimony, are the core capabilities the military must
protect and, in some cases, increase investments in, regardless
of the budgetary constraints imposed.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harrison can be found in the
Appendix on page 49.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Bensahel.

STATEMENT OF DR. NORA BENSAHEL, DISTINGUISHED SCHOLAR IN
RESIDENCE, SCHOOL OF INTERNATIONAL SERVICE, AMERICAN UNIVERSITY

Dr. Bensahel. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith,
and distinguished members of the committee, thank you for
inviting me to testify in front of you today.
I participated in this exercise when I was employed at the
Center for a New American Security as the co-director of the
Responsible Defense Program. My co-director, retired Lieutenant
General Dave Barno, and I formed the CNAS team.
In the interest of time, let me quickly note the three most
important conclusions we took away from our participation in
the exercise.
First, DOD is not investing in the right things for the
future. As Todd mentioned, this exercise was not a budget-
cutting drill; it truly was about making strategic choices.
All four teams decided to rebalance the defense budget by
reducing spending on many current priorities and reinvesting
the newly freed funds into other parts of the defense budget.
For example, our team cut the planned defense budget over the
10-year period covered by the exercise by a total of $716
billion, far more than was required to meet the spending caps,
but added back $384 billion in new spending in the full Budget
Control Act scenario and added $509 billion back in the half
sequestration scenario.
This suggests that the planned DOD budget is overinvested
in some key areas and underinvested in others.
Second, it was virtually impossible to meet the budget caps
under the Budget Control Act without cutting civilian and
military personnel, readiness, or both. Personnel and readiness
simply consume so much of the defense budget that we were
unable to stay within the budget caps by cutting procurement,
force structure, armaments, and logistics alone. People and
force readiness had to be sacrificed in order to stay within
those caps.
We chose first to cut the number of civilians employed by
the Department of Defense and the military services by one-
third, which was the maximum we were allowed to do under the
exercise. Between 2001 and 2012, the number of DOD civilians
grew five times faster than the number of Active Duty military
personnel. In our view, military combat forces, the sharp end
of DOD's spear, needed to be preserved even at the cost of
deeply slashing civilian staff and overhead.
Yet even so, we were also driven to reduce the Active Duty
and Reserve end strength of all four military services. We cut
Active Duty end strength by a total of 127,000 personnel, with
most of those cuts coming from the Active Army.
And even yet, we still had to cut readiness in order to
meet the budgeting cap, even though we strongly resisted doing
so because readiness is expensive. We believe that the United
States has a responsibility to prepare its military forces as
thoroughly as possible for the missions that they are asked to
conduct, and sending untrained or inadequately prepared forces
into combat is dangerous and irresponsible. Yet, we had to make
the same difficult choice that the services have made in recent
years to cut those readiness funds.
Third and finally, defense reform is essential to free
resources for current and future capabilities--again, to invest
as much money as possible in the pointy end of the spear.
There are three key elements of a reform agenda that stood
out to us on our team. First, DOD must shed unneeded overhead,
civilians, and contractors for the reasons I mentioned above.
Second, another BRAC [Base Closure and Realignment] round
is needed. Reducing excess infrastructure would have been one
of our highest priorities if the tool had allowed us to do so.
The Army and the Air Force have each estimated that they have
around 20 percent excess capacity. It is unconscionable to
require these services to continue spending money on facilities
that they do not need while the budget caps require them to cut
end strength, training, and readiness, which puts American
troops at risk.
Third and finally, military compensation must be reformed.
This is a hard but necessary choice, because pay and benefits
and health care are eating an ever-larger share of the defense
budget.
The recent Military Compensation and Retirement Commission
report offers good recommendations on how to do so while
grandfathering all currently serving members of the military.
The commission has estimated that its proposals would save $15
billion a year.
That amount is certainly not enough to compensate for the
cuts required by the Budget Control Act, but if we had been
able to include around that level of savings in the exercise,
for example, which did not include an option for compensation
reform, we would have had to cut far fewer people and maintain
more readiness.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bensahel can be found in the
Appendix on page 55.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Crotty.

STATEMENT OF RYAN CROTTY, FELLOW AND DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR
DEFENSE BUDGET ANALYSIS, INTERNATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM, CENTER
FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Crotty. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you this morning.
The strategy and budget exercise that we are referencing
here today occurred almost exactly a year ago, and yet the
year--the world really already looks significantly different
than it did then. The volatile and complex security environment
already strains many of the choices that we made in this
exercise, which I think speaks directly to the challenge of
sequester-level budget, which is a loss of flexibility and a
limiting of options.
The U.S. security goals have not been reduced since the
2012 Defense Strategic Guidance, and yet, $120 billion has been
cut from that concurrent budget over the 3 years since. The
impact of these cuts is already in evidence, as the service
chiefs have already testified. And with the force as currently
constituted, continued sequester-level funding would shift the
impacts the force is currently experiencing in readiness,
trimmed programs, cut training, from just holding patterns to
entrenched problems.
So far during these budget cuts we have asked the military
to do more with less, and they have risen to that challenge.
But that is not sustainable over the long term.
In participating in this exercise it was clear that
sequestration forces you into decisions that you would not make
otherwise.
The CSIS team worked to tailor our cuts to the strategic
priorities that we derived from the 2012 Defense Strategic
Guidance: prioritizing homeland defense; Asia-Pacific
engagement, presence, and reassurance; and retaining
counterterrorism capabilities. We took as a guiding principle
that a smaller, ready force was preferable to one that
maintained force structure or added more new programs but is
less prepared to face the complex challenges we already face
today.
There was no way to implement the strategy without risk,
and we took our primary risks in the size of Active ground
forces. We hedged this risk with increases to the Guard and
Reserve, sought to facilitate reconstitution of a larger ground
force by having additional noncommissioned officers, junior
grade field officers, retained; better coordination of training
between Active and Reserve, and shifting of some roles and
missions into the Reserve Component.
We also cut the carrier force, but forward-stationed one in
the Pacific to maximize coverage. And we invested in smaller,
unconventional capabilities, including cheaper forward
presence; more intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance;
and special operations forces.
Under the sequester-level budget, the U.S. military will
remain the preeminent military in the world. However, we have
seen a shrinking of the breathing space that we have between
the capacity that the force has and the daily demand on those
forces. This limits the Pentagon's ability to react and adapt
to new challenges and take on the shaping and reassuring
activities that can help deter a future conflict.
The Pentagon is being forced to choose between the fights
today and the fight tomorrow. The reality is that today's
security challenges require capabilities for the full spectrum
of operations.
The 2016 budget process will be a critical one for national
security. We are reaching a turning point where the temporary
impacts of sequester-level budgets are going to more
permanently shape the force that we have going forward.
So hopefully today's testimonies will help the committee
better understand what a force looks like under those budget
constraints and inform the budget tradeoffs that will have to
be debated over the coming months.
Thank you for the opportunity, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crotty can be found in the
Appendix on page 67.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Thomas.

STATEMENT OF JIM THOMAS, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF
STUDIES, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND BUDGETARY ASSESSMENTS

Mr. Thomas. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, and members
of the committee, thank you very much for holding this hearing
today, and also for inviting all of us to testify. I will
provide a brief overview of CSBA's approach during last year's
strategic choices exercise.
We started, as well, with an assessment of the external
security environment and its implications for the types of
forces and capabilities we will need in the future. This
assessment, in essence, served as our filter or our lens for
determining our priorities as well as where we would take risk
regardless of spending levels.
As challenging as the prospect of continued spending caps
are for national defense, we face an even more worsening set of
challenges overseas: revisionist states like Russia, China, and
Iran; Islamist militant groups like ISIL; new nuclear powers,
all of whom are exploiting a host of new technologies that
confer the means to impede America's ability to project power
and meet its security commitments in the ways it traditionally
has done so.
The bottom line for us, as we assessed these challenges,
was that the future was going to present far tougher challenges
for our military than the post-Cold War era that we are
exiting. In particular, future operating environments will be
far more contested as adversaries exploit anti-access and area
denial [A2/AD] capabilities to devalue our traditional means of
power projection and achieving forward presence.
Thus, we saw an imperative to reshape DOD's portfolio of
forces and capabilities around three main objectives. First, we
sought to reshape the U.S. military to put more weight on
deterrence through the prospect of swift punishment and more
effective denial of our enemy's objectives in the first
instance, and at the same time, relatively less weight on
traditional compellence forces--that is, forces that we need to
serve eviction notices when our allies or friends abroad might
be invaded and we have to conduct a counterinvasion.
Second, consistent with this first objective, we sought to
maximize combat strike power and prioritize the most viable
options for projecting power and holding potential adversaries
at risk anywhere and anytime. We maintained the nuclear triad.
We placed a premium on conventional global surveillance and
strike forces, including submarines and low-signature, long-
range land- and sea-based surveillance and strike aircraft, and
made substantial increases in our stock of precision-guided
munitions. We sought to develop new ground-based strike
systems.
We prioritized unconventional power projection
capabilities, as well, including special operations forces and
cyber and electronic warfare capabilities. And we invested in
potential game-changers, like directed energy, electromagnetic
railgun, and high-power microwave weapons.
Second, we sought to judo through the A2/AD problem by
fielding our own air and sea denial forces and helping
frontline allies to do the same. So we built up stock of sea
mines, acquired new torpedoes, and developed new maritime
sensor arrays to detect enemy intruders in friendly maritime
space.
We pursued new air and missile defense systems, like the
Air-Launched Hit-to-Kill missile. And we made substantial
investments in decoys, deception measures, aircraft shelters,
rapid runway repair kits to improve the resilience of our
forward-based forces.
And lastly, we expanded our combat logistics fleet to
maintain robust naval strike power in distant theaters.
Making these investments would be difficult in any
circumstances, but the BCA caps made the shift even more
difficult. We took risks in traditional forces less suited for
operations in contested environments, including those most
dependent on close-in bases and those that have to mass in
order to be effective. This meant significant reductions in
legacy short-range combat aircraft and ground force capability.
We also had to make very deep cuts in civilians and
contractors. And with greatest reluctance, we were also unable
to avoid making cuts in near-term readiness funding and had the
most regret over this choice.
In closing, I urge Congress to develop a serious budget
proposal that properly funds defense while reshaping the U.S.
military for tomorrow's challenges.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thomas can be found in the
Appendix on page 79.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Donnelly.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS DONNELLY, RESIDENT FELLOW AND CO-DIRECTOR
OF THE MARILYN WARE CENTER FOR SECURITY STUDIES, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Donnelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Smith.
It is an honor for a former staff member to return to the
People's House and to be on this side of the witness table for
a change, so thank you very much for the invitation. I will try
to be brief.
I think it is important, though, to say that we tried--this
was a second run through this game for us, and we did not want
to repeat the lugubrious experience we had the first time. To
be constrained by the BCA budget levels or even the modified
levels that we used the second time around was, we felt, simply
to rearrange the deck chairs on the Titanic, that there was no
space for strategy when the budget choices were so constrained.
And I think Todd's observation that there was a whole lot
of commonality--another way to say that is there wasn't a
dime's worth of difference--between the BCA-constrained
programs that the four of us came up with is an important
takeaway from the exercise. At this level of budget, there
really isn't much chance for a strategy to operate.
Secondly, we also felt that we had to reject the
President's 2012 defense guidance because it would not, in our
judgment, achieve the national security goals that this country
has always strived to achieve and, most recently, annunciated
in the National Defense Panel. So we thought it was necessary
to return to a more traditional military strategy, because what
we wanted to do was to find out how far we had fallen into the
hole that we have built for ourselves over the past decade and
what it would cost to get back out of that hole.
That is the approach with which we approached this game.
And so, very kindly, Todd and his crew allowed us to play a
budget-unconstrained version, which we used to try to put a
price tag on what we thought it would take to return to a more
traditional military posture on the part of the United States.
And again, I won't go through that in detail. I would be
happy to respond to that in the question and answer session.
But I would say that we also refuse to sort of rule out
unpleasant forms of warfare--counterinsurgency and the like--in
unpopular theaters of war, such as the Middle East.
So we wanted to stick with a strategy that was consistent
with the long past and not invent a new America that divested
itself of traditional security interests. Rather, we wanted to
put a price tag on attempting to return to a more traditional
defense posture and to exercise a more traditional strategy--
one consistent with the strategies that have been consistent
from administration to administration, from changes of party
really since the end of World War II, but particularly since
the end of the Cold War.
As my colleagues have observed, it has been a year since we
ran the game and the world looks a little bit more dangerous
today than it did a year ago. We didn't fully understand how
firm a grip ISIS would have on western Iraq and eastern Syria,
or how serious the Russians were going to be about holding on
and expanding their grip on Eastern Europe either.
So if we were playing the game today, we would take the
same approach--and that would be not to worry so much about the
20-year future, but to try now to rebuild--to get to the point
where the investments that I think some of my colleagues were
more interested in could have a decisive effect.
We really felt that the critical time was now and that our
shortfalls in capacity and readiness were more strategically
important than shortfalls in capability. So we wanted to try to
repair what is not broken in order to survive, to live again,
to fight another day.
Just to give you a sense of what that meant to us, a couple
of things: First of all, we didn't just simply throw money at
everything. First of all, we understand that the rebuilding of
the force and taking advantage and rebuilding the industry and
the infrastructure that would sustain that force has to be
cognizant of the fact that these are institutions that have
been on a starvation diet for some time now and overworked.
We have built a plant, for example, that is capable of
producing maybe 300 F-35s a year, but so far we have only been
producing about 30 a year. So while the plant is there, the
workforce isn't there.
So when we were reinvesting, we tried to be cognizant of
how much money the Department could intelligently digest over
the 10-year period that we were talking about. So we didn't
think that just flipping the money switch was going to be an
adequate solution.
Nonetheless, over 10 years we calculated that the
difference between the BCA levels of spending and what we
thought might begin to reduce things to a manageable level of
risk was $780 billion. That is a lot of money.
By the same token, we were surprised to understand that not
even that level of further investment would restore the program
to what it was prior to the BCA. Let me repeat that. In other
words, we couldn't get back to where we were, in terms of what
the defense program was in 2011, 10 years from now even if we
added almost $800 billion to the defense program.
So that is a measure of how deep the hole is that we have
dug for ourselves.
Final metric: That level of spending--the budgets that we
imagined at the end of this reinvestment period would still be
less than 4 percent of projected GDP [gross domestic product].
And to the degree that the 4 percent of GDP figure means
anything other than a level of affordability, it means that
even this kind of reinvestment would still be below what
reasonable people imagine would be a sustainable level of
defense burden for the economy and our society.
So the big takeaway for me was, in order for us to restore
a traditional form of American leadership it is going to cost a
lot of money. It would still be affordable, but we can't get
there from here.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Donnelly can be found in the
Appendix on page 90.]
The Chairman. That wasn't very cheerful.
So in essence, four of the leading institutions in town
formed teams to look at how you would reprioritize the defense
budget. And as each of you, I think, has acknowledged, a fair
number of things have happened in the last 12 months--Crimea
and Ukraine, ISIS, these negotiations with Iran, North Korea
says it is testing various systems, the Chinese in waters close
in the Western Pacific are more aggressive.
My one question I would ask for each of the four teams is,
hold yourself accountable. Knowing what you know now has
happened over the last year, where did you mess up? What would
you do--what would be the one or two areas you would do
differently now than you did then based on these events that
have happened over the last year?
So, Dr. Bensahel, would you like to start?
Dr. Bensahel. Sure. An easy question.
The Chairman. Sorry.
Dr. Bensahel. I think the guiding principles that we used
during the exercise where the fundamental question is where do
you assign risk, right, because all of strategy is about
assigning risk. We made a calculation to assign more risk in
the short to medium term than in the longer term because of
some of the challenges, as Jim mentioned, because we saw some
very significant threats coming out on the horizon.
And therefore, we prioritized investments in advanced
military capabilities and research and development because of
the long lead times those involve.
I don't think we would have made very many fundamentally
different choices, given what we know now about what has
happened over the past year. The one area where I think we
might have made a different choice is we might not have cut
Active Duty Army end strength by quite as much as we did.
In the exercise we cut it down from the planned level of
490,000 to 420,000. I think we would maybe have made a
different choice to cut that only as far as about 450,000 to
hedge against some of those threats.
But we still would be changing the balance of the force
between the Active and Reserve, even in the Army, and still
trying to preserve as much money as we could for those long-
term investments, given our strategic principles that we used
to guide the exercise.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Crotty.
Mr. Crotty. So we actually tried to focus a little more on
the near term, and that was something that was borne out, and
yet still, I think we were underinvested in the kinds of
reassurance and low-end deterrence that actually has been shown
as something that we desperately need, whether it is in Europe
or in Asia.
And I think that that is something that can only be done
with more capacity. You need more people out there engaging
with partner and allies, having the flag, being available,
being close by, because I think that really provides a
reassurance that is required, especially at the lower end.
You know, we are very good at deterring at the high end,
and it is something that we will have to continue to invest in
to maintain that. But that has changed the level of the
conflict discourse, and that has not looked very good over the
past year.
So for us, so even having focused more on that near term, I
agree with Nora, it was primarily in some of those personnel
cuts that we made. We cut the Marines and I think we now
definitely regret that, particularly with their sort of more
unique capabilities as well as the requirements that are being
put on them and sort of the new normal environment. You know,
there is a lot that we need from them.
But also, I think--we did not say this specifically, but I
think that based on the 2012 defense review guidance, we would
have been pulling some of those Army units that we cut out of
Europe, and that immediately comes to mind as something that
might have been a dangerous decision.
So as you said, I think it immediately tells you that there
are significant choices that can change in just the course of a
year, how those will impact your future security.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Thomas.
Mr. Thomas. One of the things that really strikes me, Mr.
Chairman, as we look back over the past year has been this
growing trend in sub-conventional, creeping aggression, whether
it is little green men in Ukraine, or it is fishermen and the
use of paramilitary coast guards in the South China Sea or the
East China Sea, the use of the Quds force in the Middle East.
This looks like it is a growing trend.
And I don't think it is a question of, do we deal with
anti-access and area denial threats or we deal with creeping
aggression. What I see is really the confluence of the two, is
that anti-access and area denial capabilities are providing
umbrellas that make it easier for revisionist states to conduct
creeping aggression activities in their immediate regions.
Fundamentally, this is about the weakness of frontline
states. As we look around the periphery of Eurasia, from East
Asia to our friends and allies in the Middle East, to Europe
and countries in the Baltics and elsewhere, how do we
strengthen their capabilities and ability especially to deter
sub-conventional threats?
I think this--we need to place more emphasis on foreign
security assistance, and in particular, think if there are ways
that we can further expand or strengthen our unconventional
warfare capabilities for countering some of these threats. So I
think special operations have an incredibly important role to
play, and that would be one of the things I would want to look
at again.
ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance] is
another. I think what we are seeing on the global basis is
inadequate ISR capacity to deal with multiple crises
simultaneously.
And the last is we, as I mentioned earlier, we already have
regrets about readiness, and that cuts in readiness under BCA
caps are deleterious to our ability to deal with all of these
situations.
Thank you.
The Chairman. If I could interject for just a second, just
to remind members that tomorrow we have an informal roundtable
on exactly this topic. What would you call it? Creeping
aggression.
Unconventional, hybrid warfare--lots of names. But we need
to understand this better and see whether we have a--whether we
are able to deal with it. And we have outstanding folks to come
and visit with us about it tomorrow.
Mr. Donnelly, you kind of answered this, but I don't know
if you have some additional comments?
Mr. Donnelly. I have no regrets, Mr. Chairman. I think the
events of the last year really underscore our fundamental
approach, that the near-term crisis is so immediate and, taken
in the aggregate, it is a global crisis. There is no theater,
there is no domain of warfare, in which American strength isn't
being seriously called into question.
So again, it really sort of underscores two things to me:
that the crisis is now; and that the fundamental strategy that
was defined in 2012, however wise it may have seemed then, is
not responsive to current conditions.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. I guess the big question is where do we save
money, and a couple of you mentioned a few things, but if we
could just really emphasize again, you know, there is a laundry
list of things that the Pentagon has put out there--BRAC,
personnel cost savings, getting rid of the A-10, laying up
various Marine and Navy ships. Give me your three best ideas
for saving money that, you know, fit within the national
security challenge that we have.
Mr. Harrison. Sir, I would start by noting some of the
things that we took off the table are probably the place we
should actually start--compensation reform. We did allow base
closures in the exercise, but we made it realistic. Base
closures cost you a little money up front and then save you
money in the long run.
Every single team here chose to do base closures under both
budget scenarios, so I think that that is an important takeaway
from this exercise.
But ultimately, you know, having run two of these exercises
with this group of think tanks and dozens of exercises with
other groups, the common trend that I have found is that in
almost every single case, every team, the largest amount of
savings dollar-wise comes from personnel--military personnel,
Active and Reserve Component, and civilian personnel that work
for the DOD.
Mr. Smith. And specifically on those personnel savings,
there are a bunch of different areas. There is health care,
there is compensation, there is pensions, and then there is a
variety of different benefits--housing, commissaries. You know,
what makes the most sense and where do you get to the point
where you fear that you are risking the All-Volunteer Force,
the willingness of people to sign up?
Mr. Harrison. In the exercises it all came from cutting
head counts. But I will say in my own opinion, having, you
know, studied and written about this issue, I think what the
compensation commission came out with in their final report at
the end of last month--I think that they have got a sound
approach there.
It certainly, you know, could use some tweaks and
improvement by Congress, but their two main recommendations
that affect the DOD budget are to alter the current retirement
plan to add a 401(k)-like plan that would benefit, you know, 75
percent of people who leave without any retirement savings
while maintaining the defined benefit plan for people who serve
a full career and retire.
Mr. Smith. How does that save money?
Mr. Harrison. Well, so the commission's plan, using their
own numbers, once fully implemented it would save about $2
billion a year, which is not a lot from that one change, but it
basically saves money by DOD not having to set aside as much in
an accrual payment each year to the Military Retirement Trust
Fund, and taking some of those savings and reinvesting in a
defined contribution plan, like a 401(k), but banking the rest
of the savings.
The other main recommendation of the commission that saved
more money was a change to the health care system, and
allowing, you know, Active Duty dependents, reservists, and
retirees to do something they were calling TRICARE Choice,
where you would get a basic allowance for health care for
Active Duty dependents, for example, and they could buy into
commercial health insurance plans instead of remaining on the
military health care system. That change, when fully
implemented, according to their own estimates, would save a
little over $6 billion--almost $7 billion a year once it was
fully implemented.
Just those two changes alone in the Military Compensation
Commission report would save about $33 billion in aggregate
over the next 5 years, and more than that in every 5-year
period that comes after it. Thirty-three billion dollars is a
good amount of money. It does not get you all the way where you
have to be in terms of the Budget Control Act, but it certainly
would help.
Mr. Smith. Just one quick question, and anyone can take
this: weapons systems. Give me a reasonably expensive weapons
system that you think we don't need, that we could live with 8
carriers instead of 11, we don't need the new Ohio-class
submarine, you know, we can buy half as many F-35s, we, you
know--give me a major--because I think by some estimates, the
weapons systems that we are planning on building right now we
can't afford, barring for some unforeseen acquisition reform
miracle.
So something has got to go. What would you say should go?
Dr. Bensahel. I think that is exactly the right question to
ask, and the obvious answer to us when we ran through this
exercise is the F-35. That is the procurement program that is
eating the entire defense budget alive--particularly the Air
Force budget, but its costs are so high that it is crowding out
everything else in the procurement area, as well.
Mr. Smith. So it is possible to consider basically eating
at this point close to 20 years' worth of expenditures on the
F-35, and then simply relying on--I get my generations mixed up
here--third or fourth generation fighter planes?
Dr. Bensahel. No, we didn't recommend canceling the
program. F-35s are needed by the Air Force in the future. But
in particular, the Air Force doesn't need as many of them as it
says it needs.
The number that the Air Force originally came up with of
1,746 F-35s was derived by doing a one-for-one replacement with
the current fighter fleet. And so if the F-35 is supposed to
have and it does have all these additional capabilities, it is
not clear to me why the one-to-one number is the right force
structure for the Air Force, for example.
Again, because of the constraints of the exercise, on our
team we did also cut some Navy ships. We cut cruisers, we cut a
couple of destroyers, and we did cut an aircraft carrier,
although again, a lot of that was budget-driven more than
strategy-driven.
And we ended up cutting a lot of force structure in the
services, again, particularly in the Army, but because that
reflected our personnel cuts. It doesn't make any sense to try
to keep the force structure and the headquarters if you are
cutting the personnel.
So we did cut some brigade combat teams, some force
structure in the Marines; but again, that reflected our primary
decision because of the budget caps to cut the personnel, to
then shrink the force structure in proportion to that.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donnelly. I just think you need to have a larger
aperture when you start going down this road. Just suppose, for
example, you know, you are concerned because the F-35 is a huge
program. What sense does it make to have--if you are going to
cut the F-35s for the Navy, what sense does it make to have the
big-deck carriers?
Who wants a $5 billion, $7 billion carrier with a 30-year-
old airplane that can't go very far or carry very much on it?
It is not like the F-35 is, you know, a miracle weapon for the
carrier, but the carrier, without a better airplane on it,
doesn't make any sense.
So you have to take the force--likewise, why should the
Marines buy large-deck America-class amphibs, which was
designed for the F-35? The whole boat is designed to
accommodate the F-35.
Also, the force numbers are not necessarily capability
numbers; they are force generation numbers. You may have to
have 1,700 Air Force F-35s in order to generate a certain
number in a certain number of theaters. I mean, I don't know
that that RFTA [Reserve Forces Training Area] couldn't be
revisited, but again, if you are worried about covering all the
bases that we have to cover, you have to generate a force that
is there.
We haven't invented a capability for any platform to be in
two places at once. So the numbers make a certain bit of sense,
and if you just start taking them in the abstract, you are
going to end up doing, you know, exponential damage rather than
arithmetic damage. And the pieces of the force interact with
one another.
So this is what budget drills lead to that have second- and
third-order consequences that we see reflected in the headlines
every day but we don't really take into account when we go
through these sort of budget drills.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
I used up quite a bit of time here. I want to yield back.
The Chairman. So do budgets. It is not just budget drills
that have second-order effects; real budgets do too.
Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the panel for all the work you have
done to help enlighten us to make some very hard and difficult
decisions forthcoming.
I wanted to ask you that if we continue to go down this
road of policing the world, and certain--there is a need with
these attacks from ISIS and groups like that. And yet, we here
in Congress are having to make some very difficult budget cuts
not just as it relates to the military, but to other programs
for the American citizen.
I think that is why the--today, with your testimony, is
very important, because again, we will be making these
decisions in the next few months.
I somewhat get perplexed with the fact that--I will use for
an example Afghanistan. John Sopko, the Inspector General for
Afghan Reconstruction, has testified before subcommittees and a
full committee--Oversight--that so much of the money we are
spending in Afghanistan is a waste. It ends up in the hands of
the Taliban to buy weapons to kill Americans, or the Taliban
decides that a road that we built, they want to blow it up.
I know this wasn't part of your responsibility, but I gotta
get to a point. If we continue to do this policing work around
the world, and then we decide that, yes, we fought, our men
have died and given their life and limbs, but we are going to
still stay there and help them rebuild their country. The
Bilateral Security Agreement with Afghanistan is 10 more years
at an average of anywhere from $25 million to $40 million. I
mean, it is just on and on and on.
Then you testify here today that we are not going to have
the strong military that we need because, again, money is going
to be part of the issue. Yes, there is waste. You acknowledge
that, in the Air Force and the Army, I think; 20 percent, you
said maybe, was excess. There are things we can do and should
do.
But I want to get to the point now of the question. In your
analysis and your personal opinion, is there not going to be a
time that the Congress pass a war tax to pay for what we have
and what we need to keep this country militarily strong?
Because I just don't think we can continue to go down this
road, quite frankly, without a collapse.
So my point is why the Congress does not have a debate--and
maybe we will have a debate--on the fact that maybe we need to
debate a war tax, or some type of taxation to make sure that we
are not cheating our defenses from being strong enough to
protect this country.
Do you believe sincerely at some point in time--and maybe
this is a little bit off your responsibility, but I would like
to know your personal opinion--that if we continue to go down
this road, we cannot keep doing business as we are doing it now
because we are not paying for it? It just is ongoing and
ongoing to a point that we won't have any more money.
Is it fair to say that Congress should have this kind of
debate so we can answer some of the--have some solutions for
some of the areas that you have shared with us today that are
going to be problem areas in the days to come?
Mr. Harrison. I would just respond that, you know, I fully
agree that we as a nation need to have a debate on what it is
we want our military to be able to do. And that is where we
began the exercises, by each of these teams having that debate
amongst themselves on exactly what are the right roles and
missions for the military now and into the future.
Once we have that debate then we need to do the hard work
of figuring out what it is we need in our military, in terms of
capability, capacity, and readiness, in order to execute those
roles and missions that have been assigned to the military. And
once we know what resources would then be required, then as a
nation we need to be willing to pay for it.
And if that means additional revenues by, you know, some
means, then so be it. But that is the debate that we should be
having.
Mr. Thomas. Congressman, if I could just add to Harrison's
remarks, I think in addition to a national debate about what we
need our military to do, I think we also need a much greater
dialogue with our allies and partners overseas. I think it is
not just a question of what do the American people pay, but
what more can our allies be doing in various places.
Mr. Donnelly. I will be very brief, if I may. If the
question is about how to finance military power and the conduct
of war, historically these are the reasons that countries have
national banks and borrow money--not to support current
entitlements, not to pay for current, you know, recurring
domestic expenditures.
The British national debt during the Napoleonic Wars was
something like 250 percent of GDP per year. Yet, because that
was a public good, the markets of Europe were willing to
finance that and eventually the British retired that debt.
We are doing precisely the opposite right now.
Mr. Jones. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Appreciate the gentleman.
I realize it is hard with five witnesses to stay within 5
minutes, but if members can keep their questions briefer then
we might have a chance.
Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. I have no questions at this time, Mr.
Chairman.
But thank you all very much for participating in this
incredibly important discussion.
The Chairman. Ms. Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In reading your testimony, I wondered if you thought there
was any fat in the defense budget.
Mr. Donnelly. There are things that I wouldn't necessarily
buy. I am not sure I would call them ``fat''; I don't think
that is really a useful----
Ms. Speier. What would they be?
Mr. Donnelly. There were things I would reinvest in, and
not invest in at the moment. I think, for example, although the
littoral combat ship [LCS] is a great littoral combat ship, it
is not a very good frigate.
So the problem is not the ship, per se. It doesn't make it
a ``fat'' ship, although, unfortunately, the Navy made it way--
--
Ms. Speier. Too heavy.
Mr. Donnelly. Yes. Yes, okay, so but the problem is a bad
analysis of the mission and the need or a changing
international environment. There is nothing wrong with the
program, per se, or the technologies, per se; it is just too
small to be a frigate.
So it is the wrong weapon. It is not a--you know, it is not
that this was fat or government waste, fraud, and abuse.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
The National Defense Panel, with members appointed by this
very committee, concluded that, ``A recapitalization of the
nuclear triad under current budget constraints is,
`unaffordable.' '' Yet the President's budget is asking us to
overhaul our arsenal, costing $1 trillion over the next 30
years--money that could be spent on dozens of other national
security concerns.
Before we move forward with this overhaul, do we need to
reevaluate our assumptions and goals of our nuclear deterrent?
I would like to know your thoughts on how we juxtapose that
with the budget.
Mr. Harrison, why don't you start?
Mr. Harrison. As a budget analyst, I always cringe at the
term ``affordability'' because, you know, the things that we
are talking about here today, some of them are very expensive,
no doubt, but affordability is a choice, right? It is a matter
of whether or not we are willing to make the resources
available.
I think when I look at the nuclear triad my conclusion is
that it is not yet ripe for a decision. If you look at the $1
trillion projection, it is over 30 years, you know, we will
likely spend $15 trillion to $20 trillion on defense over that
same time period. So it is a rather small part of our overall
force and expenditures.
And many of the platforms included in the nuclear triad
that we are going to need to recapitalize are dual-use, and
especially many of the supporting capabilities, in terms of
communication networks, tankers for the aircraft. Many of these
things we would fund anyway even if we had new nuclear weapons
in our arsenal.
I think you get to a good point, though, of do we need to
rethink the triad? Do we need to rethink the way that we
modernize it and the type of capabilities that we have in
there? I think absolutely we need to be looking at it, and the
time to look at it is between now and the end of the decade,
and then we can start making some smart decisions.
The one thing that concerns me most about the
recapitalization of the nuclear triad is we have put off some
of these recapitalization efforts so that now many of these
programs, the peak in funding are starting to overlap in the
2020s, in the next decade. And it is not just nuclear forces
either; if you look at the rest of our acquisition portfolio,
we have a number of major programs where their peak levels of
funding are projected to occur at about the same time in the
2020s.
If you just look at the Air Force's aircraft procurement
plan, their long-term plans--and I don't mean to pick on the
Air Force here, but the F-35A will be in full-rate production;
the next-generation, LRSB [Long Range Strike Bomber], will be
ramping up to full-rate production; the KC-46A tanker aircraft
will be at full-rate production; and they would like to buy a
new trainer aircraft, ramping up to full-rate production.
Ms. Speier. Okay. Mr. Harrison, I am going to have to cut
you off because I am running out of time, want to get one more
question. But thank you very much.
And thank you all for your participation. I think this is
an extraordinary exercise, and I would love to see us as
members of this committee attempt to do what you have just
done. It would be quite a challenge.
I would like to focus one last--30 seconds on the F-35. And
I am more concerned than anything else on the cost of
maintenance. And we do not factor that in when we built these
sophisticated weaponry.
And I understand it, it is going to be about $19.9 billion
a year, and $1 trillion over the lifetime of the program just
for maintenance. And maybe you could all respond to that in
writing, because my time is expired.
The Chairman. Thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Not trying to flatter you, but I believe all of you are
brilliant analysts. But you don't feed your families because
you think lofty thoughts; you feed them because you are able to
communicate well.
And by and large, we are failing. This committee is
failing; anyone related to national defense is failing in
communicating the problem we have to our policymakers and to
the public.
The real essence, when it comes to national defense
preparation, has nothing to do with intent, because intent can
change within 24 hours. We really look at the curve lines for
strategy, capacity, and capability.
As I see it, the problem we have is the curve lines for
those who may want to do us harm today or in the future are
dramatically going up, and ours are dramatically going down.
The primary driver of that, in my estimation, is sequestration
right now.
And yet, when we talk about sequestration, everybody on
this committee would be against it but we would all have a
caveat. Some would say, ``But I didn't vote for it.'' Okay. I
am in that group. Others would say, ``But we can't deal with it
unless we raise taxes.'' Some would say unless we remove it
from everything else, unless we have a BRAC. You know the
drill.
Taking all of that aside, using your best communication
skills not with defense speak--not A2/AD defenses, or
readiness, or any of those things that you have--what is the
best message that we can use to communicate with other
policymakers who might be sitting in Ways and Means [Committee]
right now, or who may be individuals across the country, to
tell them the dangers to this country if these curve lines
continue the way they are and we can't change them? What would
you say?
Mr. Thomas. Congressman, I guess I would start by talking
about not just the security that we have today in this country,
but what is the security for our kids. That is something that
affects every Member of Congress and it affects every one of
us.
What kind of country are we leaving in the future? And as
you point to these trend lines, there is a perception of
American weakness right now in the world and that perception, I
think, is growing.
And how we overcome it I think really involves two things.
One is we have to get our fiscal house in order.
As Tom was talking earlier, in terms of being able to tap
financial markets, our ability as a nation to go into financial
markets and get whatever the heck we need, whether it is in
World War II or it is in the next World War III, God forbid,
rests on our fiscal foundation. How secure are we as a
potential investment?
And so that is critical. Fiscal rectitude is the foundation
for everything else.
And so I think that we would be very open to, whether it is
entitlement reform, revenue increases----
Mr. Forbes. But you are covering the solutions. Tell me
what happens if we continue the curve lines.
Any of you guys.
Mr. Donnelly. Sir, I mean, we will lose wars, our people in
uniform will die, and we as a civilian society will have broken
faith with the very small number of Americans who go in harm's
way to defend us. It is really that simple.
You know, the chiefs talk about readiness statistics and
all the rest of that stuff, which abstracts it to one level,
but it--you know, that is what it comes down to.
Mr. Forbes. Anybody else?
Mr. Crotty. To me, you know, the strength of American power
is on our economic prosperity, and that prosperity is based on
a rules-based international order that is undergirded by our
involvement in the global security. And I think that that is
the biggest argument, to me, about why we need what we have.
Mr. Forbes. Anybody else?
Dr. Bensahel. I would add to that that, particularly for
the American public, we need to emphasize that the future of
wars do not necessarily look like Afghanistan and Iraq. I think
that for most people who don't follow these issues closely,
that is what war looks like and that is what the future looks
like, and they don't want a part of that.
And so I think distinguishing what the future environment
is like, future threats, and making clear that they do not
always require large-scale deployments of combat forces in
irregular environments is very important. I think the American
public responds to the need for American leadership in the
world. I think that resonates quite well.
And I also think--I hate to come back to this, but
reforming the defense budget resonates. You know, my mother
used to ask me, ``Why can't the United States defend itself on
$500 billion a year?''
It is an excellent question. If we started the budget from
zero we would probably allocate things very differently.
But making a public case about how we spend that money and
why those dollars are needed to protect U.S. interests around
the world, to continue playing a leadership role, and to say
that not everything looks like the wars of the past 13 years is
an important step.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony today.
You know, I have been sort of in and out. We are dealing
with the education markup, and sequestration is haunting that
process, which is, again, I think some of the more thoughtful
people who care about our ability to advance technological
capability in defense understand that education is also a
priority that really plays into national defense, as well.
And that sort of, I think, goes right back to the question
of, you know, when sometimes sequestration is talked about it
is sort of, like, viewed as this, you know, the Ten
Commandments that we are all sort of trapped under. And, you
know, I was around when the 2011 Budget Control Act was passed,
and when that was incorporated into the Budget Control Act,
number one, you know debt-to-GDP was closer to 10 percent--or
deficit spending-to-GDP was closer to 10 percent; today we are
under 3 percent.
And secondly, the history--the forensics of sequestration
really go back to the 1980s. I mean, this language was almost
done verbatim from the Gramm-Rudman sequestration.
And Phil Gramm, the grandfather, you know, the inventor of
sequestration, he gave a speech in 2011 where, you know, he
reminded Congress that it was never the objective of Gramm-
Rudman to trigger sequester; the objective of Gramm-Rudman was
to have the threat of sequester force compromise and action.
So in other words, I mean, the fact is we are not helpless
here. I mean, we can turn off those cuts by an act of Congress,
which the Budget Control Act, by the way, was, as well.
So, you know, this is--you know, I just think it is
important sometimes for people to remember we are not sort of
trapped here, that, you know, we can do this. And Mr. Thomas
alluded to, you know, some of the ways that we need to take a
global approach.
And the good news is that, again, because the deficit has
moved in the right direction far faster than CBO [Congressional
Budget Office] projected in 2011 when we passed the Budget
Control--I mean, if you said that we would have the deficit
down to less than 3 percent of GDP back in 2011 you would have
been dismissed as a stark raving lunatic, and yet that is where
we are today. So this is not mission impossible.
And again, I just think that that is something that we all
have to kind of keep sort of drumming into is this is not
something that we have to accept.
One quick question, again, looking at some of the
priorities that, again, you guys still went through this
process, you know, sharpening your pencils. You know, I sit on
Seapower and, you know, the Navy changes that you sort of
suggested--certainly the undersea, you know, sort of bolstering
of forces is something that some of us are--you know, feel
pretty validated about.
But there was also, again, the LCS program and the cruiser
program seem to be sort of a target, in terms of some of your
suggestions. And I was wondering if whoever wants to step up
and sort of talk about that, you know the floor is yours.
Mr. Donnelly. If you don't push the button you don't get to
talk.
The sea services back in the 1990s made a fundamental
misjudgment about the nature of warfare in their domain, which
we have been paying for. They thought they were going to be
able to eternally operate close to shore, so the Zumwalt
cruiser was basically like a giant battleship.
It had a gun that shot 100 miles, which is a pretty amazing
bit of engineering. But, you know, if you can't sail close
enough to use the gun then it is a little bit of a problem.
Likewise, the littoral combat ship, as the name indicates,
was meant to fight in littoral waters, and it was designed to
go fast originally. It was called the ``Streetfighter'' at one
point.
Well, so now we find that the environment in which it may
be asked to operate is a lot more lethal. And thus, it was a
fundamental misjudgment by the Navy about what its operational
environment was going to be that has affected a whole host of
programs, and it is going to, I don't know, take a long time
for the Navy to recover from having made that profound mistake.
It has been a problem for the Marine Corps, as well. And
you could probably make similar judgments about the other
services.
Dr. Bensahel. I would like to just add briefly, your
comment about education and how that affects this. One of the
things we prioritized on our team was preserving as much of the
defense budget as possible for research and development, and
particularly within that basic science, things that don't have
yet a direct link to defense programs, because of our concerns
that the funding for that in other parts of the Federal budget
will be coming down and that ultimately, basic research and
basic technological research is absolutely essential to stay on
the forefront of defense capabilities in the future. So we
prioritized that even within the defense budget.
The Chairman. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go back to the topic that Mr. Forbes was
pursuing--that is how we communicate this problem. Anybody on
this committee knows that the spending caps that were put on
defense through the BCA are moronic and need to be gone.
The problem we have is many people in the Congress think it
is working out just fine. Deficit is going down, they are not
hearing the Defense Department squeal too much, and we are not
dead.
So we have the challenge, as members of this committee, to
communicate not only to the public but, more importantly, to
our fellow colleagues and our leadership the problem in a way
that makes them want to act. You know, Mr. Courtney is right--
we can fix this, but we have got to have consensus that it
needs to be fixed. That is not there.
So I would ask each of you--and, Mr. Donnelly, Mr. Forbes
asked you to, in plain language, describe why it needs to be
fixed, and you talked about we have broken faith, and all that
was fine. That is not going to persuade Members to change their
mind. What I think we have to do is offer that, but then follow
it up with some specific examples of why this is a threat to
our country's security.
So I would ask you to use this threshold: Assume you are
talking to my 75-year-old mother who never finished high
school, in that kind of language, and explain to her, who
happens to be another Member of Congress, why this has got to
be fixed and it has got to be fixed with this budget.
Start with Mr. Donnelly and go down. And you have got 30
seconds at most, because they are not paying attention after
that. We are talking to them on the floor; they are wanting to
get on to something else.
Mr. Donnelly. I can't believe that a woman like that would
be content to send American soldiers into harm's way without
preparing them for victory. I would not want to give up on that
idea. I think that is something that touches Americans who
don't serve very deeply.
Mr. Rogers. My colleagues are going to say, ``Listen, the
Defense Department is not squealing. I think it is working out
just fine. Tell me why it is a threat.''
Mr. Donnelly. Because----
Mr. Rogers [continuing]. Example.
Mr. Donnelly. Part of the job of this committee is to put
a--is to make that case.
Mr. Rogers. That is what I am asking----
Mr. Donnelly. You know, go out to a rifle range, go to a
unit, go to a hangar and see pilots who aren't flying.
Mr. Rogers. You are missing my point. I am on the floor
talking to a colleague from Wisconsin. He is giving me 15 or 20
seconds of attention before he is moving on. I am asking you to
help me have some examples I can provide.
Mr. Thomas, you are shaking your head. You know what you
are doing.
Mr. Thomas. I will try to redeem myself after Mr. Forbes'
comment.
What I would say is that, are we better off now as a nation
than we were in July of 2011, before the----
Mr. Rogers. And he said, ``Yes, well, our deficit is
down.''
Mr. Thomas. Our deficit is down, but the world is going to
hell in a handbasket. And what I would say is the reason we
have to make--we have to fully fund defense today is because an
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure, and we either pay
now or we are going to pay much more later as we look at a
deteriorating global security environment.
Mr. Rogers. Y'all are making a wonderful case to people on
this committee who get it. You are too abstract. Give me some
examples of why we should scare the crap out of somebody that
if we don't turn this around we are going to be in trouble.
Mr. Crotty. So the last time we sort of ignored things and
went down farther than most planners would have wanted us to go
was the time we ended up back in--or we ended up in Afghanistan
because we had not been paying attention and didn't have the
capacity to--and will to respond. Or maybe more currently, if
you are speaking to someone today, you know, ``You see the
beheadings from ISIS on the news. Do you want us to be able to
do something about that?''
I think that that is the fundamental question. I mean,
there are deeper questions buried in that, but I think that is
the fundamental question we are sort of trying to face.
Dr. Bensahel. The world is a dangerous place and we are
dealing with more difficult threats than we have in a long
time. And we have to be able to deal with the full range of
threats, from a group like ISIL that beheads innocent people,
to an aggressive Russia that is invading, taking over territory
from other states.
The United States has a leadership role to play in ensuring
those things don't happen.
Mr. Harrison. Sir, can I try a completely different
approach? Because I don't think the defense arguments are
necessary going to convince a person that hasn't already been
convinced by them, because I think they have heard all of this.
What I would say is the BCA budget caps were set without
regard for need. They were set to reach a predetermined deficit
reduction target.
The BCA was intended as a forcing function, not as a means
of governing. So I would say, with all due respect, Congress
should do its job and govern, and reconsider those caps, and
spend what is necessary for defense, not an arbitrary level.
Mr. Rogers. Well, you know, all of you make very good
cases, but I am just telling you, our colleagues don't get it.
They really think they are working and they don't see the harm,
and this is dangerous.
But thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
I have listened carefully, and, Mr. Donnelly, you mentioned
about entitlement funding and inferred that that is one of the
reasons why we cannot fund our defense needs.
And so my question is this: Defense spending, particularly
sequester, are hollowing out our defense infrastructure and
will leave us with a hollowed-out military unable to meet the
current and future threats to our national security. And my
question to you is this: What is worse, a hollowed-out military
and inability to respond to the current challenges to our
national security and those that will arise in the future most
certainly, or is it a hollowed-out social safety net with
millions of poor, hungry, and homeless children, elderly, and
mentally and physically ill Americans all clamoring and solely
dependent upon private charity for their basic sustenance?
Which is worse?
Mr. Donnelly. Both those things are bad. The worst case of
all is paying for my entitlements. I am not yet poor. I don't
intend to become poor, and----
Mr. Johnson. You do realize that there are many poor people
out there----
Mr. Donnelly. I do, but the entitlement----
Mr. Johnson. You realize that----
Mr. Donnelly. But you are not talking about entitlements
when you are talking about poverty. You are talking about the
middle class. You are----
Mr. Johnson. You also recognize that----
Mr. Donnelly. You are going to be--Social Security and
other entitlements are going to be paying for baby boomer
retirement. I would sacrifice some slice of that to protect the
poor and to give people who need in this society a decent
quality of life, and to protect us all as Americans.
Mr. Johnson. Well----
Mr. Donnelly. Take my slice.
Mr. Johnson. I think most of us would agree with you. Most
of us would have some affinity for the idea of perhaps removing
caps on social--income subject to Social Security taxes, those
kinds of things that would strengthen our so-called
entitlements.
But you did not answer my question, though. What is worse,
a hollowed-out military or a hollowed-out social safety net,
which affects millions of poor children, elderly, sick, both
mentally and physically--what is worse----
Mr. Donnelly. That is a false choice that I won't make. We
are a wealthy society. We can afford to defend ourselves and we
can afford to take care of the people who need help in our
society.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I think your comments were indicative of
wanting to just totally cut and obliterate the entitlement
spending.
Mr. Donnelly. I said we are spending too much on
entitlements; I didn't say that we should obliterate or
eliminate the entitlement program.
Mr. Johnson. Current levels of spending on entitlement
programs is too much, and current spending on defense is too
little.
Mr. Donnelly. In bottom-line terms, I would agree with
that.
Mr. Johnson. All right. I just wanted to get you on record
on that.
Unless any of the other members of the panel wanted to
respond, I would have no other questions.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Gentleman yields back.
Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank our panelists today for joining us.
Dr. Bensahel, I would like to go to one of the comments
that you made specifically about base capacity. Your comment in
your analysis is, ``It is unconscionable to require these
services to continue to spend money on facilities they don't
need while the budget caps require them to cut end strength,
training, readiness, which puts American troops at unneeded
risk.''
And looking at that, give me your perspective on how the
analysis was done on current base capacity. What are some of
the assumptions there? Was it different than the analysis that
was done in 2005?
And one of the issues that comes up is, you know, not only
are we looking at capitalization, but, you know, how does this
square with the national security strategies that we have and
making sure that there is, indeed, alignment there?
And another one of the most important questions is there is
a cost to these base realignment and closure. If you can't
capture those savings within the FYDP, then all of that is
speculative about what impact truly realigning capacity has.
So give me your assumptions about that analysis and about
where we really need to be addressing this particular question.
Dr. Bensahel. First of all, that is exactly right about
needing to be able to harvest the savings within a certain
period of time, the 5-year FYDP period. And in fact, that was
the one defense reform-type option that was available to us in
this exercise was what Todd dubbed, and others have dubbed, the
clean-kill BRAC, which is that all the savings as part of that
would have to be generated within 5 years.
I think that there are a lot of lessons to be learned from
the 2005 BRAC experience. I don't think anybody is happy with
how that occurred.
I would say that that process was much more about alignment
than closure. There was a tremendous amount of new
construction. The new construction costs reduced the planned
savings for that by over 70 percent.
So the 2005 BRAC model is not what I think that Congress
should endorse. The previous BRAC rounds did a far, far better
job of reducing costs and actually harvesting savings, even
though some of it was beyond the 5-year period. That is what
Congress should use as a model and not be scared off by the
2005 experience.
I don't know the details of where those numbers came from
within the services, but I do know that there have been
efforts, for financial reasons, to shrink footprints, to
consolidate, and some of it also reflects force structure cuts.
When you cut force structure and end strength you don't need as
many facilities as you have in the past, and I know that was
one of the drivers of their cost estimates.
Mr. Wittman. Looking at the national defense strategies, I
think one of the concerns is that in haste to be able to save
money we look at the short term. But understanding, too, just
as you all have pointed out, that things change in the long
term.
And we know in the United States, as it is configured
today, if you get rid of base structure you will never get it
back in that configuration. And if you do need to regenerate
that it will be much, much more expensive, and it will be
sometimes impossible to regenerate it because people don't want
those things in their backyard anymore once they disappear.
So the balance is how do we save money in an effective way
to meet today's needs, but how do we make sure that we don't
rid ourselves of capacity that may be needed in the future?
And a great example is let's say theoretically you want to
close an Air Force base, but we are planning to put in place a
new long-range strategic bomber. And all of a sudden later down
the road, as these aircrafts start to come online in 2020 and
beyond, you look at it and you go, ``Wow, you know, we closed
this base, but that is really a place where we need to be
placing these long-range strategic bombers, for a variety of
reasons: we don't want them flying over neighborhoods, the
sound, all those kinds of things.''
So my concern is aligning strategically long-term needs
with where we are trying to go in the short term. So just give
me your perspective on how to--how those elements balanced in
this decisionmaking.
Dr. Bensahel. I would just say that I believe the chiefs of
staffs of all of the services are well aware of that. They do
think long-term. They are not concerned--when they make
recommendations like that and estimates of that kind of
capacity they are not talking about what they need for today or
even tomorrow; they are thinking much longer term.
And, you know, if those are the conclusions that they have
reached, that they have asked Congress for--they are asking
Congress to close 20 percent of their capacity--that will
already have figured into their calculations, particularly
because they are also, you know, involved--the Secretary of the
Air Force, the Chief of staff of the Air Force are thinking
about the long-range bomber, for example, when they make those
decisions.
Mr. Wittman. Sure. I think that is why the questions about
the assumptions that they make about needed capacity and
whether that aligns with the strategies is such a critical
question. I think those questions need to be asked if we are to
make the proper decisions.
I don't know if any of the other panelists have a view on
that and how we need to keep those things in mind.
Mr. Thomas. Congressman, one thing I might add is we
certainly have to be concerned about regret factors for closing
domestic bases, but I think that danger is greatly compounded
when it comes to thinking about our overseas bases. And there I
think the regret factors could be far greater.
Mr. Wittman. Yes. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I had a question, you know, just about--particularly
because the American public obviously has a lot of concerns
about costs in general and defense budgets and what have you.
But help me understand like how do you--with all the aggression
that we see popping up in different parts of the world,
particularly in the Middle East, but also in the Ukraine and
other places, paying for all of the needs to address all of
those different issues and be prepared? Because I think that a
big part of preparedness is that even if we never have to use
force, like let's say like in the Ukraine, for instance, we
obviously want to have the appearance or the perception that we
are prepared to deal with it if need be.
And so how do you deal with all of these--with having to
keep up that perception and that capability at the same time
and dealing with the money that is needed to do that, in
particular when we start talking about personnel costs, which
is a big part of the budget?
Mr. Thomas. Congressman, one thing I would offer is that,
as I mentioned in my testimony, we have to think about new ways
of deterring conflict abroad. And in the past we have
maintained very large, sizeable forces in an expeditionary
fashion that we can dispatch overseas to come to the aid of an
ally very reactively after something has occurred.
And we have an opportunity, I think, to make a shift. We
can put greater emphasis on preventive capabilities and the
ability to deny adversaries the ability to commit acts of
aggression or coercion in the first instance.
But we also can place greater emphasis on global
surveillance and strike capabilities that can cover down on
multiple areas of the world simultaneously and hold out the
potential for very devastating reprisals, should aggression or
coercion be conducted.
Dr. Bensahel. I would add to that that the United States
has a tremendous deterrence capability today, especially if you
are talking about things like Russian aggression in Ukraine.
The U.S. Army, in both the Active Component and Reserve
Component, has a tremendous number of tanks, for example.
The question about whether they are forward-based and
whether they are, you know, reassuring to our allies is an
important one, but that is not a question of the equipment. The
equipment is there; the people are there. It's a, you know, a
basing issue and a force posture issue.
The types of current threats that we are facing don't
require large-scale conventional forces in order to address.
They are more likely to be addressed by special operations
forces, light footprint types of approaches that cost much less
money in terms of equipment; they are expensive on the
personnel side.
But at least in the current threat environment, that is not
a tradeoff that you have to make within the defense budget.
Now, as I said, our principles when we went through this
exercise were not convinced that that is the same logic over
the long term, so our long-term investments shifted a bit in
order to ensure that the United States maintains a credible
deterrent force across all of its military services.
But the capabilities to deal with the threats that we are
facing today, in our view, largely do reside within the
services.
Mr. Donnelly. If I may, I would say we have a problem more
with dissuasion than deterrence. We have an incredible ability
to punish anybody that we wish to punish, whether we are based
forward or based in the continental United States. I mean, that
destructive power of the American military is, you know,
literally awesome.
The problem is to dissuade the Russians or whoever from
crossing the line in the first place, and that is very much a
matter of where we are and in what kinds of numbers. This is
the problem, you know, both in Europe and in East Asia.
But it--the problem in the Middle East goes even beyond
that, I would say. I have always been attracted to Jim's idea
that we have been issuing eviction notices in the Middle East
rather regularly over the past 20 years.
What is our strategy for ISIS if not to evict them from
their current statelet, or whatever you want to call it.
Anything less than that would be a strategic failure of huge
magnitude.
So, you know, if our real goal is to not simply deter but
to dissuade a whole host of bad guys from even thinking about
it, they have to think not only of the severity of the
punishment but of the certainty of the punishment and our
ability to roll back, as it were, if they do cross various red
lines.
And that is where I think the immediate problem is. Nobody
doubts the United States' ability to exact--or to wreak havoc
on our adversaries. What they question is our sort of
willingness to do so, and our willingness to do so in a way
that will be tolerable to our allies.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here today, to the panel.
You know, I agree with some of what you say and I disagree
with some of what you say, which is a good thing, right? You
know, we had a retreat yesterday, which was the first for this
committee, ever, and we heard from some, you know, pretty
insightful folks. Some was, you know, classified and some was
unclassified.
But at the end of the day, I think most of us walked away
saying, you know, we have--the multiple threats are so
different, and we have state actors and we have resurgence of
some state actors--Russia in one and China now emerging.
And our response obviously is worldwide while theirs is
more regionally allocated, so they can have, you know, less
money spent, but we have to spend a whole lot more to reach out
and do the things we need to do, plus the counterterrorism
issues that we have through non-state actors that are proxies
for some states. So we have a whole host of issues to deal
with.
But your review--and, Mr. Crotty, I think you--Crotty--you
touched on an area as it related to the National Guard and
Reserve Component. I think you were the only one that actually
increased National Guard and Reserve, and I was just trying to
figure out why did you do that and what was your basis behind
that?
Mr. Crotty. Sure. I think that when you start talking about
getting down to these big budget cuts, one of the first things
that you need to think about is the roles and missions
question. What should everybody be doing?
And I think that as we talk about the changing and diverse
nature of threats, and some of us have talked about the move
away from how important conventional response is--perhaps the
Guard and Reserve can start to be a place where we start to
develop these other capabilities.
Maybe these are not people who are going to be out there in
the front line in tanks, but they may be--maybe the cyber
mission needs to move out of the Active Component and into
Guard and Reserve because that is how we can better access
people that, you know, don't--they want to serve their country;
they don't necessarily want to be in uniform on the front
lines, but they have skills that they can bring. And I think
that that is something that we--if you are going to have to
start thinking about big cuts you have to start thinking about
big moves, so that was one area.
I think another area where we were thinking about the Guard
and Reserve is as a better rotation base for doing some of the
engagement overseas or, you know, sort of short-term things,
being involved in exercises and building relationships and
having some of those language and cultural skills that might be
harder to keep in the Active services.
And finally, one of the things that we did was we brought
down the size of the Army significantly, and while conventional
threats are less than they have been at times--or our
conventional responses are maybe not as effective as they have
been in the past, the ability to mobilize a large ground force
is an important capability to maintain. And so while you lose
some time and capability by moving it from Active to Reserve,
it is still important to be able to do that if you have to.
And so making sure that the Guard and Reserve are sized and
also organized to work better with the Active----
Mr. Nugent. And the Guard and Reserve----
Mr. Crotty. Yes.
Mr. Nugent [continuing]. They do it at a reduced cost.
Mr. Crotty. Yes. Yes. I mean, part of the reason we moved
out of Active into the Reserve is it was cheaper.
Mr. Nugent. But they have been utilized to a greater extent
than ever, you know, the last 10, 13 years. They were never
really, I don't think, envisioned to be that--you know, that
operational, but they are today. And I think we have relied
upon them to a greater extent.
Here is what I worry about, and, you know, we focus on what
is in front of us. Right now the shiny object is ISIS. But, you
know, it is much greater than that, you know, across the globe.
You know, when you start trying to identify what the threat is
and it is, you know, it is radical Islam, it is those types of
things that are not just in, you know, in Syria and in Iraq,
but they are in, you know, Africa.
They are all over the world, and so we are focused on that,
but at the same time, we have state actors that are increasing
their capabilities to an extent that we have never seen before.
You know, China has never been a real threat to us, and I don't
think they are necessarily a threat to the homeland, but they
are a threat to our way of life, particularly in regards to
what is going on, you know, in the Pacific, and what they can
do and what their modernization is designed to do.
And we have to be able to project force to that because I
think one of the things that was mentioned, you know, that
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. And I just want
to leave it at that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for an excellent
hearing. I wish all of our colleagues were able to attend.
I also want to thank CSBA, because it sounds like that
budget exercise you went through was extraordinarily useful not
only for the expert panelists, but it made me wonder, Mr.
Chairman, if we should get all the members of this committee to
go through that exercise, because life is about tradeoffs;
legislation is about tradeoffs.
And I thought Mr. Donnelly was particularly useful in his
exercise in a traditional U.S. defense posture costing us $780
billion. Like, is anybody on the Hill talking about numbers of
that size?
You know, and that is very useful because your benchmark is
kind of like traditional HASC [House Armed Services Committee]
speech material. So I would suggest that no member continue
making that speech unless he or she is willing to find $780
billion so we are more than a paper tiger here.
Mr. Donnelly.
Mr. Donnelly. I just want to clarify what the--that is the
difference between what we thought would begin to be adequate
and what the 10-year baseline is. So it is about a--almost a 20
percent increase, you know, so it is $800 billion out of $2
trillion, something like that.
Mr. Cooper. Yes. So it is 4 percent of GDP, which is a
reasonable figure to spend on defense, but yet we, even on
HASC, who are more familiar with these issues, are nowhere near
in the reality ballpark to get this done.
Now, we perhaps don't need the traditional defense posture.
The other panelists provide a useful service by getting even
more realistic.
But just in that ballpark, when Mr. Harrison said, well,
for certain personnel measures, reforms that we probably won't
have the courage to do on this committee, that would save us
$33 billion over 5 years.
Well guess what? This week this House of Representatives,
in legislation so minor it won't even be reported in the
newspaper, we will increase the deficit by $77 billion just by
routine stuff that we will do this week.
Seventy-seven billion dollars. Now that is a 10-year
figure, as opposed to Mr. Harrison's 5-year figure, but these
are approximate numbers. Just this week we will blow through
savings like that that this committee will not have the courage
to come up with.
So I thought the single most powerful word in the testimony
was Ms. Bensahel's word ``unconscionable.'' That is a strong
word.
And what was she referring to? The fact that this committee
will not even allow the Pentagon to consider a BRAC reduction
when the Army and the Air Force testified there is 20 percent
surplus capacity. That is outrageous.
When our own military is begging them to--begging us to get
the flexibility to do the right thing and we refuse to give it
to them. We look incompetent. We look selfish. We look weak.
And America should not look like that. So this is this
committee's chance, under new leadership, to come forward with
a realistic and funded defense strategy.
On another note, Mr. Thomas, I wanted to ask--you mentioned
a new strategy regarding sea mines and things like that. I
would like to understand more about that. Aren't mining the
seas considered an act of war? But that's a useful way to do
A2/area denial?
Mr. Thomas. Thank you, Congressman.
What we have seen our adversaries doing over the last
decade or more has been developing capabilities that can impede
our ability to project power. Sea mines, as they sound
offensive, are actually extremely useful defensive weapons.
So you could imagine in places like the East China Sea, the
ability for the United States and its local allies to be able
to implant mines in their own territorial waters that could
impede intruding submarines and other forces could be valuable
for helping to better defend their maritime areas of control.
Mr. Cooper. You have written about this, and so just go to
your think tank and CSBA and get the materials on this?
Mr. Thomas. Yes, sir. We would be happy to send you
something.
Mr. Cooper. That would be great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, an excellent hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Harrison, you are as knowledgeable an expert on defense
budget as I know of in town following it closely. Are you aware
of any study or basis for this figure that some folks from the
Pentagon throw around that we have 20 percent extra
infrastructure?
Mr. Harrison. My understanding of that figure is, well,
first of all, I believe DOD is prohibited from doing a detailed
analysis of this issue, so they aren't able to produce new
analysis to substantiate the number. The figure is an estimate
that is derived from the detailed analysis they did of the
inventory of facilities in the United States prior to the last
round of base closures, and then subtracting the amount of
infrastructure that was reduced during the fifth round of base
closures. You end up with somewhere in the neighborhood of 20
percent excess capacity.
The Chairman. As I understand what you are saying, sometime
before 2005 they believe they had--and I don't know if these
numbers are exactly right--23 percent extra infrastructure. The
2005 BRAC round reduced 3 percent, so they are saying, okay, we
still have 20 percent extra.
Mr. Harrison. That is my understanding, sir.
The Chairman. That is where that number is basis----
Mr. Harrison. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. MacArthur.
Mr. MacArthur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have lived through budgets for about 30 years in a very
different context--in a business context--and I am still trying
to decide and discern to what degree that helps me and to what
degree that hurts me in trying to assess our role and how we
make progress in this. And I have presented budgets where I
argued for my priorities; I have sat on boards of directors
where I evaluated those and made cuts.
It seems to me that our role is probably more like the
board. I don't see us cutting individual programs, getting into
the weeds. I think we lose something there.
So I have been focused on the broader sense, and I would be
interested when I am done in whether you think that is the
right approach for us.
It also seems to me the difficulty for us in assessing what
level of military investment is adequate, there are a couple
things I have jotted down here. One, the scope of the DOD is
vast and arcane. It is so complex that only initiates like the
DOD, perhaps you, and others really get it.
It is difficult to compare dollar levels to your mother.
What is the difference between $500 billion and $550 billion?
You know, what is the difference, really? It is hard for us to
assess that.
There is a myriad of different opinions is a third problem
about the risks, the priorities, the relative effectiveness of
options.
And then there is a whole set of--a fourth issue is
differences in values. I heard a question earlier about, you
know, is this more important than social programs. And you can
argue whether that is a false choice, but it is a choice that
is in many people's minds.
So I have tried to stay focused on a little bit of a
broader approach to this, and that is, what is military
spending over time as a percentage of GDP in peacetime, in
wartime, and where are we? Are we in wartime, peacetime as you
look--you know, it is not a World War II environment, but we
are certainly a nation at war.
And I would like you to talk about it, but I would actually
like it if one of you could send analysis, if you have it, I
assume you do--what have we spent throughout the course of
modern history in military spending as a percentage of GDP? And
then what level of DOD spending is implied by the current BCA
as a percentage of GDP?
So I would be happy to have you grasp any of those points
that I just mentioned and comment on them.
Mr. Harrison. If you don't mind, if I can go first? I have
a report, I will send it to you, that tracks it, at least since
the end of World War II, of defense spending as a percent of
GDP. I do not remember the exact numbers off the top of my
head, but I believe the peacetime average, if you cut out the
periods of the Korean War and Vietnam War, et cetera, that we
have typically averaged around 6 percent of GDP.
But also, if you look at the trend in the graph, it has
been steadily declining, and that is over decades.
I caution people against using percent of GDP as a good
metric for defense spending. I think what that leads us to is
setting things like an arbitrary floor for defense spending.
People floated things like 4 percent of GDP, ``Four Percent
for Freedom.'' It is great alliteration. I don't know that it
is good strategy, though.
I still fundamentally believe--the reason I am against the
BCA budget caps is the same reason I am against setting a
percent of GDP for defense, is because I think our spending
level should be driven by our security needs and not set at
some arbitrary level, regardless of where that ends up. Let's
have the debate about what we need to spend and then let's
fully fund that.
Mr. MacArthur. If we could get some agreement around that I
would agree with you. But I am not sure we can, and so in the
interest of persuading colleagues who are part of this
decision, it seems to me there needs to be something else, some
handle for people to grab hold of and say, ``Okay, we do have
deficit issues, but if we spent 6 percent traditionally then
maybe I can live with, you know, 3.5 percent today.'' That is
why I gravitate a little bit to that.
Mr. Harrison. I have failed to answer the last part of your
question. We are on track now to fall below 3 percent of GDP on
defense spending. That is where we are headed at this moment.
Mr. Donnelly. I will try to put this in 15 seconds. Since
the end of World War II we have guaranteed a remarkably
historically secure and stable international environment. It
has been the framework for our prosperity, been the framework
for the expansion of human liberty across the planet, and for a
really--if you are talking about great power stability,
unprecedented in history.
The cost of that has declined as we have become richer and
the system has become more entrenched, which is reflected in
that downward GDP slice. GDP is nothing more than a measure of
the opportunity cost. Can we afford to sustain what we have
built?
And at 5 percent, a nickel on the dollar, it seems like a
pretty good value and a cost that we could sustain, you know,
indefinitely.
Mr. MacArthur. Thank you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. I will try, Mr. Chairman, really quickly. I
have been called back to another meeting.
Thank you so much. Your presentations were good. I read
most of those before and have heard the questions.
Mr. Harrison, if I could turn to you, because I know you
have been very involved in personnel issues, and I believe the
chairman asked about that earlier and, you know, the cost
factors involved.
We have 1 percent of our population that engage in the
military, and so part of the pushback as we move forward and
try and deal with these issues is that very fact of people
feeling like, you know, we are looking at the budget but, you
know, we are going to this area--and I greatly appreciate the
commission, but I am just--you know, we were talking about how
do we sell some of this.
And what would you say, I guess, to that 1 percent? And
what is it that we should be coupling particularly with those
changes, that modernization, that we demonstrate that we are
actually, you know, being very true to the young men and women
and the families who serve this country?
Mr. Harrison. I would say that when it comes to the defense
budget, it's about balance. And when it comes to keeping faith
with the troops, it is not just about pay and benefits; it is
about ensuring that the force that we have and the funding we
provide provides an adequate number of people, it provides the
best equipment in the world that is properly maintained, and
the best training in the world.
And we are breaking faith with the troops when we
shortchange any of those things. So it is about keeping the
right level of balance.
And for me, when I look at the compensation reform issue, I
served in uniform in the past and, you know, I can tell you--
and anyone who serves I think would agree--that it is not the
only reason people join the military or choose to make a career
of the military. It is not just about compensation; it's about
serving one's country. So let's not forget that.
But also, what is important to me is thinking about the
future. I am not in the military anymore, but what if one day
my two little daughters--this is still a long way off--what if
one of them wants to join the military. What will I care about
as a parent at that point?
I will tell you, I will not care one bit about their
retirement plan. I will care about making sure they have got
the best training, the best equipment in the world, and they
have got enough people going into battle with them that they
will be protected and they will be able to come back home to
me. That is what I care about.
And so I think when we are looking at, you know, what we
can do in the future, yes, we absolutely have to keep faith
with the troops. And we absolutely need to maintain an All-
Volunteer Force with a compensation system that can recruit and
retain the best and the brightest, but it is about balance, so
I think we have got to look beyond just trying to maintain the
status quo.
Mrs. Davis. Just too, I think a few of the other issues
that you raised--one is focusing on cyber, and that is
understandable. I know that in the last budget we actually did
improve those budgets considerably, and on some levels they--
technological piece and the intel piece is really dependent on
the best minds, you know, so it is personnel, it is human
capital that in many ways is required here.
Why did everybody want to raise those cyber budgets
significantly and what should we know about that? Is it in
competition, necessarily, with adversaries and the idea that,
you know, we are--we can't stand still while they are, you
know, racing ahead, or is it something else?
Dr. Bensahel. I think there is a tremendous amount of
concern about proliferating cyber capabilities, particularly in
the hands of some U.S. potential state adversaries and their
capabilities. So I do think that there is a reason to be
investing in that.
I would caution, though--and I don't think the American
people are aware of this--that most of the money that DOD
spends on cyber goes to protecting and dealing with DOD
networks and dealing with offensive capabilities against state
adversaries. They don't go about protecting, you know, the
networks that we depend on for our, you know, banking, for, you
know, the fact that we all have iPhones in our pockets, you
know, the basic networks that undergird our society.
I think there is an important role here for Reserve forces
to play not just because they offer the chance to bring in
people who wouldn't necessarily serve otherwise, but because
you want the people who work at Apple, and Microsoft, at
whatever, you know, startup tech company, you want the military
to be able to address their skills. And particularly if--to be
able to utilize their skills. And particularly if you are
talking about the Army and the Air Force, you want them in the
National Guard so that they can also deal with state
preparedness for cyber emergencies and events that may occur,
as well.
Mrs. Davis. If I may say, because I think you were pointing
out the fact that those Reserve forces and civilian have
increased greatly, but that is part of the argument, that being
specific about the talents that people bring in that area, we
actually--maybe we should be increasing that a lot more.
Dr. Bensahel. I think it is important to bring in people
who already have those skills. It is much harder to grow
someone within the military force structure to do that than to
bring in people with the outside expertise.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Budget Control Act passed in 2011. It held the
sequestration provisions in it that have done such damage to
national defense. For emphasis, I am one of those that heeded
the warnings and voted against the Budget Control Act.
We were advised--the House Armed Services Committee in
2011--that if sequestration played out through the full 10-year
period, after everything was said and done our military would
have the smallest number of men and women in uniform since
before World War II, Great Depression era numbers; the smallest
number of operational naval vessels since roughly World War I;
and the smallest number of operational aircraft in the history
of the United States Air Force. That's 3\1/2\ years ago.
Today, do you have a judgment as to whether those
projections are holding up, or they were exaggerations, or
underestimates?
Mr. Crotty. My first reaction is, actually, I think we are
getting there even faster than some would have guessed at that
time. You know, we already had a Navy and an Air Force that
were shrinking as budgets were growing.
I believe the Air Force is now trying to rebound from
hitting their lowest point since their creation after World War
II this year. The Navy force structure that we have projected
even in the President's budget level, not even the BCA level,
is bringing us far below where we have traditionally been as a
Navy.
And it is both the size and efficacy of those forces. We
have shrunk them, but they also have the oldest equipment that
they have had, especially in the Air Force, as sort of an
average age of inventory, and they are getting less time to
fly, steam, drive, and train and exercise.
So I think we have already seen a lot of those impacts
probably faster than we would have expected.
Mr. Harrison. And I could add one thing. Fully agree, we
are rapidly shrinking the force, I think faster than many of us
even expected. I think even when we were running this exercise
I think we thought that our cuts might have been too rapid, and
yet it seems to be the track that we are on.
A caution I would offer is while, you know, for many types
of threats and many types of contingencies the size and the
capacity of the force matters and the number of platforms
matters, in other contingencies, other situations, it is the
capabilities that those platforms have that actually may be
more important. So while we do see that our ship count in the
Navy, just if you take an example, is far below where it was in
the 1980s, it is a different mix of ships with different
capabilities.
The same is true of the Air Force. Much smaller number of
platforms, but I would argue that the platforms are a lot more
capable.
So it is a very complicated question when you are looking
at the size and capacity of the force. You have to also take
into account, what are the capabilities of that force? What can
it actually do?
And that--I think that is a key role of this committee is
providing oversight to make sure that we have got the right set
and the right mix of capabilities and capacity in the future.
Mr. Brooks. Is it fair to say at the same time that our
potential geopolitical foes' platforms or weapons systems are
also being upgraded?
Mr. Donnelly. Or just changed.
The other thing that I would say about our forces is they
are really remarkably less ready. So it is not just a question
of how capable they are, how many of them there are, but how
many of them are prepared to go into harm's way on short
notice.
The chiefs recently testified that, because of the little
squirt of money they got in the Ryan-Murray deal, the Air Force
got up to 50 percent of its combat fleet being ready. The Chief
of Staff of the Army reported a third of its brigade combat
teams were ready. That was the high watermark of recent years.
So if you ask, ``How many units can we send to respond to a
crisis who have all their gear, well-trained, all their people,
and are ready to go,'' that is a small slice of a shrinking
pie, an aging, you know, pie with aging equipment, et cetera,
et cetera. So if you are looking at outputs rather than inputs,
I think that is the sort of metrics that really frighten me
much more either than capacity or capability.
Mr. Thomas. China has had double-digit increases in its
defense spending for 24 of the last 25 years. That is a
situation that we can't imagine, sitting in this room, for
ourselves. And over time, those--just looking at those
trajectories, this just presents a far greater problem for us
as we look out a decade or more.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, to all the witnesses, for the excellent
testimony today.
My question--and I hope in this question I bring
generational perspective--I was a senior in high school when 9/
11 happened, and in our world today, at no point in my lifetime
did we have more hotspots and chaos than we do when we open the
newspapers. I find that much of our discussion in Congress,
unfortunately, focuses on the impact of the sequester with a
snapshot of the present time.
My challenge to you is, what is the snapshot of the future
for my generation that is going to inherit the negative
implications of the sequester if we do not change the
trajectory? I would like to hear what that snapshot is 10, 20
years in the future, how it affects the free flow of goods and
services around the world, the tough choices our military is
going to have to make, and whether we will be able to support
our allies.
Mr. Crotty. I will just take a quick comment to that. You
know, I think that the worst case scenario is a continuation of
actually some of what we have seen this year, which is the
freedom of regional actors to start to take things into their
own hands without fear of repercussion, which I think is sort
of the harbinger of a breakdown of sort of the international
order.
When we reach a point where, you know, we see all of these
hotspots, the concept of regional actors being able to
physically take territory--I mean, the last time there was an
annexation of land was Kuwait, and before that it was back in
the 1960s. I mean, this is sort of relatively unprecedented in
the current time.
And so if that is what the worst case scenario looks like,
I think the hotspots only sort of exponentially grow.
Mr. Thomas. Really since World War II we have taken for
granted the international set of rules that everyone plays by,
which are really underpinned by American defense capabilities.
And as we look out over the next couple decades, I think it is
likely that we are not only going to have challenges to that
global set of rules, but in fact, there are a number of
revisionist states, whether it is Russia and Europe in the
Caucasus or Iran in the Middle East, particularly if it
acquires a nuclear weapon, or China in East Asia, that are
going to impose new rule sets, at least regionally, and over
time globally.
Mr. Donnelly. Suppose a couple years from now you are
voting on an authorization of force requested by the President
in whatever scenario you can imagine, and you thought as a
member of the committee that you were going to send people into
harm's way who might not win, and that more of them would die
than you felt comfortable with. That is not something that
anybody since 9/11 or since the end of the Cold War has had to
take into account. When we have gone to war we have gone to war
with the expectation of victory and at a particularly low cost.
So as you look forward to your long and no doubt
distinguished career, that is the kind of proposition that you
may have to wrap your head around.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Donnelly, I want to follow up on that.
My second question, I have the distinct honor of
representing Fort Drum, which is home of the historic 10th
Mountain Division, the most deployed unit in the U.S. Army
since 9/11. And my basic question--and I want you all on
record--as we focus on the negative consequences of these
devastating defense cuts, are our soldiers' lives at risk today
and tomorrow?
Mr. Donnelly. Yes. I mean, and again, more so. War is a
dangerous business. All kinds of--you know, training is a
dangerous business.
You know, we ask people in uniform to take these kinds of
risks, but we also think that our responsibility is to send
them out there with the prospect of victory, and a prospect of
coming home in one piece and living a decent life when they are
not deployed.
Mr. Thomas. Yes. I mean, a force that is not adequately
trained and adequately equipped is going to be at far greater
risk, and this is a real danger with the Budget Control Act and
the imposition of the caps.
Mr. Crotty. Yes. And I would add that we have talked a lot
about the impact of sequester-level budgets, which is, as
distinct from sequestration, the mechanism itself--you know, we
talk about how bad sequester-level, BCA-level budgets are. I
actually think the impact of sequester, particularly on those
readiness questions and training, is even worse. So I would
just highlight that in the future as we see where this budget
goes this year.
Dr. Bensahel. Yes. The cuts to readiness undoubtedly
increase the risks that our military personnel will face.
Mr. Harrison. The one thing I would just add is not only is
it the amount of budget reductions that play--increases this
risk. That would only be compounded by a failure to make
strategic choices, because I think the way we spend our defense
dollars is just as important as how many dollars we have to
spend.
Ms. Stefanik. Absolutely. And as we seek to educate our
colleagues of the importance of replacing this sequester and
not gutting our Nation's military, it is more than dollar
signs. This is about our soldiers' lives at risk and brave
young men and women who serve in our military.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Knight.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I would like to say that I appreciate these briefings.
They are very helpful, especially to the freshmen that are
learning quite a bit, and we are getting into this process.
Maybe we have come from somewhere where we have got a little
bit of knowledge about this, but the whole budget process is
quite a bit.
I want to talk about two things real quickly. One is in a
time where we are deploying one-to-one in many of our cases--I
know the Marines as a whole are about one-to-five-to-one right
now. It is very difficult, and it is very difficult to maintain
a force.
Some of the force wants to be deployed, but when you start
getting into one-to-one or 1.5-to-one, you start diminishing
your force and diminishing what--well, what they are capable
of, quite honestly.
How much should we worry about that? How much should we
worry about many of these divisions going out at such a high
rate?
And then secondly--and you can take these as a bunch; this
is a totally different subject, but let me talk about the F-35
program. The F-16 has been out IOCs [initial operational
capability] for about 36 years; the F-15 for about 43 years. We
are going to have those two aircraft, those two fourth-
generation fighters, for probably another 20 to 25 years in
some capacity in the U.S. Air Force.
At what point to we say the F-35 program is a leap ahead in
technology that we just can't skip? You can't take two bites of
the apple, in other words. You have to do that technology jump
right now.
In other words, if you don't do it in 10 or 15 years, if
you try and take the next step it is going to be hugely costly
and we won't be able to afford it at that point, so the Joint
Strike Fighter [JSF] makes sense. And maybe we can run down the
road on that.
Mr. Harrison. I would just start by saying in this
exercise, no one actually cancelled the JSF program. Three of
the four teams did reduce the quantity that we are buying, but
I will let them explain their rationales.
Dr. Bensahel. On both your questions, first, the rotation
demand, the one-to-one and one-to-two and one-to-three that we
have seen should no longer be the rotation requirements of the
future now that we are not sourcing two large-scale ground wars
in Iraq and Afghanistan, so those numbers are naturally going
to come down. So the way that we have looked at rotation
policies in the past, the way even that the services have
thought about staffing themselves and modeling what units are
ready to go is all going to be changing because we will no
longer have that kind of rotation demand on our largest forces.
The caveat to that is special operations forces and other
specialized capabilities will continue to deploy at those rapid
rates because that is where the demand is, and so there does
need to be some caution there. But those larger problems I
think will naturally reduce themselves because of--we are going
to be having fewer people deployed overseas.
Second, on the F-35, exactly as was just said, I think the
question is not whether we should have the F-35, but how many.
I would make an argument that the leap ahead is not to the F-
35. The F-35 is important, but it is a linear continuation of
the succession of fighters that we have had.
The real leap-ahead technology is into unmanned, and there
are very, very good reasons that the Air Force in particular
should be exploring that. And I would argue for not investing
additional funds in the F-35 as the leap ahead, but taking any
harvested savings and investing that in the future of unmanned
technology, which will be a truly bad capability.
Mr. Crotty. On the first question, I would say that one of
the things we do have to keep in mind is that while we are
coming, you know, sort of having a changing of our structure of
rotating, I think that there is also greater demand on forward
deployment worldwide, and that is something we will have to
keep in mind and keep an eye on, especially with any changes to
capacity. I think that is one of the big issues. You know, we
need to be places to reassure, to have presence, to engage with
allies, which I think is critical today.
As far as the F-35, I think one of the undersold advantages
that it provides is as the sort of network node that actually
makes everything around it better. And then, in fact, that is
sort of the multiplication, to me, that it brings to the table
is actually taking the fighters that we are going to have for
another 20 years, and when you start working them together it
actually vastly increases their capability, their
survivability. And I think that is something that we can't sort
of wait on.
Mr. Thomas. To your first question, undoubtedly if we are
going to have a smaller force we have to change what we are
doing. We can't have unsustainable OPTEMPO [operations tempo],
PERSTEMPO [personnel tempo], where you have one-to-one
rotations.
But that is going to drive you in one of two directions.
Either you are just not going to be overseas because you are
just not--you don't have the rotation base if you continue
business as usual.
The other alternative as a smaller force means we are going
to have to be more forward stationed, and I think that probably
is the right answer. And it is the right answer not only
because we are a smaller force, but it is the right answer
because the environments in which we are going to operate are
going to be far more contested, and our ability in a crisis or
in a conflict to simply flow C-17s and commercial aircraft into
a theater or drop off ships in that theater with troops is just
not going to be realistic.
On the F-35 point, I would just echo Ryan's comments on how
we think about the F-35. It is more than just a fifth-
generation fighter aircraft; it is a node and a network.
And in particular, I would highlight the incredible
capabilities of the advanced electronically scanned array, the
AESA radar, which not only is a sensor, but it also is a
potential weapon in the future. So I think we have to kind of
change how we think about this capability.
That said, we are going to have to look at what the
capacity of that force is going to be.
Mr. Donnelly. I will be quick because there is not much
time left.
Anybody who tells you we will never get another large-scale
land campaign in the Middle East, you should go have a little
lie-down and, you know, wait till it passes. Nobody ever wanted
to do these things in the first place, but there is a logic
there that is pretty compelling. If you do care about the
balance of power in the Middle East, this is going to keep
coming back up.
The points that people have made about the F-35 being
something fundamentally different than a fancier version of the
F-16 are right on point. I would offer that it is not really a
fighter; it is more like an armed scout. It can go and protect
itself and find targets for other things to kill.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Time of the gentleman is expired.
Let me see if you all are comfortable in answering how much
we should spend this year on defense. Given everything you know
about the work that your organizations have done, the exercise
we have been talking about--and just for reference, using the
050 numbers, we are at $521 billion this year; under the BCA
caps it is $523 billion; the President's budget request is $561
billion.
I am not trying to influence you, but yesterday General
Dempsey told us that $561 was the lower ragged edge of how much
spending it would take to defend the country.
So, based on everything that you have done and everything
you know, let me just see if--and if you don't feel comfortable
I understand, but do you have a number for fiscal year 2016
that you think would be an appropriate amount to spend for
defense?
Mr. Harrison.
Mr. Harrison. Well, being from a think tank, I will start
with my caveats. If you--what do you want the military to do is
the strategy that is laid out in the 2012 Defense Strategic
Guidance and updated in the 2014 QDR [Quadrennial Defense
Review], if that is what you want our military to do then I
think--and the other caveat, if you are willing to accept many
of the cost savings proposals that DOD has included with their
budget, which do include some compensation reform proposals--if
you are willing to accept that and cross your finger that some
efficiency initiatives actually come true, then I think their
number of $561 billion for the total national defense budget is
probably about right.
Dr. Bensahel. His caveats were my caveats. I think that the
key question is what savings do you harvest in other parts of
the defense budget and the assumptions that go into that.
But if you make those assumptions, I think that that is a
reasonable number to be considering. But I don't have a lot of
optimism that a lot of those caveats will hold.
The Chairman. And your reason for saying that is if we gain
efficiencies or savings in parts of the budget, those savings
and efficiencies need to stay within the defense budget, right?
Dr. Bensahel. Yes, that is part of it. It is also--and you
will know this far better than we do--it is very, very
difficult to achieve current-year savings by looking at
efficiencies on the kind of reforms we are talking about; you
do need to have a much longer perspective.
The Chairman. Yes. Okay.
Mr. Crotty. I agree. I do think, obviously, Chairman
Dempsey going with the ragged edge at $561, it is hard to
refute that. And the--sort of the rumor has always been that,
you know, that they tried to come in significantly higher.
You know, I think that having some pressure on making sure
that internal reforms do happen and there is some rationalizing
of say civilian and contractor forces, as the force changes,
you know, there needs to be some downward pressure. But I am
concerned about some of the risk is all in the other direction.
The risk is in the money we are trying to bring back in from
OCO [Overseas Contingency Operations] that--in the war funding,
that really is now just about how we live day-to-day. It is
part of what the military is doing.
So between that, the past efficiencies, and assumed future
efficiencies, the $561 starts to jump to $580, $590 really
quickly when you start thinking about exactly what it is we
think we are paying for and need to pay for.
Mr. Thomas. Just to underscore, we really need reform,
because the reforms are not just about treating the President's
request as a floor for this year and saying, ``If we don't get
the reforms you potentially need more,'' but it is the long-
term savings. And if we don't start placing--putting these
reforms in place, we have this problem year after year. And at
the same time, if we do put the reforms in place, we get those
accumulated savings sooner rather than later.
Mr. Donnelly. I would fall back on the report of the
National Defense Panel, for which I worked as a scribe and so I
got to see the members wrestling with this question. And their
answer was to say we needed to go back to the 2011 budget--the
last Gates budget, as it is commonly referred to, which was the
last time prior to the BCA that the Department was allowed to
do anything like budget building that was based on a strategy.
And I think their observation was that the BCA has
fundamentally changed everything since then, including the
National Military Strategy, as reflected in the Defense
Guidance.
So the question is how reasonably fast can we get back to
that Gates ramp? So based on where we are and what that Gates
number is, something in the $560 to $570 range is probably as
much money as the Department can reasonably digest, even if you
wanted to get back to Gates, say, by 2018 or something like
that.
The Chairman. I don't remember the exact number for this
year for Gates, but it is in the--I think $580s or something
like that would be what it would be, so-- I'm sorry?
Staff. 638----
The Chairman. $638 billion. Sorry. It is always good to
have a budget person on your right shoulder to remind you what
the real numbers are.
Last comment I would make: I appreciate what a number of
you, including Mr. Thomas at the end, said about reform. My
only point to you is it is not just about saving money; reform
is necessary for the agility we have to have in a very
volatile, uncertain world. And so there are two goals of this
reform, and we need to keep them both in mind.
But you all have done a terrific job of fielding our
questions and also some of our frustrations today. I appreciate
it very much. And as I said at the beginning, I really
appreciate all of the work that your organizations do to
contribute to our national dialogue and decisionmaking on
defense.
So thanks for being here, and please keep up the good work.
I know I and other members of the committee depend on the work
y'all do to help inform and educate us.
And with that, the hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

February 11, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 11, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
