- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-88]RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE FUTURE OF THE ARMY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-88]

RECOMMENDATIONS FROM

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION

ON THE FUTURE OF THE ARMY

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

FEBRUARY 10, 2016

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAIABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-916                          WASHINGTON : 2016
_______________________________________________________________________________

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio, Chairman

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
PAUL COOK, California                    Georgia
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona              DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey         MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
Jesse Tolleson, Professional Staff Member
Doug Bush, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Tsongas, Hon. Niki, a Representative from Massachusetts,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...................     2
Turner, Hon. Michael R., a Representative from Ohio, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces...................     1

WITNESSES

Ham, GEN Carter, USA (Ret.), Chairman, National Commission on the
Future of the Army, and Hon. Robert F. Hale, Commissioner,
National Commission on the Future of the Army..................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Ham, GEN Carter..............................................    36
Turner, Hon. Michael R.......................................    33

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Statement from Reserve Officers Association of the United
States.....................................................    47

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]

RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE FUTURE OF THE ARMY

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, February 10, 2016.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:00 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael R.
Turner (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL R. TURNER, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM OHIO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND
FORCES

Mr. Turner. The hearing will come to order. We have votes
that are coming up, so we are going to try to get through our
opening statements, General Ham's opening statement, and then
return for questions.
So the subcommittee meets today, along with members of the
full committee, to receive testimony on the findings and
recommendations of the National Commission on the Future of the
Army [NCFA]. I would like to welcome our distinguished panel,
General Carter Ham, U.S. Army, retired, Chairman of the
Commission appointed by Chairman Thornberry, and the Honorable
Robert F. Hale, the commissioner appointed by Ranking Member
Smith. Mr. Hale was also the lead for the Commission's
subcommittee on aviation issues.
The Congress was prompted to form the Commission in large
part over two major concerns. The first was how the Army should
best organize and employ the total force in a time of declining
resources. The second was whether the Army should proceed with
the transfer of AH-64 Apache aircraft from the Reserve
Components to the Regular Army, as directed by the Army's
Aviation Restructure Initiative, ARI.
The Commission reported its findings to Congress and the
administration on January 28, 2016, and made 63
recommendations, 19 of which were directed towards Congress for
potential action. This will provide the committee with enough
time to review the recommendations as the committee prepares to
mark the National Defense Authorization Act for 2017.
In considering recommendations, the Commission was
instructed to take into account, quote: ``anticipated mission
requirements for the Army at acceptable levels of national risk
in a manner consistent with available resources and anticipated
future resources.''
I want to underscore those last two, because it is a
significant limit upon the Commission's view, and that was
available resources and anticipated future resources.
Consequently, the Commission assumed that the Army budget
is flat-lined at the fiscal year 2016 Presidential budget
levels. The Commission has indicated that a total force Army of
980,000 soldiers is an acceptable level of risk, but is the
lowest total end strength the Army can go given mission
requirements and the current defense strategic planning
guidance. Again, the Commission did not consider the potential
for budget increases over the amount of the fiscal year 2016
Presidential budget.
However, the Commission did acknowledge that the current
defense guidance does not include emerging threats such as
Russian aggression and the growing threat of ISIL [Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant]. The Commission then further
notes that perhaps, quote, their ``greatest concern is the
inadequacy of that guidance.''
We have heard senior military leaders testify before this
committee that our military is operating at the ``ragged edge''
and that current assumptions in the defense guidance are rosy
at best. Here is what we know. The Army is being asked to do
more with less. Demands from the combat commands for Army
capabilities and capacity continue to increase. The world's
security environment is considerably worse now than when the
Department of Defense conducted its more recent Quadrennial
Defense Review in 2014.
Going beyond just Russia and ISIL, North Korea conducted
another ballistic missile test over the weekend. The Army has
soldiers deployed in over 140 countries. The Army has provided
over 1.5 million troop-years to the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan since 2001. And the Army has nearly 100,000
soldiers committed to the Pacific and continues to deter
aggression in the Korean peninsula. However, despite these
demands, the Army has continued to downsize and budgets have
been reduced.
I hope today we can engage in candid discussion regarding
total Army force capability and capacity as compared to the
current and emerging threats. I want to briefly touch on the
Army's Aviation Restructure Initiative, or ARI.
Originally, the ARI had proposed numerous changes to Army
aviation capacity, including the transfer of all Apache
helicopters out of the Army National Guard to the Regular Army.
The Commission examined three comprehensive options for the
Army's ARI, and we look forward to hearing more details about
their final recommendations. This should also provide a great
opportunity for the committee to gain a better understanding of
the Commission's views in how to better utilize the Reserve
Components.
Before we begin, I would like to return to my good friend
and colleague, Niki Tsongas, for her opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Turner can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]

STATEMENT OF HON. NIKI TSONGAS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, SUBCOMMITTEE ON TACTICAL AIR AND LAND FORCES

Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to
our witnesses. I appreciate you both being here.
The National Commission on the Future of the Army had an
ambitious task, and I commend the commissioners--the two of
you--and their staff for the work they put into this report. I
would also like to thank the chairman for opening the hearing
to the full committee, as these topics impact the men and women
of our Army stationed across the country and around the world.
As many of us in this hearing have heard before, the Army
is being asked to do more with less against an array of diverse
and complex global threats. These constraints require the Army,
the Department of Defense [DOD], and Congress to closely
examine the appropriate distribution of active Guard and
Reserve forces, as well as the right mix of capabilities needed
to defend the United States and its allies.
Today's challenges also require the Army to ensure that it
is optimizing the performance of its soldiers to see that they
remain the best trained and best equipped force in the world.
The Commission's recommendations appear to fall into three
broad categories. First, the Commission made specific
recommendations regarding the size, location, and composition
of the Army. Second, the Commission report makes many
recommendations on how to further integrate the Reserve
Components of the Army, the National Guard and Army Reserve,
with the Regular Army. Finally, the report includes
recommendations on the future of Army aviation, and in
particular the question of where Apache helicopters should
reside.
I look forward to hearing more details about how the
Commission reached its conclusions on all these topics. I would
also like to hear more about the cost associated with the
Commission's recommendations. If Congress chooses to pursue any
of the recommendations in the report, the money will have to
come from somewhere, either within the Army or from another
military service's budget.
Fully understanding these potential tradeoffs is a critical
part of considering the Commission's recommendations. These are
not easy decisions to make, and I appreciate the opportunity to
have a robust debate here in Congress on the way forward. I
look forward to hearing more about how you arrived at some of
your key recommendations.
Thank you. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Congresswoman Tsongas.
I ask unanimous consent that non-subcommittee members be
allowed to participate in today's hearing after all
subcommittee members have had an opportunity to ask questions.
Is there objection? Without objection, non-subcommittee members
will be recognized at the appropriate time for 5 minutes.
With that, General Ham.

STATEMENT OF GEN CARTER HAM, USA (RET.), CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL
COMMISSION ON THE FUTURE OF THE ARMY, AND HON. ROBERT F. HALE,
COMMISSIONER, NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE FUTURE OF THE ARMY

General Ham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ms. Tsongas,
thank you very much. On behalf of all my fellow commissioners
and the great staff that support us, I thank you for inviting
me and Secretary Hale to testify before the committee on a
report on the future of the Army.
The committee and your staff have already received the
Commission's report, so I won't spend a lot of time addressing
specific points. But I would like to give you a sense of how we
approach the task that you gave to us in the fiscal year 2015
National Defense Authorization Act [NDAA].
The Commission made every effort to be inclusive,
accessible, and transparent. We visited 17 States and
interacted with over 320 different Army units across all 3
components. We interacted with all 54 adjutants general and
with 33 Governors. About 80 Members of Congress engaged with
the Commission, as well, and we met with all 6 geographic
combatant commanders and many of our most important allies and
foreign partners, and that frankly is only a partial list of
our engagements.
As Chairman Turner indicated, we paid strict attention to
the law you passed creating the Commission. Importantly, our
recommendations had to be consistent with, I quote:
``acceptable levels of national risk and anticipated future
resources.''
In other words, we simply were not unbounded in our work.
The result is a set of 63 specific recommendations that we
believe are well researched, based on realistic assumptions,
and backed by solid data. First, America's Army is the best in
the world. Those who wear the uniform deserve our gratitude
each and every day. But even those great men and women serving
in uniform, the Army faces severe challenges, many of them
budget-driven.
From fiscal years 2010 to 2015, overall defense spending
declined 7 percent, but Army funding declined 14 percent. On
the two main issues before the Commission--force size and mix
and the Apache transfer--the Commission found the following. An
Army of 980,000 is the minimally sufficient force to meet
current and anticipated missions at an acceptable level of
national risk. Within that 980,000, the Commission finds the
Regular Army should be 450,000, an Army National Guard of
335,000, and the Army Reserve at 195,000, represent the right
mix of forces and, again, the absolute minimum levels to meet
America's national security objectives.
To fully understand this recommendation, it is important to
remember again the mandate that you gave us. We were tasked to
size the force in light of the two previously mentioned
considerations--acceptable risk and anticipated resourcing.
Adjust either or both of those and you would reasonably arrive
at very different conclusions. In our assessment, an Army of
980,000 is again the absolute minimum; a floor, not a ceiling.
On the Apache question, the Commission recommends the Army
maintain 24 manned Apache battalions, 20 in the Regular Army
and 4 in the Army National Guard. The Commission recommendation
has advantages over the Aviation Restructure Initiative in both
wartime capacity and surge capacity and it will reduce
peacetime deployment stress. It will also, in our view, promote
better integration of the Regular Army and the Army National
Guard.
To offset the cost of having four Apache battalions in the
Guard, the Commission suggests that the Army add only two Black
Hawk battalions to the Guard instead of the four that are
currently planned, and we recommend some slowing of Black Hawk
modernization.
The report also contains several prominent themes based on
the Commission's fact-finding and analysis. The Commission
considers sustaining the All-Volunteer Force vital to the
future of the Nation. A return to a draft or other model of
compulsory military service will not yield the quality Army the
Nation requires, but an All-Volunteer Force is expensive to
recruit and retain. We believe doing so is the right choice.
The Commission believes it is critically important to
develop a true total force culture. While the Regular Army, the
Army National Guard, and the Army Reserve are distinct,
essential, and interdependent, they are meant to operate as one
force, with their efforts fully integrated. We found gaps and
seams that exist in the implementation of the total force
policy, and our report highlights some of those and offers some
remedies.
For example, we recommend putting all Army marketing under
one office, fielding a consolidated pay and personnel system,
and making changes to the existing section 12304b authority
that will make it easier for the Army to employ the Reserve
Components. The Commission recommends funding at the
President's fiscal year 2016 level, which would provide the
Army with the minimum resources necessary to meet its
requirements and acceptable levels of risk.
But given the evolving strategic environment and the
potential for growing instability, even this level of funding
may prove inadequate. Additionally, Army funding must be
predictable. Successive years of budget uncertainty and
continuing resolutions have had significant negative
consequences for the Army.
It should be understood that in the Commission's view even
with budgets at the President's budget for fiscal year 2016,
the Army would still suffer from some significant shortfalls in
aviation and short-range air defense, as well as other
capabilities that we address in the report.
That is a very brief rundown of what we found. Certainly
not everyone will agree with our recommendations. Indeed, many
have already voiced their disagreement. What I do hope, though,
is that our report will contribute to the important debate that
you and the Congress and the administration and the Army--
indeed, the Nation--must have to determine how America's Army
should be sized, trained, modernized, and postured.
With that, Secretary Hale and I are prepared to answer your
questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Ham can be found in the
Appendix on page 36.]
Mr. Turner. Thank you, General. It is our honor to have our
chairman with us today, and I recognize Chairman Thornberry.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to take
a moment--and I know I speak on behalf of Mr. Smith, as well--
to express our appreciation to General Ham and to Mr. Hale for
their willingness to serve on this Commission, as well as the
work that the Commission has done, as well as the staff that
have made all this possible.
I think that you all have done exactly what we asked you to
do in answering some very specific questions, but as General
Ham was just referring, you have also set up some of the larger
discussion that we need to pursue, such as how we make sure all
the components of the Army work together in a total force.
So I think this is very good and very important work, and I
just want to express appreciation to the work of the
commissioners and the staff. In a relatively short amount of
time, you have dealt with some very big issues. So thank you.
And I would yield back.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, want to thank
both of you for the work that you have done. And it is
incredibly helpful to us. We also need to look at it in the
context of the limitations that you were given in putting the
construct together.
And so with that, General Ham, I have a question for you.
It wasn't within your charge. You were constrained and limited
by budget caps. But I would ask if you could opine, if Congress
did have additional funds to allocate, would you recommend that
Congress stop the Army drawdown? General Ham.
General Ham. Yes, thanks, Mr. Chairman. As the Commission
did not look at that issue specifically, let me speak
personally rather than as chairman of the Commission. It is my
view that with additional funding, were additional funding to
be available, some of the capability shortfalls that we
mentioned in the report, some in aviation, short-range air
defense, missile defense, military police, wheeled vehicle
transport, and some other capabilities would be highly
beneficial to the Army and would reduce the risk that we
assessed given the size of the force that we recommended.
So I think that is where additional capability, additional
capacity would buy down risk over time. And maybe Secretary
Hale has some thoughts.
Mr. Hale. May I briefly on the budget side of this? The
budget that was released yesterday has less resources--and I
think you all know--for the Army and DOD than was in the fiscal
year 2016 budget plan, by a significant amount. So we are
already off the track that the Commission assumed in terms of
funding for DOD. And I think the Commission feels strongly we
need to get back on that track in 2018 and beyond, and 2017 if
that is possible.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. General Ham, of course, I am
referring to the total force drawdown numbers. In your report,
you have said what the force needs to do, and you have said
what some of the threats are as to how that force can be
utilized. But as you know, the total force drawdown is based on
budgetary constraints that you were given.
If Congress had the resources and we could stop the
drawdown of the total force numbers, should we?
General Ham. Mr. Chairman, I believe doing so would be
wise, and it would afford the Army the opportunity to gain some
of those capabilities that are currently in shortfall. The one
caveat that I would offer, Mr. Chairman, is it is not just
about the size. The size is important. But the size of that
force, that Army must be properly modernized, trained, and
resourced. So it is not just the number. It is all----
Mr. Turner. But, General, let me interrupt you for just a
second. I understand that what you are saying is that in
addition to having the force numbers, you have to have
resources, you have to have training, you have to have
capability for those force numbers. But I appreciate your
statement that the total force number does matter and that if
we had the resources, your recommendation it'd be that we not
draw the force down, but that we also in addition to it
adequately equip it, train it, and provide it with capability.
General Ham. That is correct, Mr. Chairman. I agree with
that.
Mr. Turner. Okay, thank you. One other question, and then I
will turn to Congresswoman Tsongas.
In looking to Europe, Lieutenant General Ben Hodges,
Commanding General of Army Europe, has stated that there used
to be 300,000 soldiers in Europe during the height of the Cold
War. Today we have 30,000 distributed all over Central and
Eastern Europe with the same mission--to assure allies and to
deter Russia, just like we did in the Cold War, according to
General Hodges.
There is a big difference in capability and capacity
between 300,000 and 30,000. General Ham, could you elaborate on
the Commission's reasoning for recommending number 14, to
realign an ABCT [armored brigade combat team] back to Europe?
And could you give the committee your thoughts on whether this
should be a permanent station or rotational unit?
General Ham. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Our recommendation is
that an armored brigade combat team be forward stationed,
assigned to Europe, rather than the current model of rotational
forces. Rotational forces are certainly capable and offer a lot
to the command, but it is our assessment that stationing an
armored brigade combat team in Europe has two effects.
One, it conveys a sense of permanence and commitment, which
is helpful both in deterrence and in assurance. But secondly,
we found in the larger sense that the Army's nine--the Regular
Army's nine armored brigade combat teams are totally consumed
in the current rotational model, which has rotational armored
brigades to Korea, that basically is three to make one, to the
Mideast, three to make one, and Europe, three to make one,
which means all nine armored brigade combat teams in the
Regular Army are committed, leaving no capacity for an
unforeseen contingency.
If the Army were allowed to forward station an armored
brigade combat team in Europe, that would provide not only
positive effects on deterrence and assurance, but it would
provide some residual capacity to the Army for an unforeseen
contingency.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. We are going to pause. Votes have
been called. I thank both of you for your patience. But we will
be returning for additional questions after the votes. That
will be recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Turner. Thank you. We will resume the hearing and turn
to Congresswoman Tsongas.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to follow
up. You have issued 63 total recommendations, and close to 20
of those were directed towards Congress that we needed to act.
But I am curious how you would rank order them, if there are
some that you see more pressing and others that could be
addressed later. And I will start with you, General Ham.
General Ham. Thanks, ma'am. We purposely did not prioritize
the recommendations, but I think--I will offer my thoughts on
ones that perhaps might require a little more attention than
others. For me, it would begin with the very first
recommendation that says maintain and sustain the All-Volunteer
Force, and clearly, Congress's role in that is absolutely
essential. I think, frankly, if we don't do that, the rest of
it almost doesn't matter, because we have got to have the
quality women and men to join the Army that are necessary.
Secondly, I would emphasize the Congress's role in assuring
prediction and responsible budgeting for the Army. I think that
is absolutely vital to give that element of stability and
predictability to the Army in its funding processes.
Thirdly, there are a number of recommendations that address
specific actions that cause the total force policy to be
implemented more fully. Some of those require some legislative
change, and so I would group those total force recommendations
perhaps as a next priority for the Congress to address.
And again, just the larger recommendation with regard to
the size and readiness of the force, the 980,000 at required
levels of readiness, I think that would obviously also rank
very, very high.
Ms. Tsongas. Secretary Hale, would you agree with that? Or
would you have a slightly different prioritize?
Mr. Hale. No, I agree with it. I want to underscore the
need for predictable budgets. This turmoil is just eating the
time of senior leaders and the Congress, I might add.
Let me just give a couple of examples of the last theme
that General Ham raised, and that is integrating into the total
force. I think the Apache recommendation actually fits within
this category. And that if you follow the Commission's
recommendation, there will be one other area of connective
tissue between the Guard and the Regular Army.
But the recommendations on multicomponent units are also I
think very important. The Army is already doing this, but I
think the Commission believes they could do more. And we made
some specific suggestions for a pilot program in aviation that
could lead to more multicomponent units. And there are a number
of others, like integrated recruiting.
So there are several, I think, specific ideas that fit
within the theme that General Ham raised of integrating the
Regular Army and the Guard in a better manner.
Ms. Tsongas. Did you identify costs associated with that
integration? And how did you--or not? And if so, how would you
pay for them? Were there tradeoffs you would make in favor of
that, moving forward in that way?
General Ham. Ma'am, the one area where we tried to address
costs specifically as to tradeoffs was in the aviation realm.
For the other recommendations, we did not. Frankly, time and
capacity of the staff and expertise, we did not have the time
to offer specific cost findings with many of the other
recommendations. I am seated next to the cost expert, as you
know.
Mr. Hale. A title I am trying to shed.
Ms. Tsongas. Mr. Secretary, you might have some off-the-
top-of-your-head idea of cost.
Mr. Hale. No, I think I won't go there. But I will say, in
the aviation area, we did do costing there, that Congress
specifically tasked us to look at the Apache transfer. And
the--although the Commission's recommendation adds to capacity
and peacetime capabilities, it does add to costs, about $165
million a year in operating costs and around $400 million in
one-time procurement costs.
And we did offer what we called an illustration of ways to
offset that cost through a slight decrease in the size of the
Black Hawk fleet and a modest slowdown in a modernization of
the fleet. It is not that Black Hawks aren't important; they
are. But they are a large fleet, and we felt that it was more
important, if you had to offset the costs, it was more
important to accomplish the Apache transfer even if some
offsets had to be made.
And there were some other general offsets that were
discussed, as well. So we certainly paid attention to costs.
Although as General Ham said, outside of aviation, we did not
specifically cost each option.
Ms. Tsongas. At least it is an acknowledgement that there
are costs associated with this and that in the world of
constrained resources that as we move forward we are going to
have to think about that as we implement or not some of these
recommendations----
Mr. Hale. But some of them won't add to cost. I mean, for
example, the multicomponent units, if you use the same units--I
mean, unless you add the units--you won't significantly add to
costs. I think some of the things can be done without
significantly added costs, and I would hope that when you see
the Army's response that they will identify some of those for
you.
Ms. Tsongas. I have a follow-on question. In the end, in an
All-Volunteer Force, in any Army, it comes down to the people
that you are able to attract. And what I would like to do--one
of the recommendations was you want to stop cuts in the overall
size of the Army. But even if this was followed, our troop
levels will still be at the lowest levels in decades. So that
is why I do think that those you do have are of the highest
caliber.
So how can the Army continue to improve the physical, the
psychological, the cognitive, the overall human performance of
the force to make sure that those that you are attracting are
able to perform at the highest level and you make the most of
every soldier?
General Ham. Thanks, ma'am. As you know, that was not a
specific charge to the Commission to look at that issue. So if
you will allow me to step away from my role as chairman and
speak perhaps to some of the things that we observe throughout
the force.
The young women and men of the Army, all three components,
Regular Army, Army National Guard, Army Reserve, what we heard
loud and clear is that they joined to serve. They want to be
utilized. So that is part of, I think, the recruiting and
retention challenge for a quality force is use that force.
We heard--this is anecdotal--but we heard from a number of
young soldiers, mid-grade soldiers, particularly in the Reserve
Components, that if they weren't going to be utilized, if they
weren't going to be operationally employed, well they might
choose to do something else. So I think that has an important
part of it.
I think a second component to successful recruiting and
retention is that the young people who we've had the great
fortune to engage with across the Army, they want to feel like
what they are doing makes a difference, that they are making a
valuable contribution. Certainly they are concerned about
compensation; that is certainly an important piece of this. But
it is not only the piece. It is not the only piece of their
sense of service.
And so I think it is this combination of challenge, of
importance of mission, combined with the proper level of
compensation that will allow the Army to continue to attract in
an admittedly declining pool of eligible women and men across
the country to serve, but will continue to attract the bright
young people that the Nation needs in its Army to maintain its
vitality and effectiveness.
Ms. Tsongas. Secretary Hale, do you have any thoughts about
it? Yes, it is not an easy challenge that the Army then has
taken on, in terms of just making sure it can recruit and
retain those that can meet the tests, whatever they may be. And
to ensure that you have the capabilities you need across the
force, as well, not just at the individual that is feeling well
able to contribute at the highest level, but that you are also
finding all the talent you need for the specific jobs, and you
kind of align them properly.
General Ham. Yes, ma'am. I think that is right. And, of
course, the requirements are changing. But I think we found
certainly young people with highly technical educational
backgrounds that are attracted to work in growing fieldings
such as cyber defense and the like. And so looking for
opportunities to match those skills and attributes that young
people bring with the needs of the Army I think will be a vital
component, again, to maintaining the excellence that the Army
has achieved over many years.
And I would add just one other point is, the people who
serve, they want to know that they are serving in the world's
best Army. That requires a continued emphasis on leader
development. It also entails a commitment to modernizing the
force, to make sure that the soldiers are properly equipped to
encounter any potential adversary.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you for your testimony.
I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Dr. Fleming.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, General, thank
you for your service in uniform and your continued service in
retirement, which is not so much of retirement. You are
actively working now, and we thank you for that.
I was here earlier when you testified. And if I understand
correctly, you said that 980,000 is really an absolute floor
that we have to operate from. And I assume you also mean
450,000 for the Active Duty Component. Is that still correct?
General Ham. Doctor, that is correct. So that we were
careful in the words that we chose. And so we chose that an
Army of 980,000 broken down by components, 450,000 Regular
Army, 335,000 National Guard, 195,000 in the Army Reserve, is
minimally sufficient. We were careful about those words.
Dr. Fleming. So it is really not even close to being ideal,
where we really need to be on our manpower strength?
General Ham. We of course, we are not charged with
recommending what might the ideal force be. It was, what was
the force within acceptable risk and with anticipated
resourcing? So that is how we came to that agreement amongst
the Commission, that minimally sufficient was the right
descriptor.
Dr. Fleming. Would you comment on the fact that this
administration's budget, because of increasing OCO [overseas
contingency operations] needs, is now wanting to pull OCO out
of base budget? Would you like to comment on that and what
impact it has on this end strength number?
General Ham. Doctor, if you will allow me, I will make a
brief comment and then look to the guy who understands this
better than I do. I think one of the challenges with the
overseas contingency operations funding is its lack of
predictability, and that is why I think it is important to make
sure that there is the right level and a predictable level of
funding in the Army's base funding so that they can undertake
many of the modernization efforts that are necessary.
As far as the impacts, let me turn to my partner here.
Mr. Hale. Well, the Commission focused on the minimum
needed resources, and we really didn't look at how it ought to
be funded. And I want to reiterate that we endorse the fiscal
year 2016 plan, and we are not on that track now, as you know.
The Army is significantly below those resources in this budget
because of the Bipartisan Budget Agreement last year.
In terms of OCO, if I could follow General Ham and step
away a bit from the Commission, it has the problems that he
just said. You don't want to fund a lot of things in OCO
because it is only one year at a time and the Department
desperately needs to be able to look out over several years in
planning programs.
That said, if the environment is such that it is the only
way to go, at least I personally wouldn't turn it down. I think
we have got to make things work.
Dr. Fleming. Right, right, excellent. Also, again, back to
you, General. The Commission cited the unstoppable OPTEMPO
[operations tempo] within the Active Component a number of
times throughout the report. Could the Commission provide some
more specifics on what it found on the high rate of
deployments, the current small size of the force, and how this
has strained the Army?
General Ham. Yes, sir. Again, so we engage soldiers across
the Army. We found the high operations tempo, rapid deployments
below that level which is optimal for the Active Component,
which would ideally be at least 2 years at home for 1 year
operationally deployed, 4 or 5 years at home for the Reserve
Components for every year mobilized or operationally deployed.
We found lots of units that were, particularly in the
Regular Army, spinning faster than that, particularly in
certain fields: aviation, missile defense, special forces, to
be sure, and many others.
Part of that, the Commission felt, was due to the challenge
in assured access and funding to allow Reserve Component units
to perform many of those missions, which they are certainly
perfectly capable of performing, but in some cases that
requires a bit of additional funding to pay principally the
salaries for those mobilized or activated Reserve or National
Guard soldiers.
Dr. Fleming. Right. Well, let me just say in ending here, I
want to thank you again, General Ham, for your position on
this, that this is an absolute more ragged edge, as we often
say, that we cannot go below this floor. And, really, all
things being said, really, we need to have better funding and
more manpower.
But thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
putting the emphasis on this report that it deserves and
pointing out some of the critical issues we are going to be
tackling here. And to the Commission, I can't thank you enough
for the work you did. On behalf of the co-authors, myself, Mr.
Graves, Mr. Miller, Mr. Meadows, and former member Rahall, who
put this in the NDAA, rarely have I seen since I have been here
the letter and the intent, the congressional intent to carry it
out the way you did it, and so thank you for that.
It was to inform us before we made decisions going forward.
The number of people you went and spoke to, it is astounding.
And I hear feedback all the time, and I want a special thank
you from those National Guard folks out in Minnesota, that you
took the time, you included them in this discussion.
And so when you are speaking of these issues, you are
speaking exactly the way we are hearing it, about what they
want to do, they want to be part of this team, they want--and
we deserve to give them the best training, best equipment, and
then integrate them into that fight. So thank you for that.
And it is on that that I would segue to, how do we do a
better job? Did you come out of anything on that that maybe
both of you--your opinions on this, General Ham--what do you
think on integration?
We have tried this before. We tried integrating battalions
in. We took troops out and leaders and embedded them at times.
Certainly, over the last 10 years, the Guard has picked up
their fair share of the missions and done them, but how do we
go forward to ensure that this is a part of the strength we
need?
General Ham. Congressman, I would offer two broad
categories of how this might be enhanced in the future. One is,
there has got to be from the very top leadership in the Army,
from the Secretary of the Army and the Chief of Staff and the
Sergeant Major of the Army, this continued emphasis on the
total force. There is one Army. It happens to have three
distinct interdependent, but essential components.
But as General Milley, the Chief of Staff of the Army,
points out in many of his public addresses, over every
soldier's breast pocket, it says U.S. Army. It doesn't say
anything else. It says U.S. Army, irrespective of component. So
I think that cultural emphasis by the Army's leadership is
important.
Having said that, there are some matters in policy and even
some in law that would help in the Commission's view to further
the integration of the three components of the Army, such as
the increased emphasis on the one Army school system, where,
again, irrespective of component, your trained and educated the
leader development programs for officers and noncommissioned
officers are the same. You know, you grow up in the Army and
you have different roles, so that is one area that we think a
difference could be made.
And as I mentioned in my opening statement, some additional
flexibility and, indeed, some additional resourcing in the
section 12304b authority that allows for the employment of
Reserve Component forces would be helpful, again, I think, in
integrating the total force.
Mr. Hale. I couldn't agree more. The tone at the top is
key. And I sense hearing General Milley speak, that he does
want more integration, and we have heard that privately from
him, and I have seen it in his statements. In addition to what
General Ham said, there are a couple others I mentioned
earlier. I think the Apache transfer itself is another way to
help toward integration, as are multicomponent units.
I will mention two others that are in the report, one an
integrated recruiting system. Right now, all three components
have their own recruiting system, sometimes even competing with
each other. The Commission recommended at least a pilot to look
at integrating those.
And the Army right now does not have a single pay and
personnel system that allows everybody to see each other's when
the appropriate security guidelines, obviously. Integrated Pay
and Personnel System-Army, IPPS-A, as it is called, is
important I think to the overall integration. It is on its way.
And I would urge that Congress fund it consistent with it
meeting appropriate milestones, but treat it as a high-priority
project.
Mr. Walz. Well, I appreciate your thoughtfulness. And I
said, it is to inform members of this committee and probably
more importantly the folks who aren't on this committee that
are in Congress. And I can't stress enough to my colleagues--I
think many of us are concerned about these end strength numbers
and we are concerned, as we rightfully should be,
simultaneously on costs.
The Guard and Reserve is a way you can get your cake and
eat it, too. And if it is done correctly, it has to be a part
of this discussion.
And so I encourage us to continue to take these
recommendations to heart and the work that you did will inform
us as we go forward. You have done a great service, and I
appreciate it.
I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Mr. Walz, I believe you have a unanimous
consent request for the committee.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that. I did
have--the Reserve Officers Association, I ask for unanimous
consent to put their statement in the record. They, too, pretty
much echo that and thank you for what you did and talk about
the one Army total force, so if I could submit that.
Mr. Turner. Are there any objections?
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Turner. Without objection, the statement of the Reserve
Officers Association will be included in the record. And
turning to Mr. Gibson.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 47.]
Mr. Gibson. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
ranking member, as well. Thank you for your leadership on this
very important issue and holding this hearing. I also want to
welcome in and stress my gratitude to both of our panelists
today for their distinguished career serving our service men
and women and their families.
You know, I want to echo the comments, certainly the work
of the Commission. With regard to integrating the force, the
total Army, I can recall back--although sometimes it seems like
1,000 years ago, being 17 years old and enlisting as a private
E-1 in the Army National Guard, serving 5 years there, and then
going in the Regular Army for 24 years, and then now on this
side.
And while I think that there has always been good faith
efforts to have this one force, I think that the weight of the
Commission and Congressman Walz, highest ranking enlisted man
to ever serve in these chambers, you know, and his team
sponsoring this Commission I think is helpful, particularly
when I see the Army leadership coming together and really
wanting to do exactly this.
I think it is going to be really important, which leads to
my next point, and that, Secretary Hale, I thank you for the
work that you have done over your career on really bringing
efficiencies, the reforms that are necessary, because as you
both point out, I mean, we don't--end strength means very
little if we have a hollowed-out force. We can't have that. We
need to have fully trained, equipped, and ready force, and it
needs to be rightsized, too, but all of that has to come
together.
So towards that end, you know, I just want to build on some
of the earlier testimony, and here I am just going to ask in
your best professional judgment, General Ham, in your case,
your best military judgment, when a BCT [brigade combat team]
is stood down, and it is completed, how long does it take to
turn the light back on?
Based on our experiences over the past decade, from the
idea to the enunciation to the recruiting to the initial
training to the integration in the unit, the training to the
deployment into an operational area, how long is that period?
General Ham. Having some experience, Congressman, in doing
this, having stood up an infantry brigade combat team while I
was a division commander, I would say at the bare minimum,
fully resourced, priority for manning, for equipment, and
access to all the right training, I would say 18 months would
be an absolute minimum, probably closer to somewhere in the
neighborhood of 24 to 36, from a cold start.
Mr. Gibson. Right. So that would be the unit. And I concur.
I think that is most of our--and then of course you have--just
to plan it in, you have to recruit. And then you have to
actually get them to basic training and AIT [advanced
individual training] and actually assess them into the unit, so
it can take as long as 3 years, when you actually put that
whole package together.
And that is what I wanted to really put into the record
here, is that we are making decisions this year on end strength
and for the American people to know that this is one that we
assume a lot of risk. If we get this wrong, you know, it is not
like, oh, well, you know, next month, we can just fix that.
If we draw down too far, you are looking at a 3-year lag
time before we can even recur or we can regain that capability
in our Armed Forces. And you acknowledge and agree?
General Ham. Congressman, I do. It is one of the reasons
why we make a number of recommendations with regard to
enhancing the readiness of the Reserve Components, but we also
address the issue of expansibility, which has not gotten a lot
of attention over the past several years, but there must be
processes in place and plans in place so that in the
eventuality where the Army is required to expand quickly, we
know how to do that. And I think that requires some additional
attention.
Mr. Gibson. Indeed. And I noticed that in the Commission--
and I think that was helpful. I will lay out a question now,
but I then want to move--and we will see if we have any time we
can recur back to it. But what I was interested from Secretary
Hale is, you know, the analysis of given a scenario where we
draw down and then we have to bring a BCT back on Active Duty,
what does that cost in relation to whatever we think it is that
we are saving?
But let me move on and see if we have time to go back to
that. I do want to ask this question, and that is this.
General, in your earlier statement, you talked about impact on
troops and families. Thank you for that. And you know, you
know, no one arguably knows that as much as you do. My point I
want to get clarification for the record is that is assuming
deterrence here. That is assuming, you know, we don't have to
go fight one of these major theater wars.
If we had to go fight a major theater war, what would the
impact then be on families in terms of dwell time? And what
would that--because you know very well what that looked like in
2007, 2008, is troops ended up spending 16 months in theater
and, you know, 11, 12 months back home, and then were rotating
back.
So if you could for the record say what the impact would be
on troops and families, if we do get committed to one theater.
General Ham. Yes, Congressman, I would commend to you and
to all the members there is a classified annex to the report
that addresses some of those issues in greater detail. But what
I would say is that certainly in the case of a full-scale
mobilization or commitment to a large-scale operation in any
future theater or war, at the size of the Army that is
anticipated, there is no dwell time. You know, for the most
part, soldiers deploy and they are engaged for the duration.
This is a commitment on the parts of soldiers and their
families to the defense of the Nation, and we have got to make
sure that our support for them is commensurate with their
commitment.
Mr. Gibson. And I thank you. I think that is a very
important point to enter into the record in terms of what the
risk we are taking on for troops and families.
I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Turner. Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank both of you
gentlemen for your hard work and the information you have been
able to provide us and give us some insight to all these very
important matters.
I like to think a lot of times about our military force as
being a deterrent for our adversaries in many ways. And I was
wondering if you could weigh in and maybe comment on where our
current state of the Army and military in general is serving as
a deterrent to our adversaries.
And I know we have different types of adversaries today,
potential adversaries. There is the peer to peer nation type
adversaries and then there is the terrorist type adversaries.
But I wonder if you could comment on where you think we are
today as far as being an effective deterrent to actions.
General Ham. Doctor, thanks for that question. I guess I
would characterize deterrence in a couple of different ways.
One is, in the purely military capability and capacity that the
Nation possesses. That is measurable. It is accessible by force
posture and levels of readiness. And that certainly shaped many
of our recommendations, particularly with regard to posture
overseas in Korea and in Europe, where there are a couple of
different recommendations with regard to ground forces and Army
aviation forces.
But deterrence also is based on elements of will and
demonstrated capacity. It is one of the reasons why we think
the presence of forces in Korea and in the case of Europe, we
believe, the forward stationing of an armored brigade combat
team conveys in very visible terms the will of the Nation to
commit to deterrence.
Mr. Hale. Thank you. Let me just add a thought, and that is
I think where the Army is able to deploy it is highly capable.
This is a strong Army. The problem is more its capacity and can
it do it in all the potential areas where they might be needed.
I think that is the trade. The risks that we take is not having
enough to do all of these requirements, meet all of these
requirements. Where they are deployed, they are a capable
force.
Dr. Wenstrup. So what I am reading from that, General,
especially your comments, when you talk about Europe, is we
could be a greater deterrent than we currently are.
General Ham. Doctor, we make a recommendation that--it gets
to the issue of, as this force, as this Army was sized and
planned for the future, the strategic environment is different
than it is today.
We did not--and most of the plans did not--we anticipated a
very different relationship with Russia than what has evolved
over the past couple of years. And we believe that that
necessitates a relook, a rethinking of our overall strategy for
employment of military forces for both deterrence, but also of
assurance of our allies and partners.
Dr. Wenstrup. I thank you both very much. I appreciate you
being here today and the work that you have done.
I yield back.
Mr. Turner. Gentleman yields back. We will go to Mr.
Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Yes, I wanted to ask a specific question about
the Commission considering the integration of women in the all-
male ground combat units and what they think of the
recommendations and, if so, what considerations are being made
and determined on that issue.
General Ham. Congressman, let me start--let me ask
Secretary Hale to comment. This obviously was not a specific
charge to the Commission. And the policy decision to open all
specialties to women was made pretty late in the Commission's
endeavors.
Having said that, we did have the opportunity to engage
with leaders, with soldiers, both women and men, across the
force and in all three components. And so we had some
discussion about this. And I think the first response is one
that won't surprise you, Congressman. It was from leaders at
all levels that says, if the policy changes, because it was
uncertain at that time, if the policy changes, we will embrace
it and move out and apply the new policy to the best efforts
that we have.
I would tell you, again anecdotally, in engaging with
women, particularly young women, both enlisted and officers,
there were mixed feelings about their personal interest in
serving in the ground combat arms or other specialties which
had previously been closed to women, but there was near
unanimity in opening the opportunity to women who had the
desire to serve in those specialties and the capability to
serve in those previously closed specialties. I think we heard
loud and clear that there was broad acceptance of the
opportunity to do so.
Mr. Hale. I agree with what General Ham said. I mean, it
wasn't a Commission issue, but speaking personally, I think it
was the right decision. We need to harness all the capability
we--or at least offer the opportunity to harness all the
capability we can in the United States military, and this was a
move in that direction.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Gibson [presiding]. Gentleman yields back. We will go
to Ms. McSally, please.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
gentlemen, for your service and your hard work on this
Commission.
And I want to go back to the Apache transfer, and to be
full disclosure here, the Silverbell Army Heliport is just
outside my district, and many of the guardsmen live in my
district. So any community is going to be concerned if they are
hearing that, you know, something is going to change, we are
going to lose those citizen soldiers from our community.
But aside from that, I am concerned about the operational
impact of the executing this and then also the cost, as you
mentioned. I have trained a lot as an A-10 pilot with the
Apaches, tremendous location there with the weather and the
airspace and the Barry Goldwater ranges, but it is a unit by
itself.
So I am assuming if your recommendations are put into
place, then we would lose that unit and that, you know, it
would be located at some Active Duty Army base. So they would
miss out on the operational strengths of being located where
they are, so that is of concern to me, just because of the
proximity and the airspace, the weather, the joint training
opportunities.
But then also, as we have seen units sometimes go from
Active to Guard or Reserve, you will see the expertise that we
have of the pilots potentially flowing into the Guard and
Reserve from Active Duty, so you can retain that expertise, but
if you are going in the other direction, I am assuming you
thought through--it is not likely to have a bunch of Guard
pilots want to transition back to Active Duty. They have other
jobs. They are rooted in the community.
So just the execution of that sounds very cumbersome to me.
And also we might lose operational capability, certainly lose
tremendous expertise if we go forward with your
recommendations. It is not clear to me whether you are
recommending with the four units staying in the Guard, would
the training capability stay in the Guard and the operational
capability be in Active Duty, just to clarify that?
And then I do want to clarify, obviously, there is cost
that comes with that, so what was the logic behind making a
recommendation that is increasing costs? And could you clarify
again what those costs are?
General Ham. So I think let me start and then we will turn
to Secretary Hale, who chaired the aviation subcommittee.
Firstly, ma'am, we did not make any recommendations with regard
to which units might be affected. We think that is left best to
the Army.
We did, as the law required us to do, we did, in fact,
actually look at the process by which Army National Guard
forces are allocated amongst the States and territories and
found with some minor recommendations, mostly administrative,
that that process was pretty sound.
So I think the Commission has full confidence that if this
recommendation is adopted, there is a good process to determine
which units might be affected.
Secondly, let me say that the recommendation doesn't change
the number of battalions that were intended to remain in the
Regular Army. From the Aviation Restructuring Initiative, there
will be 20 battalions, our recommendation keeps that same
number in the Regular Army, but adds 4 battalions into the Army
National Guard. That is over and above the Aviation
Restructuring Initiative.
The intent was that those 4 Army National Guard battalions
would be fully manned, but they would be equipped only with 18
by 24 aircraft. That is largely an acknowledgement of the added
cost that would be required.
But when those battalions would be mobilized and
operationally employed, they would cross-level amongst units, a
practice which the National Guard is quite familiar with. Chief
of the National Guard Bureau, director of the Army National
Guard have advised the committee during its work that they are
comfortable with that level of cross-leveling, so that when one
of the four Army National Guard battalions would be
operationally employed, it would go as a full-up battalion with
its own personnel, but with aircraft from additional
battalion--or from additional units.
With regard to the costs, let me turn to the cost expert.
Mr. Hale. We looked at four criteria before I get to the
costs. One of them was cost. One, wartime capacity in a key
scenario that is stressful to the Apaches. Second, a surge
capability across a variety of scenarios. Third, how do they
help in peacetime? Or how do they do in peacetime? And finally,
costs.
I won't go through all of the options, but the Commission
option ranked better of those that we looked in terms of
wartime capacity, it had somewhat more surge capability than
the Army's initiative. And it offers some opportunity if these
units are used, and we certainly hope they would be, to help in
the peacetime, as well.
That brings us to cost. It does cost more, about $165
million a year in operating costs, and a one-time cost in
procurement to manufacture more Apaches to the E model of about
$400 million. We did offer offsets. They are illustrative. We
recognize that and mentioned earlier they involve two fewer
units of Black Hawks helicopters, the assault helicopter, and a
modest slowdown in the modernization program for Black Hawks.
Black Hawks are important. But we felt that it was more
important to have a balanced force with some more Apache
capability, even if we had to pay for it through modest changes
in the Black Hawk program.
So we tried to look at a broad criteria that included cost,
but it wasn't solely cost.
Ms. McSally. So did the criteria include the potential loss
of expertise and having to rebuild some of that expertise in
the Active Army for the experience you will lose?
Mr. Hale. Well, as General Ham said, we would keep all 20
battalions that are currently in the Army, Apache battalions
that are currently in the Army, so we shouldn't lose any
capability there. It will be the same battalions and they will
be recruiting for them. We would keep some ability for the
Guard to be a repository of talent when Apache pilots leave, if
they want to stay in the Guard, they would have the opportunity
to do that under the Commission's proposal. So we would have
some more capability there, but the same in the Active.
Ms. McSally. Okay, great, thanks. My time is expired.
Thank you.
Mr. Turner. Gentlelady yields back. Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
General Ham and Mr. Hale, I thank you both for your work on
this informative Commission report. General Ham, a number of
the Commission's recommendations focused on total force
integration, preparing and leveraging the Reserve Component as
an operational force, including increasing the annual number of
Army National Guard combat training center rotations.
Now, if that were to be implemented, how can Congress
ensure that the readiness built through the rotations is best
maintained and best capitalized during the unit's on year, if
these units are not deploying as they have in past years?
General Ham. It is a great question, ma'am. And you will
allow me, let me offer an example that we came across. We
visited the 116th brigade combat team based in Idaho, but with
units from many, many different States, during their training
at the National Training Center at Fort Irwin, California.
That unit, all of those units in that brigade had spent a
considerable number of days, many more than the 39 minimum
number of days each year. Some of those soldiers had 50 or 60
days in the year leading up to their National Training Center
rotation. And they voiced the same concern that you did.
As they exited the National Training Center, at the peak of
their readiness, they said, but we are going home. We want to
be used. We are trained. We are ready. And so that was a large
part of why we recommended increased use of the 12304b
authority, why we increased continued reliance on the
operational capabilities that are resident in the Reserve
Components of the Army, to capitalize on that investment in
readiness that the Army had made.
The soldiers saw it. The leaders of that unit saw it. And I
have confidence that the leadership of the Army, the Secretary
and the Chief of Staff and the Sergeant Major of the Army are
recognizing that, as well, and say we simply cannot afford to
train units for training sake. We have to train and build
readiness so that those forces can be operationally employed
across the Army's needs.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Did you want to add to that?
Mr. Hale. I agree with that.
Ms. Bordallo. All right. Thank you very much.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibson. Gentlelady yields back. Mr. Bridenstine for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, gentlemen, for the great work you have done
on the National Commission on the Future of the Army. I know we
are going to hear from a lot of stakeholders on it, but I think
on balance it is a lot of very good recommendations that this
committee is going to have to take very seriously and move
forward where we can.
I wanted to talk to you for a second about some of the
short-range air defense and field artillery concerns. General
Ham, the Commission found unacceptable shortfalls in the short-
range air defense and field artillery. Fort Sill is in my home
State of Oklahoma, the Fires Center of Excellence, and of
course, it is the Army's home of air defense and artillery.
When you think about how important this is to the Army, a
couple of things that were mentioned in the National Commission
on the Future of the Army were the threats from unmanned aerial
systems and cruise missiles. Could you maybe take some time and
explain to this committee why it is so important that we make
sure that we are taking into account short-range air defense
and field artillery?
General Ham. Thanks, Congressman. First of all, I would
commend to you the classified annex that has some further
detail about the threats that are posed by potential
adversaries in this domain. And I think it is important to this
discussion.
At an unclassified level, I would go back to a previous
comment that said when the Army that we have today was planned
and structured, we did not envision the nature of the threat
environment in which the Army must operate today. As one
example, we did not anticipate that there would be many places
in the world where the Army might operate where they would be
subjected to threats by enemy air forces either manned or
unmanned or cruise missiles. That is in large testament to the
extraordinary capability of the world's finest Air Force to do
that, but the threat situation has evolved.
And I would highlight particularly as we have seen
integrated air defenses in Syria, as we have seen Russia's
employment of both manned and unmanned systems in eastern
Ukraine, it presents a different operating environment than
that which was envisioned, and we believe that the Army needs
to take note of that and restore some capability within the
force to counter those measures.
Mr. Bridenstine. So could you maybe share--is the concern
on the shortfall, is it primarily modernization? Is it
munitions? Is it manning? Is it doctrine? What is the--can you
be more clear on what that shortfall might be? All of the
above?
General Ham. It is a little bit of all of the above. It is
structure and modernization. As one example, for very sound
reasons, the Army has made a decision that all of its short-
range air defense battalions reside in the Reserve Components.
There are none in the Regular Army. At that time, that made a
lot of sense. In our view, it doesn't make a lot of sense
today, so there is a structure issue there, as well.
There certainly is a modernization component to this, as
unmanned systems, smaller systems, more sophisticated adversary
capabilities present themselves on potential battlefields, so
there is a modernization aspect to this, as well.
Mr. Bridenstine. One of the things we have heard General
Milley say--he stated on multiple occasions that the Guard
should get at least two additional combat training center
rotations in this year's budget.
Do you agree with that?
General Ham. Congressman, we did not specify a number. We
think that is best left for the Army. But we certainly do
believe that it is--that the number of the Reserve Component
combat training center rotations should be increased,
importantly, but without diminishing, decreasing the number of
Regular Army rotations.
Mr. Bridenstine. Okay. Well, that makes--and you think it
is possible to do more for the Guard and not decrease the
Regular Army rotations?
General Ham. In our assessment, yes, it is.
Mr. Bridenstine. Okay. One other question I had was the--
the recommendation to eliminate two Regular Army IBCTs
[infantry brigade combat teams], and ultimately did you
consider other areas where you could find 8,500 people or how
did you come to the assessment that infantry brigade combat
teams is where that number needed to come from?
General Ham. Some of the details would be in the classified
annex, Congressman, but in general, what I would say is that
while infantry brigade combat teams certainly are stressed in
any potential operational theater of war, they were less
stressed than many other capabilities. And so we felt that we
had to make at least some offer to say, if you have to make
these very, very difficult decisions to increase some of the
shortfalls in other capabilities, that this was a
consideration, recognizing how difficult that decision might
be.
Mr. Hale. We did look at a number of other potential
efficiencies. We didn't study them in detail, but I think
they--and they will be familiar to you. Most of them have been
proposed. Health care reform, for example, the always difficult
but important issue of closing unneeded facilities, and the
integrated recruiting system that the Commission recommended--
wasn't recommended primarily to save money, but it would
potentially save some dollars. So we did look at some other
areas.
Mr. Bridenstine. Did you guys look at the Army service
component commands, the nine different Army service component
commands as a place to find personnel?
General Ham. We did look at the Army service component
commands and spoke with them and with the combatant commanders
that they support, but not so much in terms of potential space
savings, while certainly there might be some utility in that,
but it is important that the Army service components at least
under current law and policy that is the mechanism by which
combatant commanders access Army capabilities.
Mr. Bridenstine. Right.
General Ham. So diminishing that brings some risk with it,
as well.
Mr. Bridenstine. And just real quick, did you guys look at
Army Materiel Command?
General Ham. We did not take a deep dive into Army Materiel
Command, principally because it is a largely civilian entity,
so we didn't look at that as a potential space savings.
Mr. Bridenstine. The chairman is telling me I am out of
time, so I will stop.
Thank you.
Mr. Gibson. Good work. Time's expired. We will go to Mr.
Wittman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, thanks so
much for joining us. Thanks for your efforts there with the
Commission.
I wanted to begin speaking from my perspective as Readiness
Subcommittee chairman in saying that I wholeheartedly agree
with your recommendation number 7 in the report that says the
Army must continue to treat readiness as its most important
funding priority. That is in line with what we have heard from
senior Army officials, including General Milley, the Army Chief
of Staff, who has repeatedly said that readiness is number one
and there is no other number one.
Secondly, I want to concur with recommendation number 14
that said the Army should forward station an armored brigade
combat team in Europe. There is probably no other statement in
the Commission's report that acknowledges the changed strategic
situation in Europe better than that recommendation. And in
your report, you quote EUCOM [European Command] commander
General Breedlove as saying the virtual presence by U.S. forces
will be translated by both friends and adversaries as actual
absence.
And while we know the rotating U.S. forces into and out of
Europe as we do now has significant value, we definitely need
armor back in Europe, and that is needed because it is a
credible deterrent to Vladimir Putin's ambitions.
The fact is, we have no armored units stationed in Europe
anymore, and as I visited the Baltic states last summer to
observe firsthand the impact of the European Reassurance
Initiative, the prime minister of Estonia I think put it best
when he told our delegation, deterrence is preferable to having
to be liberated.
And with Prime Minister Roivas there giving us that
perspective and having the longest period of time of
independence for Estonia, I think those are very prophetic
words.
And finally, like all of my colleagues, I have serious
reservations that the size of the total Army, especially the
Active Duty Army, is enough at the current levels being
proposed to fulfill all of its missions. And the report states
that for some potential challenges, the Army might have
capability and capacity shortfalls and will be forced to deploy
units not fully ready, which would not be acceptable, pretty
plain and straightforward. On the next page, it states, even
assuming full access to all Army components, this force size
provides only limited ability to react to unforeseen
circumstances.
And the report goes on to say that under current strategic
guidance, the Army and other defense components are directed
not to size themselves for large-scale, long-duration stability
operations.
Yet the other direction is to conduct current stability and
counterinsurgency operations, and that stated as one of the top
elements in the joint force prioritized missions as described
in the national military strategy of 2015. So those two
statements are at counter purposes.
So not only is the 980,000 total Army at the minimum
sufficient strength necessary to meet challenges of a future
strategic environment, as stated in the report, it only barely
meets that requirement when we wish away valid and required
missions. And I think we have to be realistic about saying we
can't change the mission sets to meet what we wish is provided
for us on the resource side. And I understand wanting to try to
take the 450 number and shoebox it into something that will
fit, but I just don't believe that that is where we need to be
directing this discussion.
My question is this. Is it safe to assume that if the Army
had included sizing for stability operations the requirement
for more IBCTs and enablers, that the number would be
significantly higher than the 980,000 total recommended in the
report?
General Ham.
General Ham. Congressman, thanks. So, again, the two parts
of guidance in the law that were so important to us were size
and force mix at acceptable levels of risk and consistent with
anticipated levels of resourcing. So as I mentioned, if you
alter one or both of those parameters, you would get a very,
very different answer.
So if you were not budget constrained, I suspect the
Commission would have come in with a much larger number. Or if
you had said, you know, minimum levels of risk, you might get,
again, a very, very different number.
I think, Congressman, what you speak to highlights the
requirement to continually assess the evolving security
environment in which Army forces will be applied. Again, in our
judgment, the numbers are what we think are consistent with the
charge that you gave us in the law. If you tinker with either
of those, I think we would have had a very different outcome.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Hale.
Mr. Hale. I would just like to repeat what I have said
earlier. We are off track from even the Commission's
recommendation in the latest budget. We recommended the fiscal
2016 budget request. We are somewhat below that, probably $5,
$6 billion below it for Army, and below it also for some of the
other services.
So I think the first thing we need to do is try to get back
on that track, and then we will go from there.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Chairman, with your indulgence, I just
want to ask one quick question with a yes or no answer.
Would you state then that under the current conditions we
find today that an Army of 450,000 would be insufficient to
properly manage risk and to address the threats we see before
us today?
General Ham. If greater resources were available, I would
agree with that. At the current level of resources, I will
stand by the Commission's recommendation.
Mr. Wittman. Mr. Hale.
Mr. Hale. I agree.
Mr. Wittman. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibson. Gentleman's time is expired. We will go to Mr.
Coffman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think my question
to you is concerning pushing more capability to the Guard and
Reserve to achieve cost savings. I think if you look at the
costs of--I have read analysis where the cost of a sergeant E-5
in the Army, and if you take sergeant E-5 in the Reserve or
Guard, that nondeployed it is about a third of the cost.
And then when you take--and that is discounting the legacy
cost of retirement. And so that individual when retired will
not draw until late 60 in the Guard and Reserve. And the Active
Duty will draw--they could draw as young as probably 37, 38
years old, with 20 years in would be the youngest, probably
certainly not the average.
And so I am just wondering, do we need a separate analysis?
Or do you think you press that issue in terms of shifting
capability to the Guard and Reserve in order to retain--to
where we are obviously not compromising capability, but to kind
of bend the cost curve in terms of personnel costs? I will
start with General Ham, you first.
General Ham. Thanks, Congressman. We purposely did not seek
to replow the ground that the compensation commission and
others have looked at in this regard, but we certainly heard
lots of testimony related to the points that you raised, that
before mobilization or activation, certainly Reserve Component
soldiers are less costly.
We looked at it from the Commission's standpoint more in
terms of the operational capability that would be required to
meet the Nation's objectives of the Army, and that is what led
us to the force sizing recommendations that we made.
But it is important that 450,000 in the Regular Army,
335,000 in the National Guard, 195,000 in the Reserve is only
sufficient if you properly train, modernize, and operationally
employ those forces. If you put them on the shelf and don't
modernize them, then the Reserve Components will not be ready
to answer the call.
So it is--again, it is more than just the size number. It
is the full package of training and modernization.
Mr. Coffman. I think you would--and I would agree with you,
and I think you would have to restructure the Guard and Reserve
in order to accomplish that. We don't want to go back to what
happened during the first Gulf War where you had an entire I
think Army national brigade that was deemed unfit to deploy.
But I just think we have got to press that issue.
And maybe we have to rethink it in a broader way to where,
do we want to maintain them as an operational reserve where
they are going to be deployed to Active Duty maybe on an every
5 year basis or something like that for a limited period of
time, as opposed to bringing them back to a strategic reserve
and having a concern about their combat effectiveness being
degraded?
Mr. Hale.
Mr. Hale. So you cited a common figure about a third. It
varies to more like a third to two-thirds the cost. The
aviation units are probably--in the Guard, even when not
deployed, about two-thirds of the costs, or 60 percent, 70
percent as much.
But the key here is the Regular Army can do some things the
Guard just can't realistically do. They can deploy early in a
war.
I will use the Apaches as a good example, because we looked
at them with care. We have got shortfalls in a key scenario
early in the war, and only the Active--the Regular Army can
help there. That convinced us to leave the number of Active
battalions at 20.
But we are also short actually a little more later in the
war. That is a capability that Guard can supply, and that is
why part of the reason we recommended keeping four battalions
of Apaches in the Guard.
So it is a capability cost tradeoff, as you know, and I
think the Commission did its best and came up with the proposal
that General Ham has discussed and I certainly share that that
as being the right way to go.
Mr. Coffman. Again, you didn't take into--I agree with you
that certain units are more expensive than others based on the
Active Duty Component that is required to support the Reserve
unit. But, again, we are not taking into account legacy costs,
and I think that full analysis needs to be done in terms of
cost.
And I also think that there are a lot of specialty areas
that have a direct correlation to an occupation in the civilian
world that don't necessarily--where we don't necessarily need
that full capability except in a full mobilization. And yet we
maintain surplus capacity on the Active Duty side. I am
thinking about medicine as an example.
Whenever I go to Bethesda--when I went to Bethesda in 2011,
there was a very significant patient flow there coming out of
Afghanistan. When I go there now, they are looking for
patients. And so we are treating patients from the Boston
bombing. They were bringing in veterans with non-service-
connected issues, just to try and maintain the certain level of
capability.
And so I think that is something where we ought to look at
plusing-up the Guard and Reserve and then bringing on when we
mobilize.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gibson. Gentleman's time is expired. Ms. Tsongas for 5
minutes.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to follow up
on an earlier question and focus it a little differently. You
know, as we are talking about end strength and what the proper
number is, I think what we are all concerned with is the
resiliency of the force and the pressures that come to bear,
given the multiple challenges.
And I have seen in Massachusetts where there has been a lot
of research investment in sort of making just better
understanding as I said how you improve the physical, the
psychological, the cognitive, the overall human performance of
the force, with the interest of and understanding the
inordinate number of pressures that come to bear on those who
do serve.
And my question really is, do you see value in that going
forward, as we are still--no matter what, but in a constrained
environment, where we ask ever more of those who are serving,
do you see value in that kind of research and development
effort?
General Ham. Yes, ma'am. Absolutely. In two ways. One is
simply from a readiness standpoint, we want to make sure that
soldiers are as ready as they can be, and as you indicate, that
is more than just technical or tactical training or other means
of readiness, but it is readiness of the whole person that is
vitally important. So I think from a purely readiness
standpoint, that is quite important.
In perhaps a less objective measure, it is also I think
integral to recruiting and retaining the quality people that we
need, to know that when they raise their right hand and
enlisted in the Army or are commissioned as an officer in the
Army, that they are joining a profession that will attend to
their needs and make sure that they are properly cared for and
they are as capable and as ready to perform at maximum levels
as is possible.
And it also sends a very clear message to their families
that we will care for your soldier when the worst possible
things that can happen to soldiers happen, that their families
have confidence that the Army will take care of them in those
dire circumstances. So for those reasons, I think the points
you mentioned are absolutely essential.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. Secretary Hale, do you--the other
question is, we have been debating end strength here. And I
think we are all concerned about what the appropriate number
is. But if you look at the current situation, we have soldiers
of the U.S. Army deployed in over 140 countries around the
world. Some are obviously fighting, engaged in the fight. Some
are there in a deterrence mode. Others are there just to
reassure allies and partners.
And as we struggle with fiscal constraints, did you at all
consider whether or not the Army is spread too thin? And is
there better--should we be better channeling those that we do
have in order to, for example, reduce the pressure on the
deployed soldier and give them more dwell time? Was that part
of your consideration?
General Ham. It was, ma'am. And in fact, the law required
us to look at that. I think in a general sense, the
Commission's view was one of the very best ways to alleviate
the frequent operational deployments, particularly within the
Regular Army, is to ensure that the Reserve Components of the
Army are adequately trained, modernized, and prepared so that
they can become more operationally employed.
It has the value of relieving a little bit of operational
stress on the regular force, but it also builds operational
capability within the Reserve Components.
And, ma'am, we heard loud and clear from those soldiers in
the Army Reserve and Army National Guard that they have a
burning desire to be operationally employed.
Ms. Tsongas. So you didn't see it as sort of retooling what
the Army should be doing and where, but rather how you do it
and who you have do it?
General Ham. Well, it is certainly a mix of both. I think
the demands from the combatant commands for the most part are
increasing. There are systems within the Army and within the
Joint Staff and the Office of the Secretary of Defense to
prioritize and balance those demands. The demands will probably
almost always exceed the supply, so it is a matter of
prioritization.
And I think in general, the Commission's view was that if
the Army can more effectively employ the operational forces in
the Army National Guard and Army Reserve, that will go a long
way toward meeting that demand and relieving some of the stress
that is evident in some communities in the Regular Army.
Ms. Tsongas. So you really didn't----
Mr. Hale. And I would just like to add to that, if I might,
I fully agree. We need to use the Guard and the Reserve. We
tried in the Commission to put our money where our mouth was on
this one. For example, when we suggested keeping four
battalions or recommended keeping four battalions in the Guard,
we included in the costs the added cost to call them up on the
one to five basis that is one of the planning scenarios.
And similarly, you have heard us say before we recommended
more funding for this 12304b, which provides funds to call up
the Guard and the Reserve.
We repeatedly heard that the reason they are not used more
is not that they don't want to go. It is that there isn't the
funds to pay for them when they are called to Active Duty. So
we tried to, as I say, put our money where our mouth is. We
need to use the Guard and Reserve, and we need to fund it.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Gibson. Thank you. This concludes our questions. Any
concluding remarks from our panelists? I will give you the
opportunity at this point.
General Ham. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I would conclude simply
by again thanking you and Ms. Tsongas for the opportunity to
come appear before the committee. And I would harken back to a
comment Mr. Hale mentioned earlier in his testimony. The United
States Army is the finest Army in the world. It has got some
challenges, and we certainly need to be careful as we proceed.
But there should be no question that this is the premier
land force on the face of this planet today, and that is thanks
to the great women and men who every day choose to serve this
Nation in uniform.
Mr. Hale. I would just like to take this opportunity to
thank the guy to my right here. General Ham did a great job. He
earned a merit badge in herding cats, which is one of the
requirements if you I think are chairman of the Commission. He
really did a good job in bringing us together and focusing on
the key issues. So thank you. And thanks also to the staffs,
some of whom are behind me, who did an outstanding job helping
us get through a tough set of issues.
Mr. Gibson. Well, I thank you both. And please do convey to
all those on the Commission how much all of us here deeply
appreciate their commitment to our country and the
recommendations that they have provided.
And with that, that closes the hearing. Thank you very
much.
[Whereupon, at 4:00 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

February 10, 2016

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 10, 2016

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 10, 2016

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
