- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-49] THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S DEAL WITH IRAN: IMPLICATIONS FOR MISSILE DEFENSE AND NONPROLIFERATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-49]

THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S DEAL

WITH IRAN: IMPLICATIONS FOR

MISSILE DEFENSE AND NONPROLIFERATION

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

SEPTEMBER 10, 2015

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

96-240                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado, Vice Chair   LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               RICK LARSEN, Washington
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   JOHN GARAMENDI, California
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     PETE AGUILAR, California
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana
Tim Morrison, Counsel
Leonor Tomero, Counsel
Mike Gancio, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Cooper, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Tennessee, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     3
Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1

WITNESSES

Almont, Christopher J., Senior Defense Intelligence Expert,
Defense Intelligence Agency....................................     6
Klotz, Lt Gen Frank G., USAF (Ret.), Administrator, National
Nuclear Security Administration................................     3
Scher, Hon. Robert M., Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Strategy, Plans, and Capabilities, U.S. Department of Defense..     5
Shepro, Maj Gen Steven M., USAF, Vice Director for Strategic
Plans and Policy, J5, Joint Staff..............................     8
Syring, VADM James D., USN, Director, Missile Defense Agency.....     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Almont, Christopher J........................................    43
Klotz, Lt Gen Frank G........................................    28
Rogers, Hon. Mike............................................    25
Scher, Hon. Robert M.........................................    33

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Letter from Mr. Thornberry and Mr. Nunes to Secretary of
State, Secretary of Energy, and Director of National
Intelligence...............................................    49
Two charts on U.S. missile defense funding to Israel.........    51

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Forbes...................................................    59
Mr. Rogers...................................................    55
Mr. Turner...................................................    60

THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S DEAL WITH IRAN:
IMPLICATIONS FOR MISSILE DEFENSE AND NONPROLIFERATION

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Thursday, September 10, 2015.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Rogers. Good afternoon. I call this Subcommittee on
Strategic Forces to order. And this afternoon we are here to
discuss ``The Obama Administration's Deal with Iran:
Implications for Missile Defense and Nonproliferation.''
We have testifying today a distinguished panel of
witnesses. They are the Honorable Frank Klotz, Administrator,
National Nuclear Security Administration; the Honorable Robert
Scher, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and
Capabilities, the U.S. Department of Defense [DOD]; Christopher
Almont, Senior Defense Intelligence Expert, Iran and the
Arabian Peninsula, Middle East Africa Regional Center, Defense
Intelligence Agency [DIA]; Vice Admiral James Syring, Director
of Missile Defense Agency [MDA]; and Major General Steven
Shepro, Vice Director of Strategic Plans and Policy, J5, Joint
Staff.
I want to note that the subcommittee invited a witness from
the State Department to testify today. We were told in writing
that he was available. He would be watching us even now from
his office since his schedule was open. However, he is not here
today. I understand that senior officials at the State
Department decided not to send him because the Department isn't
ready to discuss implementation.
Well, I think every member of this subcommittee should be
angered by the disrespect which this membership and our
witnesses have been treated by the State Department. Moreover,
the entire Congress, as it prepares to vote on the Iran
agreement, should be bothered that we are being asked to vote
on this agreement and Department of State won't discuss how it
will be implemented.
With that unpleasantness aside, I will move to the joint
hearing.
In February of 2014, Under Secretary of State Wendy
Sherman, a lead negotiator of the Iran agreement whose record
reflects she also gave us the Agreed Framework with North Korea
that gave the Kim family its nuclear weapons arsenal, stated in
testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Committee that,
quote, ``It is true that in these first 6 months we have not
shut down all of their production of any ballistic missile that
could have anything to do with delivery of a nuclear weapon,
but that is indeed something that has to be addressed as a part
of a comprehensive agreement,'' closed quote.
Now, let me repeat that, quote, ``But that is indeed
something that has to be addressed as a part of a comprehensive
agreement,'' closed quote.
We all know what has happened to Iran, Russia, and China
instead. In July, the President's senior military advisor,
General Martin Dempsey, the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff,
testified, quote, ``Under no circumstances should we relieve
pressure on Iran relative to ballistic missile capabilities and
arms trafficking,'' closed quote.
I want to repeat that. ``Under no circumstances'' is what
he said. Why is this important? As stated by your senior DOD
leadership, the ban on technology for ballistic missiles was
critical to America's own security, especially since Iran's
ballistic missiles would be dangerous weapons if they were ever
equipped with chemical, biological, or even nuclear warheads.
Even if we assume the Iranians will honor the nuclear
agreement, which we would be foolish to assume, we are paying
no attention here to the chemical and biological weapons
programs. Just this weekend, according to press reports, 45
Emirati soldiers fighting Iranian proxies in Yemen were killed
by a ballistic missile with a conventional warhead. We don't
have missile defense solely because the bad guys may have
nuclear capability.
I will read an excerpt from the most recent arms control
compliance report on Iran:
``Based on available information, the United States cannot
certify whether Iran has met its chemical weapons production
facility declaration obligations, destroyed its specialized
chemical weapons equipment, transferred CW''--chemical
weapons--``or retained an undeclared chemical weapons
stockpile. The JCPOA [Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action]
ignores this violation and provides Iran more funding for
chemical and biological weapons. Iran is also not in compliance
with the Biological Weapons Convention, the ballistic missiles
it needs to deliver them.''
I also want to indicate my strong agreement with the letter
sent by Chairman Thornberry and House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes last week, which
I will add to the record, that this agreement appears to have
already started the cascade of proliferation in the Middle
East.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 49.]
Mr. Rogers. Unfortunately, I can't say much more in this
environment, but I believe Secretary Kerry owes this body
information before we vote. Chairman Thornberry and Chairman
Nunes asked for a response by this past Tuesday, and that
response has not been provided.
I have stated before that I believe the administration
concealed material information concerning Russia's violation of
the INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces] Treaty from the
United States Congress while the Senate was considering the New
START [Strategic Arms Reduction] Treaty in 2010. I have come to
the same conclusion about this.
I will cast my vote against the JCPOA, but I do not believe
that the President will heed any call from this Congress about
this legacy deal for him. We have a constitutional law
professor as a President who seems to be unfamiliar with the
Constitution's checks and balances, so we must all turn to
cleaning up the mess that is being created and what is going to
be required to fix it. I only hope that generations to come
will not pay too high a price for the mistake of this President
and what he is doing now.
Before turning to the ranking member for any opening
statements that he may make, I want to remind all my colleagues
who attended this morning's classified session on Iran's malign
activities that that was a highly classified briefing, and
details from this morning should not be discussed in this open
session. We will adjourn to a closed briefing at the conclusion
of this open hearing, and at that appropriate venue we can have
discussion of those details.
And, with that, I turn to my friend and colleague from
Tennessee, Mr. Cooper, for any opening statement that he may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogers can be found in the
Appendix on page 25.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COOPER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM TENNESSEE,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, too, welcome the witnesses, and I appreciate this
opportunity to hear from them.
Let me emphasize the word ``hear.'' This is called a
hearing. It is not a press conference. We call it a hearing so
that we can hear from the witnesses, which I look forward to
doing.
And I would just urge the chairman and other colleagues who
may come that we make this open portion as brief as possible so
that we can get to the classified session, because I think that
will be also much more useful as well as less risky in terms of
what people around the world may hear.
This is the third briefing on Iran today, and it is the
only one to have an open portion. So, with that, I would
particularly urge my chairman and my colleagues to keep this
open session as short as possible so that we can get to the
classified session.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. I concur with that view.
General Klotz, we will start with you, if you could
summarize your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LT GEN FRANK G. KLOTZ, USAF (RET.), ADMINISTRATOR,
NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

General Klotz. Thank you, Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Cooper. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, JCPOA, reached between the P5+1
[China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United
States, plus Germany], the European Union, and Iran.
Let me state right up front, the Department of Energy [DOE]
and the National Nuclear Security Administration [NNSA] value
your robust support and abiding support for our mission and for
our people. In that regard, I appreciate the opportunity to
discuss a critical component of our overall mission,
specifically our support to the International Atomic Energy
Agency, or the IAEA. The IAEA, as you know, has a special
responsibility in monitoring and verifying the nuclear-related
measures detailed in the JCPOA.
I have provided a written statement, and I respectfully
request that it be submitted for the record.
As Secretary of Energy Moniz has said, the JCPOA prevents
Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, and it provides strong
verification measures that would give us ample time to respond
if Iran chooses to violate its terms. It is a very good deal
for America, for our allies, and for our global security. And I
fully share his view and this view.
The Department of Energy and NNSA's nuclear experts,
national laboratories, and nuclear security sites were
extensively involved throughout the negotiations, evaluating
and developing technical proposals in support of the U.S.
delegation. As a result of their work, Secretary Moniz has said
that he is confident that the technical underpinnings of the
JCPOA are solid and that the Department stands ready to assist
the IAEA in its implementation.
Let me take a moment to discuss, as you requested, the
Department's important work with the IAEA on nuclear
safeguards.
Safeguards are defined as the set of technical measures
applied by the IAEA to independently and objectively verify
that a state's nuclear material is accounted for and not
diverted to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosives.
Safeguards also provide credible assurance of the absence of
undeclared nuclear materials and activities.
These technical measures include, for example, on-site
inspection; nuclear material accountancy; physical
measurements; facility design information verification;
containment using tamper-indicating tags and seals;
surveillance, including the use of cameras; and environmental
sampling.
DOE and NNSA have closely cooperated with the IAEA's
Department of Safeguards for many decades in developing and
enhancing these measures. The full range of our involvement
with the IAEA is actually described in this recently just hot-
off-the-press brochure prepared by the NNSA, and we have ample
copies here for members and for staff if you choose to take
one.
Our work with the IAEA also includes funding, training,
technology transfers, and expertise. In fact, since 1980, every
new IAEA inspector has had nuclear materials measurement
training at the Los Alamos National Laboratory. And, every
year, the Department hosts additional specialized training
courses for IAEA inspectors and analysts both here and abroad.
Our partnership with the IAEA has also generated various
technologies for use in safeguard systems. For example, the
Online Enrichment Monitor, the OLEM, is one example of the
technology jointly developed by our national laboratories and
the IAEA. The OLEM can continuously monitor the enrichment
levels of uranium in gaseous forms at a centrifuge enrichment
plant. And, for the first time, as a result of this JCPOA, the
OLEM will be used in Iran.
Sir, I would be very happy to provide any additional
information on our involvement in response to any questions you
may have, either in this open session or in the closed session.
Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of General Klotz can be found in
the Appendix on page 28.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, General.
Mr. Scher.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT M. SCHER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR STRATEGY, PLANS, AND CAPABILITIES, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE

Secretary Scher. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Cooper,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify on missile defense and the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, or the JCPOA. I am grateful for this committee's
consistent attention to and continuing support of the critical
mission of defending our homeland, our deployed forces, allies,
and partners.
I, too, have submitted written testimony for the record so
will look to keep these opening remarks relatively brief.
I would like to start by repeating what Secretary Carter
has noted. The JCPOA places no limitations on the Department of
Defense; no restrictions on our plans, programs, capabilities,
or what we can do with our friends and allies.
For decades, we have focused on and prioritized the
totality of challenges that Iran poses to our interests. The
Department has organized itself to deal with Iran's ballistic
missile capabilities through our preparations, partnerships,
force posture, and plans.
I am happy to speak today about our missile defense
policies, but, as you had noted, nonproliferation programs and
sanction regimes fall outside of my portfolio, so I will have
to defer those questions.
As you have been briefed, the JCPOA is a nuclear deal, not
a ballistic missile deal. As such, it does not obviate the need
for ballistic missile defenses, and it does not change our
programs or plans for continued cooperation on missile defense.
Iran has the largest inventory of ballistic missiles in the
Middle East and today can strike targets throughout the region
and into Eastern Europe. While Iran has not yet developed an
intercontinental ballistic missile [ICBM], its progress on
space-launch vehicles provides Iran the means to develop
longer-range missiles.
There is no doubt in my mind that Iran's ballistic missile
activities continue to pose a risk to the United States and our
allies and partners in Europe, Israel, and the Gulf. However,
this is exactly why the United States has maintained a robust
missile defense posture throughout the region and why we have
focused on missile defense cooperation with these same partners
and allies.
I also want to reaffirm that the U.S. homeland is currently
protected against potential limited ICBM attacks from Iran
should they deploy such a capability in the future. We continue
to strengthen our homeland defense posture and invest in
technologies which better enable us to address emerging threats
in the next decade, including continued improvement to the
Ground-Based Midcourse Defense [GMD] system and the redesigned
kill vehicle for the Ground-Based Interceptor [GBI].
Secondly, the administration continues to recognize the
regional Iranian ballistic missile threat and remains committed
to strengthening regional missile defenses. As President Obama
stated in Prague on April 5, 2009, and I quote, ``Iran's
nuclear and ballistic missile activity poses a real threat, not
just in the United States but to Iran's neighbors and our
allies. As long as the ballistic missile threat from Iran
persists, we will go forward with a missile defense system that
is cost-effective and proven.''
In 2009, we went on to state that the European Phased
Adaptive Approach would have the ability to defend all of NATO
Europe from Iranian ballistic missiles, and that commitment
remains.
Outside of NATO, we are working closely both operationally
and on counter-ballistic missile development with Israel to
address the Iranian ballistic missile threat. We are currently
codeveloping missile defense technology with Israel on Iron
Dome, David's Sling, and the Arrow systems. Since 2001, we have
provided over $3 billion for missile defense to Israel.
As the Secretary also recently noted with Prime Minister
Netanyahu and Minister of Defense Ya'alon, we are full speed
ahead on addressing these issues in collaboration with our
Israeli counterparts.
The Department also continues to implement the deployment
of missile defenses that are tailored to the security
circumstances in the Middle East with a number of Gulf
Cooperation Council [GCC] states, which I detail in my written
statement. During the Secretary's recent discussions with the
Saudi Minister of Defense, we reiterated our commitment to
working with Gulf countries on missile defense, specifically
emphasizing the importance of collective BMD [ballistic missile
defense] among the GCC countries, the importance of
interoperability, and a common intelligence picture.
Members of the subcommittee, to conclude, I want to
reiterate that, regardless of any deal, the Department will
continue to improve our homeland defense capabilities against
any potential Iranian ballistic missile threat; maintain a
robust BMD posture throughout threatened regions, including the
Middle East and Europe; and will focus on increasing
cooperation with those same partners and allies to deter
against and respond to any potential Iranian aggression.
I look forward to answering your questions in this session
or, when necessary, in the following closed session. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Scher can be found in
the Appendix on page 33.]
Mr. Rogers. I thank you.
Mr. Almont, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER J. ALMONT, SENIOR DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE
EXPERT, DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Mr. Almont. Good afternoon, Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Cooper, and members of the subcommittee. I thank you for the
opportunity to offer testimony today regarding the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, or JCPOA, and implications for
Iran's missile defense and nonproliferation.
Iran continues to be a threat to regional stability, as its
regime's national interests often diverge with U.S. and our
regional allies' security priorities in this dynamic and
turbulent region. Understanding Tehran's support to terrorists
and subnational armed groups as well as its military
capabilities and regional ambitions are a priority for DIA's
analysts and collectors. For years to come, we expect Iran to
be a difficult target.
For Iran, its national security strategy remains to ensure
the regime's survival, expand its regional influence, and
enhance Tehran's military deterrence and regional superiority.
Iran's ballistic missile capability will continue to
threaten U.S. strategic interests in the Middle East. Iran's
overall defense strategy relies on a substantial inventory of
theater ballistic missiles capable of striking targets
throughout the region. Iran will continue to develop more
sophisticated missiles and is improving the range and accuracy
of its current missile systems irrespective of JCPOA
implementation.
Iran publicly stated that it intends to launch a space-
launch vehicle as early as this year. This vehicle would be
capable of intercontinental ballistic missile ranges if
configured as an ICBM.
Post-JCPOA economic growth could provide Tehran more money
for ballistic missile development, but engineering and
infrastructure challenges will remain. U.N. [United Nations]
restrictions on ballistic-missile-related sales and purchases
will remain in place for 8 years following adoption day or
until the IAEA reaches its broader conclusion, whichever is
sooner.
After the U.N. restrictions end, international and domestic
tools, such as the Missile Technology Control Regime, or MTCR,
the Proliferation Security Initiative, and U.S. export controls
will still apply, and the U.S. will retain its ability to
impose missile-related sanctions under nonnuclear sanctions
authorities, including Executive Orders 12938 and 13382.
In addition, secondary sanctions will continue to attach to
foreign financial institutions and other persons that engage in
transactions with Iranian missile proliferators sanctioned by
the Department of the Treasury.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this opportunity to discuss
these important topics. I look forward to the subcommittee's
questions and a more detailed discussion in the closed session.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Almont can be found in the
Appendix on page 43.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Almont.
Admiral Syring, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF VADM JAMES D. SYRING, USN, DIRECTOR, MISSILE
DEFENSE AGENCY

Admiral Syring. Thank you, Mr. Rogers. Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Cooper, thank you for the opportunity to be here
today and specifically address missile-defense-related
questions.
I will save time and save my comments for the Q&A [question
and answer] period. Again, thank you for the invitation.
Mr. Rogers. How do you like that, Mr. Cooper?
Mr. Cooper. That is good.
Mr. Rogers. I thought you would like that.
General, no pressure.

STATEMENT OF MAJ GEN STEVEN M. SHEPRO, USAF, VICE DIRECTOR FOR
STRATEGIC PLANS AND POLICY, J5, JOINT STAFF

General Shepro. Very quick. Thank you, Chairman Rogers,
Ranking Member Cooper, and members of this subcommittee. I
likewise appreciate the opportunity to address your questions
regarding the military implications of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action.
The Joint Staff will remain concerned with over all of
Iran's destabilizing activities within the region, among which
is its expanding ballistic missile inventory and technology
that Assistant Secretary Scher just underlined.
To address these concerns, we will preserve the military
options at our disposal. We will likewise preserve our posture
and engagements with our longstanding partners in the region to
assure our mutual security.
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Rogers. Well, thank you.
I will recognize myself first.
General Klotz, you heard my reference to the DOE and State
Department letters that Thornberry and Nunes sent. Do you have
anything that you can tell us on the status of our response,
when are we going to get a response?
General Klotz. Mr. Chairman, I understand that they are
being actively worked within both departments as we speak.
Mr. Rogers. So, no. All right.
General, let me stay with you just a minute. Is it correct
the so-called 123 Agreement between the U.S. and the Emirates
would prohibit possession of uranium enrichment and plutonium
reprocessing technology by that country?
General Klotz. I believe that is correct.
Mr. Rogers. Well, is it correct that we have been seeking
an agreement with Saudi Arabia for the same so-called gold-
standard-type agreement?
General Klotz. That, sir, I think is something, since it is
an ongoing discussion, that we ought to discuss in the closed
session, if I could defer to that.
Mr. Rogers. I will do that.
Mr. Almont, I may get the same response from you, but are
you aware of any information concerning intentions of the UAE
[United Arab Emirates] or Saudi Arabia regarding their plans to
develop uranium enrichment capabilities?
Mr. Almont. And I, too, would like to defer until the----
Mr. Rogers. All right.
Admiral Syring, are you aware of any discussions post-JCPOA
of changing the deployment of Phase 3 of the EPAA in Poland?
Admiral Syring. No, sir, I am not aware of any changes.
Mr. Rogers. Great.
Mr. Scher, as the senior DOD witness here today, are you
able to pledge without hesitation that the administration will
make no changes whatsoever to the employment of the Aegis
Ashore site in Romania and Poland as consequences of JCPOA?
Secretary Scher. Currently, our plan stands as it always
has, which is to make those deployments as you have discussed.
Mr. Rogers. Great.
Mr. Cooper, you are recognized.
Mr. Cooper. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am so looking
forward to the classified session, I thought I would do what I
could to expedite our movement to 2337.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Lamborn, you are recognized.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Well, I do think this is an important issue that has public
ramifications, as well as secure ramifications that we can talk
about in closed session. So I want to talk about some things
here openly and in public that I am curious about and the
American people might be curious about.
Mr. Scher, you talked about that with the Israelis and
joint missile defense projects that things were, quote, ``We
are full speed ahead.''
Now, one thing that seems like a disconnect to me is that,
when it comes to coproduction of the Arrow 3 and David's Sling,
Israel has requested that, but we have made no response that I
am aware of, and the administration provided no budget--no
money for it in its budget.
Can you address coproduction of the Arrow 3 and David's
Sling?
Secretary Scher. I will briefly, but then Admiral Syring
has that budget under his control, so I will ask for details
from him.
But, in fact, my understanding is we continue to work
together with the Israelis to identify what we need to do in
terms of production, coproduction, and how much money we work
together with in terms of how much we transfer to the Israelis
as part of the MDA budget and that that continues to go along,
based on Secretary Carter's recent visit to Israel, as had been
planned.
So I would ask Admiral Syring, if that is okay, sir,
Congressman, to fill in the details on what that cooperation
actually looks like.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, but I may come back to you on this.
Secretary Scher. Sure.
Mr. Lamborn. Admiral.
Admiral Syring. Sir, let me take that.
There is ongoing dialogue and negotiations specifically on
the David's Sling coproduction agreement, which is very
important for us and very important for Israel. It is weeks
away in terms of draft, probably months away in terms of final.
But we had great success with the Iron Dome coproduction
agreement; I expect similar success with David's Sling.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you for that information.
What about Arrow 3 coproduction?
Admiral Syring. That would follow David's Sling, sir. We
are focused on David's Sling today, as that will be the next
system fielded and operational.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. All right. Thank you for that. I
appreciate it.
And back to you, Mr. Scher. The President requested
approximately $155 million for Israeli missile defense in the
fiscal year 2016 budget request, but Israel's actual needs were
approximately $475 million.
This seems like a three-to-one underfunding to me, only
funding one-third of what appears to be the actual need. Can
you discuss that?
Secretary Scher. I know that we work very closely with the
Israelis to try to figure out what the best funding approach is
for our support to their programs and the ones that we do
coproduction for.
The President forwarded to the Congress the figure that you
talked about. We have had, I think, over $3 billion of
cooperation up to this point. We have, approximately, I think,
overall, about half a billion dollars in the next fiscal year
development plan for cooperation with Israel. And I would say
that that is a negotiation to go on between Congress and the
White House as to what the final number looks like.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
And changing subjects slightly, we have heard from the
administration about missile defense integration and
interoperability. We have been told that much of this will work
through organizations like the Gulf Cooperation Council, GCC.
However, there seem to be problems that are coming up. In
an article called ``Little Progress Made on Integrated GCC
Missile Shield,'' we see that we haven't even been able to
achieve agreement on the establishment of a command and control
center or how it will be operated or even shared training
capabilities and foreign disclosure.
Why is this not coming along better?
Secretary Scher. I don't know the details of the
negotiations on those, but what I do know is that, based on the
Camp David summit, we have reenergized this approach to
ensuring that the Gulf Cooperation Council countries are able
to work more collaboratively together and with us. I think we
have seen greater cooperation in the CAOC [combat air
operations center] in terms of other operations, and my hope is
certainly that we will continue that greater collaboration.
I know that folks from my team and many others have been
out to the Gulf recently to work on the results of the Camp
David summit, and we are continuing to follow through. The
early warnings and indications piece is the first element of
what we are trying to do and work very closely across the
regional and also Missile Defense Agency to make sure that we
can get over some of the problems that we may have seen in the
past on this issue.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
And then in my remaining little bit of time, Admiral
Syring, let me just ask you a general question about the
budget.
If we have to resort to a continuing resolution for next
year's defense, which the House has passed but the Senate
appears unable to pass, what would that do to missile defense,
in particular, that is under your portfolio?
Admiral Syring. Yes, sir. Two items in particular: It would
put pressure on the procurement accounts because that funding
would be limited. And, more specifically, it would not enable
me to begin Poland MILCON [military construction] construction
if the MILCON is tied up in the CR [continuing resolution]. And
I view that as critically important, that we have those
resources to release and the Army has the ability to get under
contract as soon as possible, later in the first part of 2016.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. Okay. I thank you.
And Mr. Garamendi is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Just a question for Admiral Syring, if you could. Does the
Iran deal change your assessment of the East Coast missile
defense site?
Admiral Syring. No, sir. So I can expand if you want me to.
Mr. Garamendi. Would you, please?
Admiral Syring. Yes, sir.
I have testified in front of this committee and others that
there certainly is operational benefit to an East Coast field
and capacity benefit to an East Coast field, but it is a matter
of, where does that fit into the priorities, given limited
resources on our homeland defense system?
Mr. Garamendi. And it would not be a priority?
Admiral Syring. Sir, today, in the budget, it is a lower
priority than in making the GMD program more reliable and more
complete in terms of the kill chain.
Mr. Garamendi. Okay. So you remain on the same path, that
it is a low priority and we ought to be spending our money
elsewhere. For example, on?
Admiral Syring. Sir, we are focused on the improvements in
the homeland defense program, not just in the GBI or the kill
vehicle itself, but in the radars that we are adding, radar
that we are adding in Alaska, and all the other improvements
that you and I have talked about.
In this year's budget, in PB [President's budget] 2016,
sir, we are proposing and requesting a shift in directed energy
funding, in particular----
Mr. Garamendi. Shift towards?
Admiral Syring. Towards more directed energy funding.
Mr. Garamendi. Oh, so directed towards directed energy.
Admiral Syring. Yes, sir. And we ask for everybody's--all
four committees' support with that, as we feel it imperative to
get on with that development.
Mr. Garamendi. And with the East, if the legislation that
we pass, NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] or
appropriation, would force the money into the East Coast
defense--or the East Coast missile defense site, that would be
money that might otherwise be used for directed energy?
Admiral Syring. Sir, it would come across multiple parts of
the missile defense budget. It is not cheap. The cost estimate
is $3 billion to $4 billion over a period of years, and,
frankly, I don't have that in my budget control today.
Mr. Garamendi. So the other things would be the higher
priorities that would be suffering on missile defense if we
were to proceed with the East Coast site?
Admiral Syring. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. No further questions.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman.
The chairman recognizes Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a point of clarification that I was kind of surprised.
Mr. Almont, in your testimony, you spoke about the 8-year--
the lifting of the ban on ballistic missile technology to Iran.
And you said words to the effect that whatever is sooner,
referencing the IAEA.
Did I hear you right, that the IAEA could make an
assessment whereby that ban could be lifted early, or did I
hear you wrong?
Mr. Almont. In fact, I mean, I think this is--I don't know
this is necessarily an intelligence question. I think that the
answer--I hate to say this, but I think that this is something
that State could answer a little bit better, about how the IAEA
could reach a broader conclusion.
But, essentially, I think that there is something in the
agreement that allows them to make an agreement--draw a
conclusion about whether or not Iran is in compliance with the
terms of the JCPOA and that the clock changes in terms of the
arms embargo.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. I was not aware of that. So what you are
saying is--under what circumstances would the IAEA make that
assessment, that, in fact, that they could be accelerated in
terms of lifting the ban on ballistic missiles?
Mr. Almont. That, I don't think I am qualified to answer
that question. I think that is something----
Mr. Coffman. Is there somebody here that could answer that
question? Because this is a pretty critical point.
General Klotz. I would be happy to pursue that in closed
session.
Mr. Coffman. Well, I would like to know, is there somebody
that could answer that question that is here? This is a very
critical point.
General Klotz. I can pursue it in closed session.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Well----
Mr. Rogers. We are going to have a closed session right
after this.
Mr. Coffman. I don't understand. Why would that be
classified?
General Klotz. We can take a look at what specifically is
written in the JCPOA in terms of when the various dates,
various milestones take place.
Mr. Almont is right; there is a provision within the JCPOA
for adoption day occurring at 8 years or when the IAEA has made
the broader conclusion. When that takes place--that is known as
transition day. When that takes place, the U.N. Security
Council can lift its restrictions on ballistic missiles. And
there is a whole series of other things which we can detail
that would take place at transition day.
Mr. Coffman. Can you point to where that is in the
agreement? Is this one of these side agreements, or is this in
the----
General Klotz. No, this is in the agreement itself.
Mr. Coffman. This is in the agreement. Where is that in the
agreement?
General Klotz. It is in Annex 5, which is called the
Implementation Plan. And it describes in some detail
specifically what will happen. On the copy that I have, it is
the second page of Annex 5 in the actual JCPOA, sir.
Mr. Coffman. So is this anytime within--can you just tell
me, is it anytime after this agreement is implemented that the
IAEA then can make that assessment? Or is there a threshold in
terms of a number of years after the implementation of the
agreement that the IAEA is free to make that assessment?
General Klotz. Well, the threshold is a list of a dozen
specific things that Iran has to satisfy in terms of the Arak
heavy water research reactor, heavy water production plants,
enrichment capability, and so on, which it has to, as I said,
it has to implement. And the IAEA has to verify that it has, in
fact, implemented each of those steps, which are laid out in
great detail in Annex 3 of the JCPOA.
Realistically, that is going to take some time. But, no, in
this specific thing, it is at 8 years or when that broader
conclusion is reached by the IAEA that Iran has met its
nuclear-related measures as specified in the JCPOA.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. I think the American people need to be--
well, Congress certainly needs to know, but the American people
need to be aware of that. I think that is very surprising.
Mr. Almont, can you tell me about Iran's biological and
chemical weapons capabilities and their ability to weaponize
biological and chemical weapons?
Mr. Almont. If we can wait till the closed session, I can
address that, sir.
Mr. Coffman. That is amazing. Okay.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. I think everything is pretty
much in closed session. And I really question the security
classifications that are being used, that might, in fact, be
politically embarrassing, and anything politically embarrassing
seems to be classified.
I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. Well, as Mr. Almont stated, we could have
gotten some answers to some of your questions if the State
Department hadn't refused to send a witness to this hearing.
Mr. Bridenstine is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am deeply troubled by the Obama administration's last-
minute concessions to Iran on lifting the conventional weapons
and missile embargoes.
In testimony to this subcommittee, the Defense Intelligence
Agency stated that, quote, ``Iran's goal is to develop
capabilities that will allow it to build missile-deliverable
nuclear weapons,'' unquote. Lifting these bans makes no sense.
Iran's words and actions clearly show its desire, in spite of
the deal, to build longer-range and more sophisticated
ballistic missiles and proliferate them throughout the region.
In February, Iran conducted its fourth successful satellite
launch, this one aboard a two-stage Safir booster. The Safir is
based on the Shahab-3, Iran's most advanced ballistic missile.
Iran's supposedly peaceful space program is simply a cover for
long-range ballistic missile development.
Last week, the head of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps publicly announced plans to expand the range of Iran's
ballistic missiles. Iran's President, Hassan Rouhani, declared
last week that Iran is, quote, ``not committed to the
restrictions on its missile program,'' unquote.
Israel is Iran's number-one target. While the
administration says it is doing everything possible to help
protect Israel, the budgetary record tells a different story.
And, Mr. Scher, you talked about this when you did your
opening statement.
I have two charts. Could I get those up on the screen for
everybody to see? And then we have handouts, as well.
[The charts referred to can be found in the Appendix on
pages 51 and 52.]
Mr. Bridenstine. Can we get those up on the screen? I was
told that we could get those up.
Is that a no, Joy?
Mr. Rogers. Apparently.
Mr. Bridenstine. Okay.
Well, the charts in front of you illustrate the
administration's requested funding for Israeli missile defense
versus actual congressional appropriations. Congress
consistently appropriates funding much closer to Israeli
requirements.
The first chart covers funding for all Israeli missile
defense programs. The President requested approximately $158
million for Israeli missile defense in the fiscal year 2016
budget request. The House and Senate Defense Appropriations
bills both would appropriate Israeli missile defense at over
$338 million. So it is a comparison of $158 million to $338
million, a figure much closer to Israel's actual need.
Secretary Kerry and the President like to tout the
administration's support for Israeli missile defense. Yet, year
after year, the President's budget request ends up much, much
lower than congressional appropriations, which are much closer
to Israel's needs. Congress always appropriates much closer to
what Israel asks us for based on its national security
requirements.
Mr. Scher, can you explain this difference?
Secretary Scher. Congressman, we appropriate with a
combination of understanding of what we have worked with the
Government of Israel and also understanding the other
requirements for missile defense money that goes to protection
of U.S. homeland and articulation of U.S. systems and U.S.
programs.
And the President's recommendation then gets forwarded to
Congress. And then we implement the funding that is eventually
agreed to by Congress and signed out by the President.
Mr. Bridenstine. So, when the President sends his budget
request--it is now up on the screen. I think everybody can see
it.
Year after year, the President's budget request is far
below what Israel asks for. And, of course, Israel is very
concerned because now there is this agreement with Iran. And it
is also far below what Congress would like.
Is that going to change?
Secretary Scher. Right now, it obviously did not change for
this year. I am not willing--I don't know the answer to follow-
on years.
Mr. Bridenstine. Okay.
Let's go to the next chart, please.
I have particular interest in David's Sling, as the
coauthor of the David's Sling Authorization Act. The President
requested approximately $225 million from fiscal year 2011 to
fiscal year 2016 for David's Sling. Over the same time,
according to the Government of Israel, with which this
committee agreed, the actual requirement was $770 million. The
administration underfunded the requirement by one-third.
Mr. Scher, can we expect this underfunding for David's
Sling to continue under the Iran deal? Is this what the
administration means by ``support of Israel''?
Secretary Scher. We will continue to look at how we can
better cooperate on David's Sling. Admiral Syring mentioned
this previously. I am happy to encourage if there are any--more
details. But that is a newer program, and, hence, the figures
and the viability of those specific figures changes as we look
through.
Mr. Bridenstine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Chairman
Turner, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Klotz, I would like to talk to you, as our chairman
has, about the 123 Agreements and nations who have agreements
with the United States that may or may not be at risk.
I know that whenever we have an open session and a closed
session there is always this sensitivity between the issue of
what is open and what is closed. So I want to ask you a
question about that line.
So if the UAE, the United Arab Emirates, picked up the
phone and called Secretary Kerry and said, ``We affirm our
requirements and our agreements with the United States and our
123 Agreements and we will not pursue any uranium enrichment,''
we could discuss that openly, right? Because it is just
affirming an ongoing commitment that is there that we all know
is public.
General Klotz. Yes. The 123 Agreement with the United Arab
Emirates is public.
Mr. Turner. But the affirmation of it, the fact that the
UAE has no intention of reevaluating it, that there is no
discussion about pursuing uranium enrichment, that there is no
concern about the agreement as a result of the agreement with
Iran, if all that was affirming, you would be able to discuss
that in this meeting, right? Because it is all the status quo.
General Klotz. You know, I don't really know the answer to
that, Congressman, because I am having a little difficulty
following the question. It would----
Mr. Turner. Well, let me help you.
General Klotz. I suspect it would depend on how that was
communicated to the United States. If it was made public by a
member state, what its intentions were, that would be something
which I assume we could discuss. If it was something that was
passed on in confidential----
Mr. Turner. Well, let me help you.
General Klotz. Yeah.
Mr. Turner. There are also prohibitions against lying to
Congress. Do you have any information that a nation, such as
United Arab Emirates, has contacted the United States and
indicated that they intend to walk away from their 123
Agreement obligations that restrict uranium enrichment?
General Klotz. I have no knowledge of that.
Mr. Turner. No one has informed you from the administration
or from any other agency that they have information of that?
General Klotz. Not me personally.
Mr. Turner. So you have had no discussions with anyone that
anyone has related to you of their awareness or information of
a concern of 123 Agreement and the United Arab Emirates and
their issues with respect to uranium enrichment?
General Klotz. To the best of my knowledge, no, that has
not been a subject. I am aware of what the UAE 123 Agreement is
in a general sense, but I have not been involved in any
specific discussions on that subject.
Mr. Turner. I am troubled by your word ``specific.'' Have
you had unspecific discussions?
General Klotz. Congressman, I have not had any discussions
or any special briefings on UAE 123 Agreement.
Mr. Turner. Okay.
General Klotz. I am aware of it because it is one of the
123 Agreements that the United States has with other nations,
and I have read a lot in the press and in other documents about
that particular agreement but not about the specific issue that
you raised.
Mr. Turner. Well, you would certainly understand our
concern, because, as Congress takes up the issue of the Iranian
agreement, Secretary Kerry has made absolute statements to
Congress that there is no one in the Middle East who will
change their obligations with respect to nonproliferation or
their relationship with the United States with respect to
uranium enrichment.
And, certainly, if anyone had information that that was
other than how the Secretary of State has represented it, it
should be known by decision-makers. Because they are not just
voting on the issue of Iran; they are voting on nuclear
programs by Iran and their neighbors. You could see why that
would be a level of concern.
General Klotz. I understand--I understand your point,
Congressman.
Mr. Turner. Excellent.
Well, we are going into closed session, and I know you have
availed yourself of the issue of closed session. I am very
concerned about the issue of the--as we look to the IAEA and
the portions of the document that are secret, with the IAEA's
relationships and deals with Iran concerning inspections.
Do you have information that you are going to be able to
provide us in the closed session concerning the secret
agreement that we have not seen?
General Klotz. I am willing to discuss what we know about
that particular issue in the closed session.
Mr. Turner. Do you have details?
General Klotz. I have information which we can discuss in
the closed session.
Mr. Turner. Have you seen that agreement?
General Klotz. I have not seen that agreement.
Mr. Turner. Yeah, that would be fairly consistent with what
everyone else has done, but yet we have people who are willing
to vote in favor of an agreement that includes secret
provisions that no one has seen and you have not either.
I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the chairman.
We can't get into the SCIF [Sensitive Compartmented
Information Facility] for 10 more minutes, so I am going to let
Mr. Lamborn ask one more question and I am going to ask one
more.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for indulging me for
asking one more question.
And I will start with Admiral Syring and General Shepro.
And my purpose isn't to put you on the spot. My purpose is to
get your best judgment, because this is such an important issue
that we are voting on. It is historic.
Were you, either of you, consulted before the negotiators,
whether it was the Secretary or the President, agreed to drop
the ballistic missile embargo on Iran as part of the JCPOA?
Were either of you consulted about that?
Admiral Syring. No, sir.
General Shepro. No, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. And I guess that is what I assumed. Had
you been, what concerns would you two have shared to whoever
asked you?
Admiral Syring. Sir, I will take that first.
You know, my focus in missile defense against Iran is
unchanged by the agreement. We remained entirely focused on
their rapid escalation of capability and capacity over the last
several years, and we made absolutely the right decision to
focus on regional defense for that potential escalation.
And I can tell you that my job is to be pessimistic, not
optimistic, and everything we do at the Agency is planning for
that capability to increase and that capacity to increase at
the rate it has. And, as far as I am concerned, we--and I have
read the agreement--we remain focused on that very mission.
Mr. Lamborn. General.
General Shepro. Sir, I represent the Chairman [of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff], and, as he has said on the Hill before, this
agreement addresses one point of friction with Iran.
Mr. Lamborn. Excuse me?
General Shepro. This agreement addresses one point of
friction with Iran, the nuclear arena, and that we must keep
pressure on the other malign activities.
And so, as Chairman Rogers has cited in the beginning, I
agree with the Chairman that we must continue to keep pressure
on this area of development of ballistic missiles.
Mr. Lamborn. And I will just make a comment. It was a
nuclear agreement, but we all of a sudden see arms embargo
lifted and ballistic missile embargo lifted, which are
nonnuclear issues. I mean, there were enough concessions
already, but then to add those on top of it really staggers me.
General, don't you have a concern about the ballistic
missile embargo being lifted?
General Shepro. Again, I will cite Chairman Dempsey's
previous statements that, in a perfect world, the embargo would
remain, but, as it is, we remain concerned about this, and we
must continue to keep pressure on this area.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Aguilar.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Klotz and the Vice Admiral, with respect to budget
and allocations for missile defense, is it fair to say with
sequestration technically kicking back in in October that that
would also affect the support that we could offer for missile
defense for our allies, in addition to a continuing resolution
that could also offer reduced support and aid? Is that fair to
say, as well?
General Klotz. Well, sir, I don't deal with missile defense
in the National Nuclear Security Administration. But let me
just say, since you have created an opportunity to do that,
that there are a number of very, very important programs that
are underway within the Department of Energy and National
Nuclear Security Administration which apply to maintaining a
safe, secure, and effective nuclear arsenal and posturing
ourselves for the future that would be severely affected by
sequestration or budget caps and without any relief from that.
Admiral Syring. And, sir, for missile defense, and I will
just talk to your specific concerns on the CR, that certainly
procurement account pressure would happen under the CR. But my
more specific concern earlier was the potential impact on the
MILCON for Poland and EPAA Phase 3, which gets to your point on
exactly what are we doing with our allies and would it affect
that. So the answer would be yes.
And then, for sequestration, I have testified in front of
this committee and others that sequestration at the levels that
are being considered would be catastrophic to what we have
proposed with the improvements that must be made for homeland
defense and the regional defense systems.
In particular, the redesigned kill vehicle and the new
radar would be at risk, and I have testified before that I view
that as overmatching. If those improvements aren't made, our
system could be overmatched by 2020.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair is informed that Mr. Turner has one more
question.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Klotz, just one more addition. I would recommend
that you do pick up the phone and call the Secretary of State
and ask him if there is any additional information that he
should provide to you that is inconsistent with your statements
today and if there is any information he needs to update you
on.
General Klotz. Well, I will see if he will take my call. I
doubt if an Under Secretary from the Department of Energy would
necessarily get through on the first try.
Mr. Turner. The effort, since you put such an admirable
effort forward here, it would probably be helpful.
General Klotz. Thank you for the suggestion, Congressman.
Mr. Turner. General Shepro, representing, obviously, the
Joint Staff, Admiral Syring has said an answer on the East
Coast missile defense site, of which I am an advocate for, that
I don't criticize in any respect. And I think the Admiral has
articulated both a need and a desirableness for an East Coast
missile defense site but has recognized the fiscal constraints
under which he is under and has, you know, identified that as a
problem for executing an East Coast missile defense site.
But even though I am an advocate for the East Coast missile
defense site, I am obviously not the initiator of the East
Coast missile defense site. We always, here on the Armed
Services Committee, look to the experts, those in the military,
as to what their needs are when we, as the Admiral has so
greatly articulated, try to allocate resources.
And, General, perhaps you could give us an articulation on
the issue of our response to NORTHCOM [Northern Command].
NORTHCOM continues to include in its integrated priority list
the need for an additional interceptor site, a third site in
the United States defense of the homeland.
We didn't make this up. We are just agreeing that there is
the need, which I think Admiral Syring has recognized the need
and the benefits of a third site. And, in that, it is our
attempt to try to respond to it in allocating resources.
We are the ones who obviously have to pick where those
resources come from. We are not telling the admiral, we are
going to do this and you have to go take it from your existing
programs. It is something that we have to find the money for.
Could you articulate that--NORTHCOM has continued to
identify it on the integrated priority list. That still sounds
pretty important, isn't it?
General Shepro. Yes, sir. Important, yes. But if you want
to listen to the expert, I have to defer to Admiral Syring,
because he is.
Mr. Turner. Admiral.
Admiral Syring. Mr. Turner, thank you.
It has showed up in their priority list. And I would just
cite, sir, that it is a priority list, in terms of--there are
many other requirements in that list that we are addressing.
And we can go through that in detail, in terms of funding
allocated to both NORTHCOM and STRATCOM's [Strategic Command's]
priority list----
Mr. Turner. But what I was looking for--and I understand
your prior answer, Admiral, of the allocation of resources and
priorities. But I wanted your answer--or, actually, either of
your answers--on the issue of need. I mean, since it is showing
up on the integrated party list, it is a need. Could you
describe the need?
Admiral Syring. The need or the benefit is operational and
capacity.
Mr. Turner. And what would that be?
Admiral Syring. It would allow more interceptors, which is
always better in terms of the warfighter, and it would allow
more decision space, as both combatant commanders have
testified to.
Mr. Turner. Explain ``decision space.''
Admiral Syring. ``Decision space'' in terms of a potential
threat from Iran, an ICBM in particular, and what that would
provide in terms of interceptor fly-out time and future
assessment capability.
And I will just leave it at that.
Mr. Turner. Well, you know, I have a minute and a half
left, and I would like to not leave it at that.
Okay, so additional time and interceptors. Obviously,
proximity is one, right?
Admiral Syring. Yes, sir.
Mr. Turner. The East Coast is closer than Alaska, where the
other missiles might be coming from.
Admiral Syring. Geographically.
Mr. Turner. Correct.
And you said additional decision making. Well, that would
also be an issue of what we have referred to and you have
referred to as ``shoot, look, shoot,'' right?
Admiral Syring. Yes, sir.
Mr. Turner. You will be able to apply an asset to incoming
asset, have an opportunity to assess whether or not the United
States, hundreds of thousands of Americans at risk require an
additional shot, correct?
Admiral Syring. Yes, sir.
Mr. Turner. So that is what you are talking about, the
ability to shoot twice, the ability to try to take something
out of the sky, the ability to eliminate a threat to mainland
United States.
Admiral Syring. Sir, I would just qualify that by having a
first-shot opportunity sooner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you for elaborating.
That is all.
Mr. Rogers. I think that is it.
Before we do go into closed session, though, Mr. Almont, I
did want to ask you something I think you can answer in the
open session.
In your prepared statement, you cite Iranian claims that it
would launch a space-launch vehicle as early as this year. And
you also stated, this vehicle will be capable of
intercontinental ballistic missile ranges if configured as an
ICBM.
Didn't they just test that earlier this year?
Mr. Almont. They did tests on the 2nd of September, I
believe, and they have announced that they are going to attempt
another launch of that same system sometime in the near future.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
All right. We are going to adjourn and then reconvene in
2337 in about 5 minutes. We are in adjournment.
[Whereupon, at 3:02 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

September 10, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

September 10, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

September 10, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Note: Appropriated Amount is the top graph line; President's
Budget Request is the bottom graph line.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6240.026

Note: Appropriated Amount is the top graph line; President's
Budget Request is the bottom graph line.

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

September 10, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS

Mr. Rogers. Did you, or did any NNSA personnel, see a draft or the
final version of the confidential agreement between the IAEA and Iran?
a. Did the national lab ``red teams'' see the confidential
agreement between IAEA and Iran?
b. So, it was the case that the labs red teams relied on
representations by the administration? Who? Which officials? General
Klotz, were you one?
c. Was the red team tasked with assessing the integrity of the IAEA
agreement with Iran or assessing whether this regime would in fact
answer the question of what the Iranians have done at Parchin?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Please explain Annex 3 of the JCPOA, which spells out
the kinds of civil nuclear cooperation Iran can expect to receive from
the United States and other parties to the agreement.
a. Will Russia or China, or the IAEA for that matter, be able to
provide any U.S. origin technology, know-how, or material to Iran?
b. Will we provide any technology, material or know-how to Iran to
``harden'' its nuclear capabilities from foreign cyber capability?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Is there any legitimate reason for Iran to produce
highly enriched uranium, which is to say, HEU enriched to above 4%?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Can you tell us who first revealed Iran's uranium
enrichment capability in 2003? Was it the IAEA?
a. When did the U.S. first detect it?
b. Did we share that information with the IAEA?
c. What covert nuclear capability has even been detected by the
IAEA?
d. Would you support sharing with the IAEA all of our capabilities
to detect Iranian cheating with this agreement?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. General Klotz, you were the Director for Nuclear Policy
and Arms Control on the NSC from 2001 to 2003. Were you involved in the
decision of the CIA to, in November 2002, provide Congress with an
unclassified estimate on North Korea's nuclear program that the United
States had information since the early 1990s that North Korea had more
than one nuclear weapon, notwithstanding its obligations under the
Agreed Framework of 1994?
a. How should Congress ensure that no future administration is able
to conceal evidence of cheating on these kinds of ad hoc arms control
agreements?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. As the senior DOD witness, are you able to pledge
without hesitation that the administration will make no changes
whatsoever in the deployment of an Aegis Ashore site in Romania and
Poland as a consequence of the JCPOA? This should be a yes or no
answer.
Secretary Scher. Yes. There are no plans to change the deployment
of an Aegis Ashore site in Romania and Poland as a consequence of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
Mr. Rogers. When the EPAA was announced, and the Ballistic Missile
Defense Review were announced, were they based on an assumption of free
cooperation between Iran, Russia, China and North Korea on ballistic
missile defense?
Is the administration updating its reviews of our ballistic missile
posture to respond to the future Iranian ballistic missile program?
Secretary Scher. The Administration considered many factors in
formulating its national ballistic missile defense (BMD) policy in
2009, including our growing capabilities, Alliance relationships,
affordability, and the current and projected threat.
The Department continuously evaluates its global missile defense
posture and makes adjustments to account for the evolving threat,
addition of new capabilities, and force sustainment and modernization
requirements. If an Iranian intercontinental ballistic missile threat
should emerge, our current deployment of Ground-Based Interceptors in
the United States is postured to respond in the near term. If the
threat should grow, we have developed hedge measures to bolster our
homeland defense system in the future.
Mr. Rogers. Does DOD support the Israeli requests for U.S. support
for coproduction of Arrow III and David's Sling? No funds were in the
administration budget request for it and we've heard nothing official
from the administration about the funds provided in the Strategic
Forces Mark provided in the FY16 NDAA.
Secretary Scher. The Department supports the current President's
Budget for Fiscal Year 2016 (PB2016) for coproduction of the Arrow 3
interceptor or the David's Sling Weapon System (DSWS). The PB2016 for
Israeli Programs was developed based on the U.S. assessment of the
executable rate of progress for the Arrow 3 and the DSWS, and the U.S.-
Israeli project agreements currently support the PB2016 submittal.
Regarding the DSWS, the additional $150.0 million funding increase
for co-production may be premature given the acquisition phase of the
DSWS. The Missile Defense Agency (MDA) budget request was developed as
an integrated and balanced approach to meet the needs of the entire
ballistic missile defense system (BMDS) budget profile. The Department
officially responded to Congress in its July 31, 2015, Budgetary Appeal
recommending that the $150.0 million in the House and Senate bills be
redirected from this congressional ``add'' to restore the reductions
elsewhere to U.S. BMDS programs.
Concerning the Arrow-3, this co-development program is at an
earlier stage of the development process, with additional knowledge
points and technical milestones required prior to transitioning from
development to production.
Mr. Rogers. The President requested approximately $155 million for
Israeli Missile Defense in the FY16 budget request, but Israeli's
actual needs were approximately $475.2 million. Secretary Kerry and the
President like to tout the administration's support for Israeli Missile
defense; how do you explain this underfunding then?
a. Likewise, in FY15, the administration requested $176 million,
but the actual requirement was $351 million.
b. Or, David's Sling. The President requested $46 million in FY11,
$41 million in FY12, $38 million in FY13, $32 million in FY14, $31
million in FY15, and $37 million in FY16, or approximately $225
million. Over that same time, according to the government of Israel,
with which this committee agreed, the actual requirement was $770
million. The administration underfunded the requirement by one-third.
Mr. Scher, can we expect this underfunding to continue under the JCPOA?
Is this what the administration means by support to Israel?
Secretary Scher. Our commitment to Israel is ironclad. We recognize
that Israel faces very real missile threats from a number of actors in
the region, and Israel's security remains a top priority. In addition
to Foreign Military Financing assistance, the United States has
provided more than $3 billion in missile defense assistance to Israel
since 2001. DOD has worked with Israel to develop, produce, and fund a
multi-layered missile defense architecture that includes the Iron Dome,
David's Sling, and Arrow weapon systems. The President Budget request
for Fiscal Year 2016 includes Israeli programs and was developed based
on the U.S. assessment of an executable rate of progress with the U.S.-
Israeli project agreements supporting the budget submittal. We will
continue to ensure the most effective use and efficient investment of
U.S. taxpayer dollars for the security of our strategic partner.
Mr. Rogers. We've heard much from the administration about missile
defense integration and interoperability as a solution to our own
missile defense shortfalls. We've been told much of this will work
through organizations like the Gulf Cooperation Council. However, based
on recent reporting, it appears that is not working as planned. In an
article ``Little Progress Made on Integrated GCC Missile Shield'', we
see that we haven't even been able to achieve agreement on the
establishment of a command-and-control center, how it will be operated,
or even shared training capabilities and foreign disclosure. What are
the obstacles to getting this done?
Secretary Scher. The United States continues to engage our Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) partners in pursuit of an interoperable
missile defense architecture. At Camp David, the President pledged U.S.
assistance to the GCC member States in their commitment ``to develop a
region-wide ballistic missile defense capability.'' This end state will
require us to progress from bilateral missile defense cooperation
between the U.S. and its GCC partners today to a more integrated
multilateral approach in which the partners are sharing sensor data,
developing joint missile defense operating concepts and training
together. While reaching this end state will not occur overnight, we
believe we are on the right path working with our GCC partners to
facilitate the purchase of U.S. missile defense systems, engaging them
in operational discussions through USCENTCOM and supporting analytic
and requirements assessments related to developing a ballistic missile
defense architecture and a GCC-wide Ballistic Missile Early Warning
System.
Mr. Rogers. What is the likely impact on Iran's ballistic missile
program of its ability to test freely its ballistic missile capability?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Please explain the role that foreign ballistic missile
technology has been assessed to play in Iran's ICBM development? The
JCPOA and resultant U.N. Security Council Resolution will phase out the
limitations on such development, correct?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Is there any legitimate reason for Iran to produce
highly enriched uranium, which is to say, HEU enriched to above 4%?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Can you tell us who first revealed Iran's uranium
enrichment capability in 2003? Was it the IAEA?
a. When did the U.S. first detect it?
b. Did we share that information with the IAEA?
c. What covert nuclear capability has even been detected by the
IAEA?
d. Would you support sharing with the IAEA all of our capabilities
to detect Iranian cheating with this agreement?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Why do you assess the Saudis are interested in
purchase--in fact, becoming the first foreign buyer--of the Russian
Iskander nuclear-capable ballistic missile?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. What country provided Yemen's rebels with the ballistic
missile they used to kill 45 UAE troops over the weekend?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. What are Iran's biological and chemical weapons
capabilities? Do you assess they have the capability to weaponize
biological and chemical weapons? Is Iran behaving consistently with its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. In a press report ``Iran Already Sanitzing Nuclear
Site, Intel Warns'', dated August 5, it was reported that Iran began
sanitizing the Parchin site shortly after the JCPOA was signed. Mr.
Almont, what can you tell us about the activities Iran undertook to
sanitize the Parchin site? Was this the first time Iran has undertaken
to sanitize Parchin?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. Can you please describe the status of discussions with
Israel concerning David's Sling development and potential coproduction?
Admiral Syring. The Missile Defense Agency (MDA) has not commenced
formal negotiations with the Israel Missile Defense Organization (IMDO)
regarding a proposed David's Sling Weapon System (DSWS) Production
Agreement. MDA initiated preliminary discussions of a technical nature
and provided to IMDO what MDA views as the basic tenets of a possible
DSWS production agreement. International agreements typically require
9-12 months to negotiate and conclude; however our experience has shown
that complicated agreements sometimes lead to protracted negotiations
that extend that timeline. For example, the Iron Dome Procurement
Agreement took 17 months from the start of negotiations to conclusion.
Mr. Rogers. Please describe the impact to our BMD (other
capabilities) if you are forced to operate under sequester level
spending or a yearlong CR?
a. Can you articulate specific impacts to our counter-Iran posture
in Europe and the Mideast?
b. Is it correct then that you approve a funding level consistent
with what was requested by the President in his budget request, such as
the FY16 NDAA or FY16 Defense Appropriations bill?
Admiral Syring. If forced to operate under sequestration levels, I
testified earlier this year that the Missile Defense Agency (MDA) would
likely scale back or eliminate work that we started last year on the
redesigned kill vehicle and the long range discrimination radar.
Without these improvements, the country would be in serious jeopardy as
the system would be overmatched over time.
A. I do not envision a negative impact to our missile defense plans
for Europe or the Middle East due to sequestration. We are committed to
our North Atlantic Treaty Organization Allies and remain on track to
field European Phased Adaptive Approach Phases II and III by 2015 and
2018, respectively. For the Middle East, specifically Israel, the only
impact of sequestration or a yearlong CR is related to any procurement
funding Congress may appropriate for David's Sling or Arrow 3
production. These would be considered new starts and we would not be
able to transfer funding to Israel even if the production agreement is
negotiated and concluded.
B. Yes, I support the President's FY16 budget
Mr. Rogers. What is the likely impact on Iran's ballistic missile
program of its ability to test freely its ballistic missile capability?
Admiral Syring. I defer any questions regarding Iranian ballistic
missile development and testing to the intelligence community.
Mr. Rogers. Please explain the role that foreign ballistic missile
technology has been assessed to play in Iran's ICBM development? The
JCPOA and resultant U.N. Security Council Resolution will phase out the
limitations on such development, correct?
Admiral Syring. I defer any questions related to the specific terms
and conditions of the JCPOA to the U.S. Department of State and the
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, and any questions regarding
Iran's ballistic missile technology development to the intelligence
community.
Mr. Rogers. When the EPAA was announced, and the Ballistic Missile
Defense Review were announced, were they based on an assumption of free
cooperation between Iran, Russia, China and North Korea on ballistic
missile defense?
Is the administration updating its reviews of our ballistic missile
posture to respond to the future Iranian ballistic missile program?
Admiral Syring. The Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD-P)
was the primary DOD-organization responsible for drafting the Ballistic
Missile Defense Review. I defer to USD-P regarding the assumptions in
the document and planned future updates.
Mr. Rogers. Have you been tasked to update your assessments of
Iran's ballistic and cruise missile capability now that the ballistic
missile embargo and ballistic missile test prohibition have been, or
will be, phased out?
Admiral Syring. No, the intelligence community is responsible for
updating assessments on Iran's ballistic and cruise missile capability.
Mr. Rogers. In May 2009, an unclassified intelligence report issued
by the National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC) stated,
``with sufficient foreign assistance, Iran could develop and test an
ICBM capable of reaching the United States by 2015.'' Then, the
administration changed its plans for BMD deployment because it claimed
there was new intelligence that showed the threat from short and medium
range Iranian BMs was already here. What is your best military advice
for how lifting the embargo will affect the need for missile defenses,
and how will it impact the rate at which Iran can make progress on an
ICBM?
Admiral Syring. I am not in position to assess the impact of
lifting the embargo. This is the responsibility of the intelligence
community and I defer to them for any assessments on lifting the
embargo.
Mr. Rogers. We've heard much from the administration about missile
defense integration and interoperability as a solution to our own
missile defense shortfalls. We've been told much of this will work
through organizations like the Gulf Cooperation Council. However, based
on recent reporting, it appears that is not working as planned. In an
article ``Little Progress Made on Integrated GCC Missile Shield'', we
see that we haven't even been able to achieve agreement on the
establishment of a command-and-control center, how it will be operated,
or even shared training capabilities and foreign disclosure. What are
the obstacles to getting this done?
Admiral Syring. We are working with our counterparts within the
Department to address GCC ballistic missile early warning system
requirements. To that end, we participated in an August 2015 meeting
with the GCC to further define their requirements. We are using the
information from this meeting to inform a top-level engineering
analysis and expect to meet again with our GCC partners later this year
to review the work. We also plan to issue a request for information to
industry to enable future evaluation of sensor and command, control and
communication solutions.
Mr. Rogers. Please describe the impact to our BMD (other
capabilities) if you are forced to operate under sequester level
spending or a yearlong CR?
a. Can you articulate specific impacts to our counter-Iran posture
in Europe and the Mideast?
b. Is it correct then that you approve a funding level consistent
with what was requested by the President in his budget request, such as
the FY16 NDAA or FY16 Defense Appropriations bill?
General Shepro. Sequester-level spending will have minimal impact
on the overall enhancement of regional missile defense. The FY16 budget
request includes adequate funding, consistent with the President's
request, to enhance our homeland missile defense system, increase our
regional missile defense capabilities, and maintain the Presidential
commitment to the European Phased Adaptive Approach (EPAA).
Mr. Rogers. Representing the Joint Staff, can you articulate why
NORTHCOM continues to include in its Integrated Priority List the need
for an additional interceptor site--a third site--in the United States
for the defense of the homeland?
General Shepro. The purpose of an IPL is to identify potential
priority capability gaps across all mission areas. An individual IPL
item details a specific potential gap and further identifies a
multitude of possible mitigation actions/solutions.
In this case, an East Coast Site is mentioned as a potential
mitigation action/solution, which is consistent with Congressional
direction. However, at this time, USNORTHCOM does not have a
requirement for an additional GMD interceptor site, based upon the
current threat, and as further stated in testimony by CDRUSNORTHCOM
over the past several years.
Mr. Rogers. Have you been tasked to update your assessments of
Iran's ballistic and cruise missile capability now that the ballistic
missile embargo and ballistic missile test prohibition have been, or
will be, phased out?
General Shepro. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. In May 2009, an unclassified intelligence report issued
by the National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC) stated,
``with sufficient foreign assistance, Iran could develop and test an
ICBM capable of reaching the United States by 2015.'' Then, the
administration changed its plans for BMD deployment because it claimed
there was new intelligence that showed the threat from short and medium
range Iranian BMs was already here. What is your best military advice
for how lifting the embargo will affect the need for missile defenses,
and how will it impact the rate at which Iran can make progress on an
ICBM?
General Shepro. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Rogers. What can you tell us about the findings of the Joint
Capabilities Mix (JCM) Study III completed approximately 4 years ago
concerning our ability to respond to the Iranian ballistic missile
threat?
a. Are you familiar with the JCM IV update that's being conducted
at present? It will look out as far as the 2020s and beyond, right? b.
Will this update take into account the impact of the concessions made
in the JCPOA concerning Iran's ballistic missile program?
General Shepro. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FORBES
Mr. Forbes. In FY 09 the President's budget request for the Missile
Defense Agency was at $9.3 Billion and based on current trend lines it
could go as low as $7.3 Billion in FY 18. What is the impact of these
diminishing funding levels to our ability to protect our nation and our
allies if the government of Iran violates the terms of the nuclear
deal?
Admiral Syring. Our President's budget (PB) 2016 request is
sufficient to keep us on track to meet our missile defense commitments.
My biggest concern remains the potential impacts to the Ballistic
Missile Defense System if sequestration remains in place. As previously
discussed before this committee, we have ballistic missile defense
capabilities deployed today that address the current North Korean and
Iranian threat and our PB 2016 budget request puts us in position to
defend against future Iranian ballistic missile threats including a
potential intercontinental ballistic missile. If sequestration remains
in place, the Department would likely need to delay our planned
improvements with the re-designed kill vehicle and the Long Range
Discrimination Radar.
Mr. Forbes. What is the likely impact on Iran's ballistic missile
program of its ability to test freely its ballistic missile capability?
a. Please explain the role that foreign ballistic missile
technology has been assessed to play in Iran's ICBM development? The
JCPOA and resultant U.N. Security Council Resolution will phase out the
limitations on such development, correct?
b. When the EPAA was announced, and the Ballistic Missile Defense
Review were announced, were they based on an assumption of free
cooperation between Iran, Russia, China and North Korea on ballistic
missile defense?
c. Is the administration updating its reviews of our ballistic
missile posture to respond to the future Iranian ballistic missile
program?
d. Have you been tasked to update your assessments of Iran's
ballistic and cruise missile capability now that the ballistic missile
embargo and ballistic missile test prohibition have been, or will be,
phased out?
Admiral Syring. I defer any questions regarding Iranian ballistic
missile development and testing to the intelligence community. a. I
defer any questions related to the specific terms and conditions of the
JCPOA to the U.S. Department of State and the Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy, and any questions regarding Iran's ballistic
missile technology development to the intelligence community. b. The
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (USD-P) was the primary DOD-
organization responsible for drafting the Ballistic Missile Defense
Review. c. I defer to USD-P regarding the assumptions in the document
and planned future updates. d. No, the intelligence community is
responsible for updating assessments on Iran's ballistic and cruise
missile capability.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER
Mr. Turner. Is it correct that the so-called 123 agreement between
the United States and the United Arab Emirates would prohibit the
possession of uranium enrichment and plutonium reprocessing technology
by that country?
a. Is it correct that the United States has been seeking the
agreement of Saudi Arabia for this same so-called ``Gold Standard''?
b. Has either country discussed with the U.S. whether or not they
too, post negotiation of the JCPOA, can seek enrichment? Does the
administration have a position on whether or not either country, both
U.S. allies in the region and enemies of Iran, should continue to be
held to these same apparently anachronistic policies?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Turner. Do you receive a regular intelligence briefing on
matters within your purview as Administrator, NNSA and Under Secretary
of Energy for Nuclear Security? How often? What IC agency or element
performs those briefings?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Turner. I raised in closed session with you a matter based on
sensitive intelligence reporting. Was that the first you learned of
this matter? Had you not been briefed on it before, including during
your regular intelligence briefings? Were you subsequently briefed on
the matter I raised? If so, by whom and when?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Turner. Are you aware of whether any other U.S. official
responsible for this subject matter was aware of the issued covered in
that sensitive intelligence reporting? If so, who?
General Klotz. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Turner. Are you aware of any information concerning intentions
by the UAE or Saudi Arabia regarding their plans to develop uranium
enrichment capability?
Mr. Almont. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]

[all]
