- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-111] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-111]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FULL COMMITTEE HEARING

ON

THE FISCAL YEAR 2017 NATIONAL

DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET

REQUEST FROM THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 16, 2016

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-063                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado                   Georgia
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
PAUL COOK, California                MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               PETE AGUILAR, California
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Kari Bingen, Professional Staff Member
William S. Johnson, Counsel
Britton Burkett, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Sanchez, Hon. Loretta, a Representative from California,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

James, Hon. Deborah Lee, Secretary of the Air Force; accompanied
by Gen Mark A. Welsh III, USAF, Chief of Staff of the Air Force     7
Mabus, Hon. Ray, Secretary of the Navy; accompanied by ADM John
M. Richardson, USN, Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen Robert
B. Neller, USMC, Commandant of the Marine Corps................     5
Murphy, Hon. Patrick J., Acting Secretary of the Army;
accompanied by GEN Mark A. Milley, USA, Chief of Staff, United
States Army....................................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

James, Hon. Deborah Lee, joint with Gen Mark A. Welsh III....   154
Mabus, Hon. Ray..............................................    76
Murphy, Hon. Patrick J., joint with GEN Mark A. Milley.......    59
Richardson, ADM John M.......................................   124
Neller, Gen Robert B.........................................   138

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Forbes...................................................   171
Mr. Rogers...................................................   171

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bridenstine..............................................   189
Mr. Brooks...................................................   188
Mr. Coffman..................................................   184
Mr. Conaway..................................................   180
Dr. Fleming..................................................   190
Mr. Lamborn..................................................   181
Mr. Langevin.................................................   175
Mr. Shuster..................................................   179
Ms. Stefanik.................................................   189

THE FISCAL YEAR 2017 NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BUDGET REQUEST FROM
THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, March 16, 2016.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. The
committee meets today to hear from the service secretaries and
the service chiefs, and we are grateful to each of you for
being here today.
The Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency [DIA]
testified earlier this month that the world is far more
complicated, it is far more destabilized, it is far more
complex than at any time we have seen. Just last month the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs testified before the
Appropriations Defense Subcommittee, the joint force will be
stressed to execute a major contingency operation to aggression
by an adversary.
We face a more dangerous world, and we face a stressed
force and a high operational tempo, all major concerns for this
committee. We talk a lot about readiness, but as one of our
senior military leaders has said, the real--real bill payer for
underfunded readiness is lost lives, and I think that helps
bring it into context for all of us.
Of course, the challenge in today's complex world is we
can't just focus on one thing. We face everything from a
serious nuclear threat from peer competitors to continuing
threat of terrorism and aggression from a variety of actors. So
we all face a number of challenges at the same time. I am sure
that we will explore a number of those issues over the course
of this hearing, as well as the administration's budget request
and how well it meets those challenges, both around the world
and within our force.
Finally, I would just note that yesterday I made some
proposals to improve our acquisition system. I don't expect
that you all have had the time to look and react to those, but
I do solicit your feedback on what you think is good and what
you think could be better. And working with you as well as
folks in OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] and obviously
all of our colleagues and folks outside the building, we want
to take further steps to improve the way that the Pentagon
acquires goods and services.
Before introducing our witnesses, I will yield to the
distinguished gentlelady from California, who is sitting in for
the ranking member, Ms. Sanchez.

STATEMENT OF HON. LORETTA SANCHEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being before us today. I want to thank you for all of your
service. Before I begin, I would like to insert for the record,
ask unanimous consent to put Mr. Smith's opening remarks in,
please, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Ms. Sanchez. So we live today in a world where the security
environment is constantly changing, and so we have the
responsibility to keep up with those changes. There are threats
today that we are facing that we didn't know about even last
year, and the threats are vast. And so I understand that all
the services today, that you face so many--you get pulled in so
many different directions to defend and to protect our country
and Americans, and so thank you for the service and the
sacrifice.
With the rise of ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant] and extremism, it has become pretty apparent that we
have to use all elements of power with those growing threats
today. And I do completely agree with the Secretary in his
written statement in terms of the different elements of power,
and each element is necessary for combination with the others.
However, each alone is insufficient to win a war or maintain a
peace. And in the last couple of years it has become evident
that military might alone is not enough to address the rising
threats.
The U.S. must take the necessary investments in diplomacy
and economic stability and in collective security to be more
effective against today's threats. It is time for us to further
engage our partners so that we can prevent terrorist attacks
like the one in the Ivory Coast. The U.S. cannot combat ISIL
and terrorism alone, and we have to be able to rely on our
regional allies militarily and financially as we continue to
fight against terrorism. And we have a budget problem, and we
all know that, and we can't fix this problem without addressing
the defense budget.
It is time not just for the services, but also for us in
Congress to really sit down at the table and get down to the
hard decisions, Mr. Chairman, to prioritize what we need and
what is not a critical need. And we have to do that in the
defense budget because it must be sustainable. As you said, a
lack of resources is really a cost that none of us want to see.
And I hope that you will speak to that, all of you.
And I would also like to commend the Defense Department
[DOD] and the services for all your efforts in opening up the
military occupation and positions to women. As the services go
forward in integrating women into these positions, I believe
that leadership will be key. And I hope to hear from you the
steps that each of the services is doing in order to ensure
that we get that done.
We are celebrating Women's History Month right now, and for
that reason in particular, I would like to recognize all those
women who have served in our military and are currently
serving. I believe that the full integration of women into the
military will not only open up the opportunities for these
women, but they will enhance our readiness of our military. So
I thank you, and I look forward to your testimony.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady.
Let me again welcome our witnesses. We have Mr. Patrick
Murphy, Acting Secretary of the Army; General Mark Milley,
Chief of Staff of the Army; Honorable Ray Mabus, Secretary of
the Navy; Admiral John Richardson, Chief of Naval Operations
[CNO]; General Robert Neller, Commandant of the Marine Corps;
Honorable Deborah Lee James, Secretary of the Air Force; and
General Mark Welsh, Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
For some of you all, I think this may be your first
opportunity to testify in this format. I do note Mr. Murphy was
once on this side of the table, and now he is on that side. It
will be interesting to see whether people go easy on him or
not. For some of you all, this may be your last time to testify
in this format.
I just want to take a moment to acknowledge Mrs. Welsh, who
is in the audience. One of the things that I have learned to
appreciate is the full-time job which the spouses of our
service chiefs occupy in supporting the force in their way, in
the families. It is a tremendous asset for our country, and I
appreciate all that you have done not only to support General
Welsh over you all's career, but what you have done to support
all of the airmen who have served our country. And the same is
true for all of your spouses.
Without objection, your full written statements will be
made part of the record, and we would be pleased to hear any
introductory comments you would like to make.
Secretary Murphy.

STATEMENT OF HON. PATRICK J. MURPHY, ACTING SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY; ACCOMPANIED BY GEN MARK A. MILLEY, USA, CHIEF OF STAFF,
UNITED STATES ARMY

Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of this
committee. It is great to be back on this side of the dais, and
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss our Army with you here
today. This is my tenth week on the job as Acting Secretary of
the Army, and it is truly an honor to be back with my Army
family.
Now, I have traveled to see our soldiers, our civilians,
and their families to Fort Hood, to Fort Sam Houston, and most
recently to Iraq and Afghanistan. And let me tell you, the
selfless service and dedication of our team should inspire all
of us. We are tasked with the solemn responsibility to fight
and win our Nation's wars and to keep our families safe here at
home.
Our Army must produce ready units today to deter and defeat
our Nation's enemies, defend our homeland, project power, and
win decisively. By ready, we mean units that are fully manned,
trained for combat, fully equipped according to their design
structure, and led by competent leaders. We must also be ready
for future fights by investing in modernization and research
and development. We do not want our soldiers to have a fair
fight. We want them to have a tactical and technical advantage
over our enemies.
With our $125.1 billion budget request, our Army will focus
its efforts on rebuilding readiness for large-scale, high-end
ground combat today. We do so because we believe that ignoring
readiness shortfalls puts our Nation at greatest risk for the
following reasons: First, readiness wins wars. Our Army has
never been the largest in the world. At times we have not even
been the best equipped, but since World War II, we have
recognized that ready soldiers, properly manned, trained,
equipped, and led, can beat larger or more determined forces.
So whether we are confronting the barbaric acts of ISIS
[Islamic State of Iraq and Syria] or the desperation of North
Korea, our Army must be prepared to execute and to win. We
train like we fight, and our Army must be ready to fight
tonight.
Next, readiness deters our most dangerous threats and
assures our allies. We are reminded with alarming frequency
that great power conflicts are not dead. Today they often
manifest themselves on a regional basis. Both Russia and China
are challenging America's willingness and ability to enforce
international standards of conduct. A ready Army provides
America the strength to deter such actions and reassure our
partners throughout the world.
Readiness also makes future training less costly.
Continuing operations since 2001 have left our force proficient
in stability operations and counterterrorism, but our future
command sergeants major and brigade commanders have not had the
critical combat training center experiences as junior leaders
trained for high-end ground combat. Investing in readiness
today builds a foundation necessary for long-term readiness.
Finally, readiness prepares our force for potential future
conflicts. We can't keep fighting the last fight. Our Army must
be prepared to face the high-end and advanced combat power of
an aggressive Russia or more likely, Russian aggression
employed by surrogate actors.
This budget dedicates resources to develop solutions to
allow our force the space to develop new concepts, and formed
by the recommendations of the National Commission on the Future
of the Army, our formations must first be ready to execute
against current and emerging threats. The choice, though, to
invest in near-term readiness does come with risk. Smaller
modernization investments risk our ability to fight and win in
the future. We have no new major modernization programs this
decade. Smaller investments in end strength risk our ability to
conduct multiple operations for sustained periods of time.
In short, we are mortgaging our future readiness because we
have to ensure success in today's battles against emerging
threats. That is why initiatives that we asked for like BRAC
[base realignment and closure] in 2019, are needed to be
implemented now. Let us manage your investment, and this will
result in $500 million a year in savings and a return on
investment within 5 years.
And lastly, while we thank Congress for the Bipartisan
Budget Act [BBA] of 2015, which provides short-term relief and
2 years of predictable funding, we request your support for the
enactment of our budget as proposed. We request your support,
your continued funding levels calibrated to current threats and
to our national security interests, and we request your
support, your continued support, for our soldiers, civilians,
and their families so that our Army remains the most capable
fighting force possible to fight and win our Nation's wars and
to keep our families safe here at home. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Murphy and General
Milley can be found in the Appendix on page 59.]
The Chairman. Thank you. My understanding is that only the
service secretaries have introductory comments. Is that
correct?
Secretary Mabus.

STATEMENT OF HON. RAY MABUS, SECRETARY OF THE NAVY; ACCOMPANIED
BY ADM JOHN M. RICHARDSON, USN, CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS, AND
GEN ROBERT B. NELLER, USMC, COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS

Secretary Mabus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Congresswoman
Sanchez on behalf of Ranking Member Smith, members of this
committee. Thank you so much for the opportunity to talk about
the Department of the Navy.
As you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, this is the first budget
testimony for our new Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral
Richardson, and for the Commandant of the Marine Corps, General
Neller. In the time since they took these positions, I have had
the privilege of their frank, professional, and invaluable
counsel. They are officers of the highest caliber who expertly
lead our Navy and Marine Corps during ever tightening fiscal
constraints and an increasingly dynamic threat environment.
This is my eighth time, and my last, to appear before you.
For me, leading the Department of the Navy is the greatest
honor of my life. I couldn't be more proud of our sailors,
marines, civilians, their families. I am also proud of the many
steps we have taken and changes we have made to ensure that the
Navy and Marine Corps remain the greatest expeditionary
fighting force the world has ever known.
First and foremost, we continue to provide presence. That
unrivaled advantage, on, above, beneath, and from the seas,
gives our leaders options in times of crisis, reassures our
allies, and deters adversaries. There is no next best thing to
being there. Maintaining that presence requires gray hulls on
the horizon.
While there has been some discussion about posture versus
presence, the simple fact is, for the Navy and Marine Corps,
our posture is presence. In every case, from high-end combat to
irregular warfare to disaster relief, our naval assets get on
station faster, stay longer, bring whatever we need with us.
And since we operate from our ships, which are sovereign
American territory, we can act without having to ask any other
nation's permission.
Resourcing that presence depends on four fundamentals, four
Ps: people, our sailors and marines; platforms, our ships, our
aircraft, our systems; power, how we use energy to make us
better warfighters; and partnerships, our relationships with
international allies, industry, and most importantly, with the
American people.
When I took this post almost 7 years ago, we had an
incredibly committed and capable force, but each of these four
Ps was under pressure. Our people had been stressed from high
operational tempo and extended deployments. Our fleet was
shrinking, and too many of our platforms were costing too much.
Our use of power was a vulnerability. And our partners were
seeking reassurance of our sustained engagement. Now our
people, platforms, power, and partnerships are stronger than
they have been in many years, enabling us to provide that
invaluable presence.
In people, we have instituted sweeping changes. Personnel
policy, promotions are based more on merit and less on tenure,
and commanding officers are empowered to meritoriously promote
more sailors and marines. We have made career paths more
flexible. And one example, thanks to Congress, is the Career
Intermission Program [CIP], which has been greatly expanded.
We have also increased professional development and
educational opportunities that bring America's best ideas to
the fleet by adding 30 graduate school slots through our Fleet
Scholars Education Program and sending high-performing sailors
on SECNAV [Secretary of the Navy] Industry Tours to great
American companies like FedEx and Amazon, where they learn
private sector best practices that can be applied when they
return.
We are absolutely committed, from leadership to the deck
plates, on combating the crime of sexual assault and the
tragedy of suicide. We have revamped our physical fitness
assessments making them more realistically align with the jobs
we do, and we have promoted healthier lifestyles through better
nutrition and a culture of fitness.
All billets in both services are now open to women.
Standards will absolutely not be lowered, but anyone who can
meet the standards will be able to do the job. This will make
us a more combat-effective force. We are trying to mitigate
stress on sailors and marines and their families by making
deployments more predictable, extending hours for child care,
and creating colocation policies. To tap into the innovative
culture inherent in the Navy and Marine Corps, we established
Task Force Innovation, which takes good ideas from deck plate
sailors and field marines, recognizes, funds, and rapidly moves
these ideas fleetwide.
On platforms, we have reversed the decline in ship count.
And thanks to Congress, and in particular to this committee,
our Navy will reach 300 ships by 2019, and we will get to our
assessed need of 308 ships by 2021. In the 7 years before I
took office, the Navy contracted for 41 ships. In my 7 years,
we have contracted for 84, and we have done so while increasing
aircraft purchases by 35 percent, all with a smaller top line.
Practices like firm fixed price contracts, multiyear buys,
stable requirements, have driven down costs on virtually every
class of ship, and we are also in the process of recapitalizing
nearly every naval aviation program. We have expanded unmanned
systems, on, under, and above the sea, and put increased focus
on them by establishing a Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Unmanned and an Office of Unmanned Warfare System on the CNO
staff, N99, designed specifically to coordinate all unmanned
programs. We are also implementing advanced energy technologies
like electromagnetic rail guns and laser weapons.
In power, to increase our lethality and operational
flexibility, I set goals of having 50 percent of sea and shore-
based energy derived from alternative sources by 2020,
competitive with the price of conventional power. We met that
goal with shore at the end of last year. Energy efficiency has
also been greatly increased on our bases and at sea. Ultimately
since 2009, both the Navy and Marine Corps have achieved large
drops in oil consumption.
In partnerships, during my tenure, I have traveled nearly
1.2 million air miles to 144 different countries and
territories, visiting with our sailors, marines, our allies,
and our partners. Twelve of my trips have been to Afghanistan,
where I visited every Marine Corps forward operating base in
Helmand to be with our forward-deployed men and women. And I
have actively engaged with our allies and friends around the
world to build and maintain a network of navies with whom we
can train, operate, and trust. And we have worked in
partnership with Congress to fulfill the constitutional mandate
to provide for and maintain a Navy.
As President George Washington once said: It follows then,
as certain as night succeeds the day, that without a decisive
naval force, we can do nothing definitive. With it, everything,
honorable and glorious. Thank you.
[The prepared statements of Secretary Mabus, Admiral
Richardson, and General Neller can be found in the Appendix
beginning on page 76.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Secretary James.

STATEMENT OF HON. DEBORAH LEE JAMES, SECRETARY OF THE AIR
FORCE; ACCOMPANIED BY GEN MARK A. WELSH III, USAF, CHIEF OF
STAFF OF THE AIR FORCE

Secretary James. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Congresswoman
Sanchez and all the members of the committee. Good morning. My
wingman, General Welsh, and I are very proud to come before you
today to represent the nearly 660,000 Active Duty, National
Guard, Reserve, and civilian airmen, plus all of our families,
and we are certainly very honored to be here with our
colleagues from the sister services as well.
When we testified before all of you last year, we outlined
our three priorities, which are taking care of people,
balancing readiness with our need for modernization, and making
every dollar count. These priorities have not changed over the
last year, but what has changed, and you have already touched
upon it, Mr. Chairman, is the threats that are facing our
Nation. As we sit here today, our Air Force is working very,
very hard to degrade, with the goal of ultimately destroying,
Daesh in the Middle East as part of a whole of government and
as part of a coalition approach.
In the last year, our coalition forces upped the ante
against Daesh, flying more than 55,000 sorties in support of
Operation Inherent Resolve, which represents a threefold
increase over the number of sorties in 2014. Moreover, a
resurgent Russia continues to foment problems in the Ukraine
and has announced its intent to modernize its nuclear forces,
and of course, we are watching and we are waiting to see what
happens next in Syria.
In addition, we have observed North Korea conduct an
illegal nuclear test and a rocket launch just within the last
month or so, and we continue to see worrisome activity from
China in the South China Sea. And, of course, there are also
very important growing threats in both space and cyberspace.
The bottom line here is that our Air Force is playing an
absolutely essential role in each of these areas. We are fully
engaged in every region of the world, in every mission area,
and across the full spectrum of operations. And to put it
plainly, in my opinion, we have never been busier on such a
sustained and global basis, and we are doing all of this with
roughly 200,000 fewer people and 79 fewer fighter squadrons
than we had at the time of Operation Desert Storm, so we are a
much, much smaller Air Force.
Now, to continue confronting these challenges and in order
to maintain an effective fighting force, our budget submission,
which is now before you, tries to balance capacity, capability,
and readiness appropriately. As has been mentioned, the
Bipartisan Budget Act, we are very, very appreciative of the
stability and the predictability that that gives us, but it
does leave us somewhat short, $3.4 billion short for the Air
Force, as compared to what we originally requested for fiscal
year 2017. So this means that once again we had some tough
choices to make in this budget. And I will detail those budget
choices as I discuss our top three priorities, and I want to
begin with the most important one, and that is taking care of
people.
Airmen and their families are the Air Force's most
important resource, and our budget, I believe, reflects this
truth. But with that said, as I just mentioned, we have been
downsizing for years, and our people are very stressed, and
this simply needs to stop. We now need to upsize our force
modestly, and we want to do it in a total force way, to address
a number of key areas, including critical career fields like
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, cyber,
maintenance across the Air Force, and battlefield airmen. These
are some of the areas that we need to plus-up. We thank this
committee for your support of our Active Duty plus-up. You have
also supported us, of course, in our Guard and Reserve as well.
The Active Duty will go from roughly 311,000 to 317,000
airmen by the end of this fiscal year, but in reality, I think
all of these mission demands I just spoke about will indicate
that we need more growth in fiscal year 2017. So in order to
meet that demand, I plan to take a judicious approach to
incrementally increase our total force beyond the current
level, provided, of course, that we can get the right talent.
And we would be grateful to this committee to consider a
reprogramming action at the appropriate time, should that be
required.
Speaking of total force, we are continuing to maximize our
use of the Guard and Reserve by shifting additional missions
and workload when it makes sense to do so. Some examples here
include cyber, ISR [intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance], command and control, mobility and space, so we
are continuing to shift workload and missions as it makes
sense. We are also continuing to push the envelope when it
comes to integration of our Guard and Reserve with our Active,
and that goes from the staff level at the highest headquarters
all the way down to the wing level and to the flight line.
I also want to call to your attention, still on the subject
of people, that we are expanding the Sexual Assault Prevention
and Response Program. We are fully funding our child care
operations, and we are making a big effort to fund the most
important infrastructure projects to benefit our airmen, all as
part of this budget. And, of course, we too are looking forward
to welcoming qualified women into the previously closed career
fields.
The second priority I mentioned is getting the balance
right between readiness and modernization, and we believe
strongly that we need both. We can't have either/or. It is not
an either/or proposition for us. So as we have explained
before, less than half of our combat forces are ready for what
we call a high-end fight, less than half. And when I say high-
end fight, I am speaking of a conflict that might take place in
an anti-access/area denial environment, in other words, an
environment where an adversary could shoot us down, interfere
with us in some major way in space or cyberspace.
In addition to all this, our aircraft inventory is the
oldest that it has ever been, and of course as you know, the
adversaries are closing the technological gap on us, so we must
modernize.
In terms of readiness, this budget funds flying hours to
their maximum executable level, invests in weapon systems
sustainment, and ensures combat exercises like Red and Green
Flag remain strong. After consulting with our combatant
commanders, General Welsh and I agreed that we needed to make
some adjustments in this budget to address these real world
changes that I mentioned.
One of those adjustments is we are rephasing the A-10 and
the Compass Call retirements. And the bottom line here is we
are not proposing to retire any of these aircraft in fiscal
year 2017. Furthermore, we will continue to look at the mix of
aircraft each year and we will be prepared to modify, based on
the global security situation. We also need to ensure the right
number and mix of unmanned aircraft, so we are going to invest
more in additional Reapers. And we also need to invest more in
munitions. Again, this is contained in the budget request.
Turning to modernization, this year's budget will continue
the ongoing investments to support our top priorities of
nuclear deterrence, space, and cyberspace. We are also
continuing with the F-35, the KC-46, Combat Rescue Helicopters.
JSTARS [Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System] we are
going to get started on, as well as T-X. We also are going to
continue to move forward with the B-21, which was formerly
known as the Long Range Strike Bomber. This fifth-generation
global precision attack platform will give our country a
networked sensor shooter capability and propel us into the next
century of air power dominance.
Now, unfortunately modernization is also where we had to
make some of those tough choices because of the insufficient
budgets. So, for example, with reluctance we are deferring the
purchase of five F-35s in fiscal year 2017 and three C-130Js in
fiscal year 2017. We will also have to delay some of our
upgrades to the fourth-generation systems like the F-16, and
many infrastructure projects will simply have to wait. So
infrastructure is another tough choice for us. And I want to
also support our department's request for a BRAC in fiscal year
2019.
The third priority reflects our commitment to give the
taxpayers the best bang for the buck, which is why we call it
Make Every Dollar Count, and we are working a number of
initiatives here, including we too are working on streamlined
energy usage, cost savings ideas that come directly from airmen
that we then put into practice, and we are continuing the march
toward meeting the mandate to be audit ready by the end of
fiscal year 2017.
So, Mr. Chairman, as I begin to wrap, again I want to thank
this committee and you for your leadership and support of the
Bipartisan Budget Act. I want to associate myself with the
remarks about the need to lift sequestration. I know many on
this committee have tried very hard to do that. If we return to
sequestration, and if we once again have to park jets and take
some of those very dire effects that we did the last time
around, there is just no question in my mind, this means that
we will enter possibly a future conflict less prepared. And if
you are a student of history--I like history, I try to be a
student--history teaches us that the consequences of
insufficient preparation are prolonged conflict and increased
loss of life. So please keep up the fight to lift sequestration
permanently. And with that, I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary James and
General Welsh can be found in the Appendix on page 154.]
The Chairman. Thank you, ma'am. That is exactly what
history teaches. I hope we have learned those lessons.
Let me just ask about a couple of things right quick.
General Neller, I have asked for the statistics for the Marine
Corps on Class A mishap rates. And my understanding is the
average over the last 10 years was 2.15 mishaps per 100,000
flying hours, but that went up in 2014 to 2.67; 2015, 2.88;
2016, 3.96. So the point is, over the last 3 years especially,
the number of Class A mishaps per 100,000 flying hours has been
increasing significantly.
Given this readiness and safety issue and the budget
constraints and all that the Marine Corps is being asked to do
operationally, can the Marine Corps meet the demands of the
National Military Strategy?
General Neller. Chairman, let me first comment on the
aviation. We track this very closely, and the simple fact is
that we don't have enough airplanes to meet the training
requirements for the entire force. The force that is deployed
is trained and ready, and it is a little bit different for
every model, type, and series. So we are working on this, and
not all of it is related to aviation maintenance, some of these
events. But it is a fact that our mishap rate has gone up.
As far as our ability to meet the National Military
Strategy, our ability to meet the day-to-day commitments and
the requirements of the combatant commanders, we are doing that
with trained and ready forces. Our ability to meet other
regional requirements for major contingency plans, we would be
able to do that, but we would probably not be able to do it
within the timeframe that the current plans call for us to
arrive to participate in that conflict.
The Chairman. Okay. General Milley, the numbers for the
Army are not quite as dramatic, but they are also on an upward
trend, rising from 1.52 in fiscal year 2014, to 1.99--just
about 2--in fiscal year 2016. Let me ask you the same question.
Can the Army meet the demands of the National Military
Strategy?
General Milley. Thanks, Chairman. On the Class A's, it has
our attention. We have asked for the Deputy Commander of TRADOC
[Training and Doctrine Command] to conduct a multifunctional,
very detailed study of Class A aviation accidents. And one of
the things you will see in this budget is we are increasing
flying hours for our rotary-wing aviators from 10 hours to 12
hours. Ideally, we want them 14 to 15 hours a month. We can't
get there with the budget to 14, 15, but we are going to
increase it to 12. But we are going to have more data here in
probably a month or so, and we will share that with you as soon
as we get it. It does have our concern. Our aircraft accidents
have increased, and we are very concerned about it.
On the second question, it is my estimate that, similar to
General Neller's, is that on a day-to-day basis, the Army does
about 46 percent of all the combatant commander demand signal
that comes in, and 64 percent of emergent demand from the
combatant commander is done by the Army. We can handle that on
a day-to-day basis, and we have also very good current
capability and capacity to fight the counterterrorist,
counterinsurgency fight that is ongoing against ISIS and other
areas such as in Afghanistan. So we have got those skill sets.
My concern going forward is at the higher end in the event
of a contingency, and if that were to happen, then I have grave
concerns in terms of the readiness of the Army forces to be
able to deal with that in a timely manner. And I think the cost
both in terms of time, casualties, and troops and the ability
to accomplish military objectives, would be very significant,
and we have all given our risk assessments associated with that
in a classified session.
The Chairman. Let me turn to a different issue, and I want
to ask first Admiral Richardson and then General Welsh about
this. Deputy Secretary Work has testified before this committee
that nuclear weapons remain the most important mission we have.
This is absolutely critical. And Secretary Carter has said it
is the foundation for everything we do.
I was just engaged in a conversation yesterday with some
British parliamentarians about their decision whether to
replenish, update, their nuclear deterrent, which is submarine-
based. Admiral, do you agree, I guess, first, with Secretary
Carter and Deputy Secretary Work that our nuclear deterrent is
foundational, and do you believe that all three legs of the
triad plus the weapons themselves must be part of that
modernization effort for us?
Admiral Richardson. Chairman, yes, I do. I think that the
triad, and our part of that, the Ohio Replacement Program, are
absolutely critical to national survival, and that is why that
program is our number one modernization program. We are also
working, as you know, very closely with the British, our
partners in the United Kingdom, to make sure that they
reconstitute and modernize their continuous at-sea deterrents.
And so I absolutely agree.
And I agree that it is a triad approach that we have right
now, and that includes not only the platforms but the weapons
and the warheads. And so this moves over to not only the
Defense Department, but the Department of Energy [DOE], to keep
that whole system whole.
The Chairman. General Welsh, a couple of those legs are in
your bailiwick. Do you agree that we need all three legs of the
triad to be modernized, as well as the weapons themselves?
General Welsh. Chairman, I do believe that. I believe the
triad has been very effective over time. I think nuclear
deterrence has been the security wallpaper, if you will, for
this country since we stood up our nuclear capability, and I
think it should continue. I believe without all three legs of
the triad, you expose seams in that nuclear deterrence posture
to certain enemies.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Sanchez.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too am concerned
about our nuclear capabilities and modernization. General
Welsh, the funding bow wave for the nuclear modernization is
really steep. Is there an effective 25-year plan to find and
execute all these programs concurrently to modernize?
General Welsh. Ma'am, I think the important thing that we
have to face really as a nation is a decision on are we going
to modernize; are we going to keep the triad, the question the
chairman just asked. And if the answer to that is yes, there is
no option but to fund it. But we have to prioritize the
funding, and if we decide we are going to take pieces of this,
we have to prioritize the pieces that we will invest in.
This is a much larger discussion than any particular
service. It has to be a Department of Defense. It is a
congressional; it is a White House discussion, and I hope it is
something that the next administration takes on early in their
tenure because we need an answer pretty quickly, or we are
going to spend money toward a lot of programs that we can't
complete if we don't fund them down the road.
Ms. Sanchez. Well, thank you for that because, I mean, this
has been my concern, is the funding of how do we modernize
this. You know, I have sat I think of the 19 years, now 20 that
I have been on this committee, all but 2 on the Strategic
Forces Committee, being a ranking member for it at one point.
And I hear Mr. Murphy and others say that our readiness is
deteriorating or has deteriorated to some extent, and it is
just really not something we should in detail discuss
obviously, I believe, in a public forum. But, you know, being
able to move forward our domestic programs, being able to have
an Army at ready to go, having an Air Force that can do the air
cover and air deterioration that we need before we send in our
Marines or our special forces or our Army, and then doing a
total modernization on our nuclear capabilities. It can't all
be funded at once.
And so, Mr. Chairman, I hope that this committee will
really sit and think about how we are going to get all of that
done because it is coming to a head. I mean, we can't fund
everything. We just cannot fund everything. So I hope that, Mr.
Chairman, that we might consider how we really take a look at
that funding issue.
I have another question. This one will be for Admiral
Richardson and General Milley. When Admiral Greenert and
General Odierno wrote us that letter in 2014, well, wrote to
the Secretary of Defense, that regional missile defense
capabilities were stretched and that the Department of Defense
should look, among other approaches, to deterrence and left-of-
launch capabilities to relieve the demands on missile defenders
and the cost to the Navy and the Army, what are the effective
alternatives that are being considered to that?
Admiral Richardson. Ma'am, I will tell you that right now
in terms of the Navy's situation, the ballistic missile defense
ships are our most stressed force right now, so in terms of
deployment length and that sort of thing, they come----
Ms. Sanchez. Can you pull that up? I can't hear you as
well.
Admiral Richardson. I'm sorry.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you.
Admiral Richardson. All right. Those ships are as stressed
as any in the Navy, but we are considering sort of the
ballistic missile defense across the entire kill chain, if you
want, the left of launch starting with the systems that, you
know, program and launch these missiles, all the way through
towards terminal defense. You take that entire sequence, you
break it down, and you take a look at the opportunities and
vulnerabilities in that whole sequence, and that is our
approach.
But there is the terminal phase which relies on our Aegis-
equipped cruisers right now both at sea and at shore. And it is
a costly system, as you point out, and that is why General
Odierno and Admiral Greenert wrote that letter, so that we can
make sure we are approaching this from a systems assist
approach and not missing any opportunities.
Ms. Sanchez. Great. I think we have had such reliability
and such capability in that area that we tend to want to use it
everywhere, and I know that it is stretched. I have been with
Mr. Turner to see some of the new systems coming up with
respect to that. And I am just worried again how we are going
to fund all of this.
And then the last question I have, Mr. Chairman--I am sorry
for taking up the time--but what is the Air Force's plan to
shift away from using the Russian RD-180 engine and have
assured access to space as quickly as possible?
Secretary James. The plan that we have been pursuing, of
course in conjunction with all of you and the last two NDAAs
[National Defense Authorization Acts], is to fund rocket-
propulsion systems to allow industry to get away from that
Russian engine as quickly as possible. We are targeting 2019,
per the law. We are doing it in a full and open, competitive
way. We are working as hard as we can at it. The technical
experts tell me that 2019 is an ambitious technical target, I
will say, for a timeline, but we are working as hard as we can
toward that goal. We absolutely share the goal.
Ms. Sanchez. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I think I
will have some follow-up questions, in particular on that
issue. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to each of you, I
wish I had the time to go through and tell the American people
all the great things you have done because you are all truly
assets to our country, and we appreciate each and every one of
you.
My questions go more not to you personally, but to the
substance of what we are asking today because it is important
that we have the facts to make the decisions we need to make.
And the first question I would ask each of you to do for me is
to raise your hand if you had to submit, or you submitted, the
written record of remarks that you have to anyone for approval
that was not under your direct command before you came here
today.
So, General Neller, you did not? You were the only one?
General Neller. Congressman, can you say that one more
time?
Mr. Forbes. Did you have to submit your written statement
to anyone not under your direct command before you submitted it
to us today?
General Neller. I approved the statement and sent it up,
and I assume it went up here as written.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you all for doing that. So, Mr. Chairman,
if we could just show the record that everyone had to submit
their statement for approval. I think that is wrong. We just
need to hear from you directly, and I know that is not your
fault.
Secretary Mabus, you know the personal high regard I have
for you, and I appreciate your comment that the Navy, it is
important that we have a presence. Also you have been a leader
to say that ship count was a part of that presence, at least a
component. You have testified that we need 308 ships in the
Navy, and Admiral Richardson has told us before that he would
bet his paycheck when the force structure comes back in, that
that will go up higher, and I would also bet Admiral
Richardson's paycheck that it will go up higher. We currently
have 272 ships in the Navy. We have had testimony before our
committee if we get down to 260 ships, that we cease to be a
superpower, and we become a regional power.
Right now if we look at some of the ships we count, we
count two hospital ships, two high-speed ferries that are in
reserve status, and we are getting ready to count 11 cruisers
that would be put up. It would take 18 months to get them back
in the water. If we took those ships out, we would be down to
257 ships. But even if we didn't look at that, we have had
testimony from the CBO [Congressional Budget Office], and the
Navy now says it is pretty close, that if we stay on track now,
and we do everything the same way we are, and we don't add
about $4 billion to the accounts--maybe as much as $6 billion
over the next several years--we will be down to 237 ships.
Admiral Harris has testified before our committee that he
only had 62 percent of the subs that he needed in the Pacific
Command. We know that by 2029, we will have 41 subs, where our
requirement is 48. The Chinese will have twice as many. We know
the Marine Corps said they need 38 amphibious ships--some
people say as many as 50--but we will have 30. We know in 2007,
the Navy was able to meet approximately 90 percent of the
validated needs of our combatant commanders. This year it will
meet approximately 40.
We know the administration is now trying to forego the
refueling of an aircraft carrier. It is trying to disestablish
a carrier air wing. It is going to cut the buy of small surface
combatants from 52 to 40, try to inactivate 1 of the 2 T-AOEs
in the Pacific, deactivate half of our cruiser fleet, and
deactivate 3 amphibious ships. We also know that we had before
sequestration, cuts of between $487- to $780 billion.
So my question is this, Mr. Secretary: Isn't it true that
unless another administration is able to do the heavy lifting
and come up with that extra $4 billion to $6 billion a year,
that the air will come out of this balloon, and we will come
down to 237 ships? And the second thing is, can you point to
where this administration has presented any budget adding that
$4 billion or making up that shortfall? It looks to me kind of
like my wife coming to me when she is complaining about our
house, and I say but, look, I got plans to buy the house on the
Hill, and then she says, but where are you going to get the
money? So maybe you can help us with that.
Secretary Mabus. Thank you, Congressman, and every CNO that
I have been privileged to serve with and I have talked about
the Ohio-class replacement coming in 2021 and the need to fund
that to keep it from having a huge and detrimental impact on
Navy shipbuilding. I would say that what your comments point
out is that shipbuilding takes a long time. It is not the job
of one administration. It is not the job of one Congress. And
this administration has reversed that precipitous decline that
you pointed out. Now, it has also put us on the track to get to
308 ships, which is what you say we need, and I would bet the
CNO's paycheck too that the next one will come in higher. But
what we are debating now, what you are discussing now, is not
what happens to the fleet now. It is what happens to the fleet
in the 2020s.
Mr. Forbes. But if you don't mind, I would love for you to
give us the rest of that for the record. And I didn't mean to
cut you off. It is just that I am cut off. So, Mr. Chairman,
thank you. I yield back.
Secretary Mabus. I would be happy to do that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 171.]
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I certainly want
to welcome our former colleague, Acting Secretary Murphy, to
the panel and to the committee this morning. I know through a
series of opportunities that we have had to discuss the issues
before us, one of the most critical really is readiness, and I
think that you have all in one way or another said that, you
know, readiness really has no constituency. And so we have to
be able to make that case to our constituents that this is
certainly something that has affected us a great deal.
And I think what people have a harder time understanding is
how the antiterrorism and anticounterinsurgency efforts have
really impacted our overall readiness today of the forces
throughout. Can you in as quick a way as possible speak to
that, all the services, what is the most critical way in which
that has made a difference and not allowed us to be at a place
today that is of less risk than it would have been otherwise?
General Milley. Thanks, Congresswoman. For the Army, just
very briefly, you know, for 15 years we have been running back
and forth to Iraq and Afghanistan. And during that time, we
have been fighting one typology of war against
counterinsurgents or terrorists or guerillas, and our higher-
end training against conventional threats, hybrid threats,
threats that involve enemy artillery, enemy air, enemy
electronic warfare, et cetera, the higher-end, higher-intensity
type battlefields have not been routinely practiced for 15
consecutive years. So our readiness against that type of threat
has deteriorated over a decade and a half.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you.
Admiral Richardson. Ma'am, I will tell you, the Navy, it
has been very well known by this committee that this manifested
itself in deployment lengths of 8 to 10 months during those
times, which puts an incredible cost on the ship itself, but
even more so on the people that man the ship, and so that part
went under stress. The ability to do maintenance on those ships
was severely affected by sequestration. It incurred a readiness
debt that we have had difficulty pulling out or even making
progress on, as the funding levels are what they are, and the
security environment in the world continues to put demands on
the force.
General Neller. I believe everybody is in a similar spot.
The DEPTEMPO [deployment tempo] hasn't reduced even though we
are doing similar things, but we are back in the Far East as we
have reset the force there, so the amount of deployment goes
on. The fight in ISIL continues to put stress on equipment,
particularly aviation. We are in the process of resetting our
equipment, and then you are trying to maintain legacy gear and
at the same time modernize. Every model/type/series aircraft in
the Marine Corps is in the middle of a reset, either reset the
legacy and/or buy new. And at the same time we recognize there
is capabilities in training, as General Milley mentioned, that
we have to get ready for what we think we are going to see in
the future. So all those things together, they are putting
stress on our readiness.
General Welsh. Congresswoman, the Air Force never came home
from the first Gulf war. We have had airmen flying and air
tasking for 25 years in the Middle East. During that time, as
Secretary James mentioned, we have cut 40 percent of our Active
Duty force, so that lower force size combined with the
increased deployment and operations tempo over the last 25
years has limited the amount of training we can do for the
other missions that we are required to do in a different kind
of conflict, as General Milley just stated. That is the biggest
impact on us in attaining readiness over the long term.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. I appreciate all of you doing that
very quickly. It was a little elevator speech, but that is
important, I think, for us to be able to articulate as well.
And if we could just go back to you, General Welsh, just
the impact of the uncertainty on the budgets and what we have
dealt with here. What impact does that have on the 2 million
men and women who serve our country and sacrifice on our
behalf?
General Welsh. Ma'am, they are very proud of who they are.
They are very proud of what they do, and they are very proud of
the joint coalition team they stand beside doing it, and their
families have been unbelievably dedicated to this. And this
world of deployments I mentioned is what almost everybody in
our services came into. It is the way it has been the entire
time they have served. So they are willing to pay the price if
they think it is important, if they think the Nation supports
them, if they think they will have the resources and the
equipment and the training to be the best in the world at what
they do. That is all they ask. If they don't believe that, they
will think about voting with their feet.
Mrs. Davis. General Neller.
General Neller. I think that is a very good review of where
everybody is. You know, they don't ask much. They always make
it happen. We want to keep them here. The thing that keeps them
here is maybe not so much what you would call quality of life.
It is having good gear. And the best quality of life I can
offer to a marine family is I am going to bring their marine
home alive.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank each of you
for being here, and we are particularly grateful to see
Secretary Murphy, our former colleague. There is life after
office. And I know his military background, too. And so I thank
all of you for your service.
General Welsh, I appreciate being the son of a Flying
Tiger. I am also very proud to be the uncle of a current
airman. And as chairman of the Emerging Threats Subcommittee of
the Armed Services Committee, I am concerned about the third
offset strategy which may be providing for present-day
tradeoffs for an overdue bet on the future when investments in
both areas are desperately needed. In your opinion, what
generation of weapons system is your priority to maintain
American military technological superiority by 2020?
General Welsh. Chairman, the two best examples of
technology that we need in the Air Force by 2020 are programs
that are already in progress that the Congress has supported
very well, and that is the KC-46 tanker and the F-35. The
emerging threat over the next 5 to 10 years will mean that we
have to have a capability to operate against an integrated air
defense system, against aircraft that now have longer sensor
ranges, longer weapons ranges, than anything we currently have
on our legacy fleet. The F-35, working with the F-22, will give
us that capability. It will also give us the capability to
penetrate and integrate our defense systems. So 2020, those are
the pacing technologies that we are already in the process of
acquiring.
Mr. Wilson. And I am grateful that you mentioned the F-35.
I formerly represented Beaufort Marine Corps Air Station, and I
am very grateful for the training there and what that means for
our country.
Admiral Richardson, I am also grateful to be a Navy dad.
And you yesterday courageously testified before the Senate
Armed Services Committee that Iran had knowingly violated
international law earlier this year by boarding a U.S. Navy
vessel, detaining 10 sailors against their will. In addition to
this outrage, it was reported just this week that Iran has
seized an estimated 13,000 pages of information extracted from
government laptops, GPS [Global Positioning System] devices,
and maps aboard the vessel. I am deeply concerned about this
violation and would like to know what subsequent actions have
been taken to rectify this brazen defiance of international law
by Iran.
Admiral Richardson. Sir, within the Navy--I will speak to
that part--we have conducted an investigation. That
investigation is being reviewed right now. That will detail all
of the sequence of events that went on in detail as that event
unfolded. And we have identified a number of areas in the Navy
where we can tighten up our act, improve, so that we can
minimize the chance of something like this happening again.
Mr. Wilson. Well, again, it is just an outrage to me to see
our military personnel humiliated by what I consider to be an
outlaw regime.
And, General Milley, my wife and I appreciate that we have
had three sons who have served under your command. Military
officials have said that the Army's fiscal year 2017 budget
request for facilities is less than that of the prior year. So
by far, this affects the military construction budget, which in
recent years has been focused on family housing projects. Could
you explain what military barracks and facilities have your
focus, and in particular I am very interested in Fort Jackson,
that I represent, and their barracks that are 50 years of age?
General Milley. Thanks, Congressman. I must say that you
have probably the most joint family I have ever heard in my
life, and I do hope you got positive feedback from your sons.
Mr. Wilson. I just can't include the Coast Guard.
General Milley. Coast Guard is next. But to answer your
question, installation readiness is one of the foundational
parts of overall readiness because that is where we get our
housing, quality of life, education, et cetera, but that is
also where you get your Rangers and all your training areas, et
cetera. And that has taken a cut over several years, and
frankly our installations have degraded significantly.
And I agree with General Neller, the greatest quality of
life that we can take care of a soldier is to bring him back
with his dog tags in one piece, whole mind, whole body, and
that requires good training, equipment, leadership, et cetera.
But also when they are deployed, to ensure that their families
have great quality of life so that they can focus on the task
at hand, which is the military task.
Specifically with respect to, you mentioned Fort Jackson in
South Carolina, there are some areas there that have been
deteriorated. So there are several projects that you will see
in the 2017 budget that are targeted specifically to Fort
Jackson because I am not satisfied with the quality of the
barracks that are there, and we are going to upgrade some of
those. And we are pulling forward a couple of additional items
that we were looking to put in the FYDP [Future Years Defense
Program] in 2018 or 2019. We are going to bring them forward
because I think the condition of some of the facilities at Fort
Jackson are unsatisfactory and don't meet Army standards.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Ms. Bordallo.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary James and
General Welch, there has been recent criticism against the Air
Force's proposed use of the cost-plus during the early stages
of the acquisition program for the new Long Range Strike
Bomber, the B-21. Can you please explain the process for which
the Air Force determined that a blended cost-plus fixed-price
approach was ideal for that program, and what advantages it
provides?
Secretary James. So Congresswoman, I will start, but then
chief please jump in as well. When it comes to contracting, of
course, I guess to state the obvious, one size does not fit
all. It just depends on the circumstances. And so in the case
of a cost-plus when it comes to development programs, this is
what we tend to do. When it is a larger program, when there are
uncertainties, when there are risks involved, but in the case
of the B-21, I do want to say that it is cost-plus incentives.
So that is to say there are incentives for the contractor
to be able to meet milestones for schedule and performance, and
if they don't meet those milestones according to the plan, they
will lose their fee. And most of that, by the way, is
backloaded in the development process which incentivizes them
to move through development as quickly as feasible and not drag
it out.
So overall, cost-plus incentive for that development, for a
never before done airframe and an integration job, the way it
is seemed most appropriate and the incentives are key. When it
comes to the firm-fixed-price in production, that seems to be a
much more sensible way to do the production element.
And as you know, Congresswoman, we awarded both at once. We
awarded the EMD--engineering, manufacturing, and development--
together with the initial tranche of the actual production in a
firm-fixed-price environment.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Thank you. I have very little time
left. Mr. Welsh, do you wish to comment on that?
General Welsh. Ma'am, I would just add that 70 percent of
the cost of this program overall, is firm-fixed-price.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you.
Secretary Murphy, and General Milley, the Army has been
working to replace the current force generation concept with
the sustainable readiness concept. Is it still on track to
replace the current model in fiscal year 2017?
Additionally, how does the Army's new model translate to
the total force? Specifically, will National Guard and Reserve
units be fully incorporated into this readiness model?
General Milley. The short answer is yes. It is on track to
be implemented and it does include Guard and Reserve in the
readiness model. In general, what we want to do is increase the
operational use of the National Guard and we want to increase
their training, increase the CTCs [combat training centers],
selectively increase the number of days of training per year,
and then most importantly, increase National Guard deployment
to Europe, Middle East, and Asia.
Ms. Bordallo. General Milley.
General Milley. That was General Milley.
Ms. Bordallo. I am sorry. Secretary Murphy.
Secretary Murphy. I am only a Secretary, ma'am. But
Congresswoman, General Milley is absolutely right. I mean, if
you look at our 1 million soldiers in our Army, the majority of
them are actually in the Reserve or National Guard Components.
We are one team, one fight, one Army. And so when you look at
Guam, for example, you know, we have the THAAD [Terminal High
Altitude Area Defense] battery that is there and Active Duty,
but we are working with the National Guard there as well. But
as far as on schedule, we were absolutely on schedule, and we
are committed to make sure that we have one team and one total
force.
Ms. Bordallo. Very good. All right. And I have a statement
to make, not a question. Secretary Mabus and Admiral
Richardson, I would like to make a brief comment regarding
depot-level maintenance including dry-dock capabilities in the
Western Pacific. I believe that these capabilities are sorely
lacking and the Navy is not investing enough to support a
forward-deployed fleet in the Western Pacific. We have these
requirements and we must make the right investments as this is
a key to readiness in our region.
In particular, I have serious concerns about the Navy's
assessments, and will continue working to ensure that our
forward-deployed assets have quality and secure maintenance
that American workers and equipment provide without losing
weeks of presence.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the
panelists. I appreciate all of your service to our country.
Secretary James, I really appreciate your leadership. You
have been a great partner to work with on our endeavors in my
subcommittee. I want to talk to you about helicopters. I know
that is a subject you and I have talked about in the past. But
for about 12 years now we have had helicopters protecting our
missile fields, our ICBM [intercontinental ballistic missile]
fields that are not up to the mission. And as you know,
recently, Admiral Haney has stated that this problem cannot go
on.
My question to you is, what is the status on that? What are
your plans to remedy Admiral Haney's concerns with making sure
those helicopters are able to carry out their mission with
protecting those ICBM fields?
Secretary James. I would expect within the next couple of
weeks, our acquisition executive, in the Air Force, who is
currently looking at acquisition strategies, will come to a
conclusion and make a recommendation. So at the moment we are
looking at sole-source opportunities. We need to have the
proper documentation to support if that is the way to go. We
are looking at competitive opportunities, and I also, you know,
Congressman, but just in case there are others that aren't
following this day-to-day, there are those that actually
protect the missile fields, and there is another part of the
requirement as well.
So maybe one is more urgent than the other. We are
essentially working with Admiral Haney. We are working with
Chairman Dunford and other members of the team of the Joint
Staff to look at the case for how urgent we need to go. I think
it is urgent. You think it is urgent. I think we are a couple
of weeks away, at least within the Air Force, of having a way
forward.
Mr. Rogers. Great. I would like, if you would, by the first
of April if you could provide me a detailed cost estimate on
what you anticipate it would cost the Air Force if you have to
call the Army National Guard in to provide gap fillers for
these missile wings' security. I would like to know what that
would be with specificity if you could.
Secretary James. We will do that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 171.]
Mr. Rogers. And then moving on to launch. As you know this
is taking up a lot of your time and mine. And for those who
aren't familiar with how we evolved with the EELV [Evolved
Expendable Launch Vehicle] program, it started in the 1990s
with Boeing and Lockheed. Now, we tried to help both those two
commercial enterprises be successful with launch capabilities
and that just didn't work out, so we helped them form United
Launch Alliance [ULA] with a lot of expense to the government.
But it is essential for national security and access to space.
Could you certify Secretary James that there is a
sufficient commercial market to support these companies over
the next 10 years and sign firm-fixed-price contracts for the
same?
Secretary James. I could not certify that, Chairman. I know
the companies are trying to become competitive because they
believe it, but I certainly could not certify such a thing.
Mr. Rogers. And do you concur then with the analysis by
General Mitchell's study which stated quote, ``Launch capacity
exceeds demand by a 3 to 1 ratio to service it in this fixed
market.''
Secretary James. I would have to go back and read that to
see the context. I am not sure he was talking about the total
world market, including commercial launches, or whether he just
meant NSS [national security space]. So please allow me to go
back and reread that passage and get back to you for the
record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 172.]
Mr. Rogers. Well, and you will find he was making reference
to that global market, and it is just a practical term that we
are going to have to acknowledge. I am not sure what the answer
is going to be either.
But you and I are going to have to navigate these waters
and figure out how to make sure we have assured access to
space. I don't know what the answer is going to be ultimately,
but I would look forward to having more dialogue with you
offline about this.
Secretary James. And Mr. Chairman, I would also bet the
CNO's paycheck that we will be having more dialogue, you and
me, but I thank you very much.
Mr. Rogers. Yeah. We are determined to make sure he never
gets paid again, aren't we?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I appreciate it and I hope you all figure it
out because it is a complex subject. Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all of
the witnesses. It is great to see our former colleague. It
shows there is hope after Congress. And again, your testimony
has been outstanding this morning.
So Secretary Mabus, you know, again, we enjoyed your long
service here, longest since World War I, and I just want to
follow up again with some of the exchange earlier which I think
we are all on the same team here, that shipbuilding is the long
game, and that we did as a nation take a holiday. As you
pointed out only 41 ships under contract during the 8 years
preceding your time in office. We doubled that to 84. I see it
every day in southeastern Connecticut.
We have the Illinois christening, the South Dakota keel
laying is coming up soon. In the yard we have the Colorado, and
Vermont. There has not been four ships under construction in
southeastern Connecticut at the same time since the 1980s, and,
frankly, the biggest challenge we have is workforce. Secretary
Perez is right down the hall. We just had a hearing on the
Workforce Investment Act and the fact that Connecticut, like
Maine, Vermont--excuse me, Virginia, Hawaii, California, they
are all out there really now scouring the countryside for metal
trades. And again, I think that speaks volumes about your
record and I want to thank you publicly for the time that you
have spent leading our Nation and really recovering our fleet.
Admiral Richardson, we had a sequence of witnesses over the
space of about 7 days a couple of weeks ago. Admiral Stavridis,
Admiral Harris, and General Breedlove. And without any
prompting, Admiral Stavridis talked about how Russian submarine
activity now is about 70 or 80 percent of where it was during
the Cold War. Admiral Harris again just said, you know, we need
more submarines out in the Pacific. General Breedlove talked
about the Greenland-Iceland-U.K. Gap, and that we are playing
zone defense.
We have a force structure that was developed back 10 years
ago of 48 submarines in the fleet. We have 54 now that are
under stress. Do we need to take another look at that force
structure?
Admiral Richardson. Sir, we do. And start of that look
right now is part of our updated Force Structure Assessment and
that will include a comprehensive look at attack submarine
force levels.
Mr. Courtney. So I mean, obviously, this budget this year,
keeps the two-a-year build rate for Virginia and has all of the
investment in Ohio replacement.
Admiral Richardson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Courtney. But, again, even with that, we are looking at
a 41-sub fleet unless we again tweak or move--can you talk
about that a little bit?
Admiral Richardson. Yes, sir. This goes to one of the
points that the Secretary makes so eloquently is that these are
long-term decisions, as you highlighted. So at the end of their
lives, these ships leave service at the rate that they entered
service, and we are building ships, submarines in this case, at
three or four a year, and that is the rate at which they leave
service. And so we have to be very thoughtful in terms of a
building plan that reaches and maintains those required force
levels.
Our two-per-year Virginia plan is part of that. We have
done an intense look at the industrial base over the last year.
We think we can mitigate that further, particularly in 2021
there might be room, industrial capability, capacity to build
an additional Virginia-class submarine in that year so that
would make it 10 over the 5-year plan. So we look forward to
discussing that with you.
That would mitigate that trough somewhat. We are building
the Virginia Payload Module, so we get more capability out of
each of those Virginia-class submarines starting in fiscal year
2019, but we do have to continually challenge ourselves, to
make sure that we have got the right number in terms of
requirements, and we are doing everything that we can to look
at meeting that requirement.
And you know, that comes up with a resource or a cost that
has been traditionally considered unacceptable. I think we
still owe you that plan at the best cost point that we could
appreciate, and then we will have a discussion.
Mr. Courtney. Good. And as you know, the Seapower
Subcommittee will work with you and I know I can speak for Mr.
Forbes. I want to give you, Mr. Mabus, the floor for just--
again, the question is, are we going to hit a 300-ship Navy
with the contracts that are underway and the work that I
described earlier that is happening right now?
Secretary Mabus. We are going to get 300 by 2019 and 308 by
2021 just with the ships this committee has authorized, that
has been appropriated, and that are under contract today.
And once again, these are long-term things. I mean, it
took--the fleet size we are living with today, those decisions
were made 8, 10, 15 years ago. The fleet size that we will be
living with in the mid-2020s, late 2020s, those decisions are
being made today. This administration has built all of the
ships we are going to be able to build and have them under
contract.
Mr. Courtney. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ladies and gentlemen,
thank you so much for joining us today and thank you for your
service to our Nation.
General Neller, I want to focus on Marine Corps aviation.
As you know, Lieutenant General Davis I think has done a very
good job in trying to bring back Marine Corps aviation
readiness. Can you give us perspective? When General Paxton
came and testified before our subcommittee he said that we
don't get back to restoring full-scale or full-spectrum
readiness in Marine Corps aviation just by adding flying hours.
Can you kind of give us a drill down of what we need to do to
get you back to full-spectrum readiness on Marine Corps
aviation?
General Neller. Well, Congressman, thank you for the
question. It is different for every model/type/series, but in
general, we have to repair our legacy aircraft that we have to
keep online and we have to modernize by buying new airplanes.
We are buying the F-35. The acquisition objective is 420 and we
have got about 70. We are going to stand up our second
squadron.
At the same time, we have got F-18s that are going to fly
for another 10-plus years. MV-22s, acquisition objective 360;
we have got about 270, 280, so that is happening. So same thing
with the Hueys and Cobras. CH-53 is probably in the hardest
spot because we have two demonstrators that are flying. They
are flying very well. We have got over 35 hours. I saw them
last week, but that program is going to take some time to go
through the test and evaluation.
So it is a combination. Buy new, repair our old, and the
accounts for fiscal year 2017, this budget fully funds the
sustainment accounts for putting aircraft through depot level.
And Admiral Richardson and I were out at the Fleet Readiness
Center in San Diego. They have improved their output. We opened
up other venues, got two contractors that have provided
additional aircraft. So all of that is going to go on.
But the bottom line is, we've got to get more airplanes on
the ramp. Pilots have to fly more. We have got to get our
maintainers the parts they need to fix the airplanes. So all of
these things are working. I think we have a plan. It is funded.
But it is not going to happen overnight. It is going to take a
couple of years of this combination of effects.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, General Neller, I
appreciate that. I know we are all concerned about getting to
the point that we project the Marine Corps needs to be at. So
we want to make sure we keep up to date on that.
Admiral Richardson, I know that you have been approached
about a number of submarine issues, but I want to drill down a
little bit on the Ohio-class replacement. The largest of the
fiscal year 2017 research and development programs are for
Ohio-class replacement. And you have talked extensively about
the design phase, making sure we are mature in designs, so when
we go to build that boat we are ready to go. We understand,
though, that if we take the cost of that boat wherever it ends
up, and we put that in the middle of a shipbuilding budget, we
know what happens. It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure
that out.
What we, I believe, need to be looking at is, what do we do
to mitigate that? And what we have done, as a House, and trying
to get the Senate to do, is a National Sea-Based Deterrence
Fund, which is how we funded Ohio-class submarines originally.
Can you give us perspective, what kind of cost savings will
we be able to accrue by funding Ohio-class replacement with the
National Sea-Based Deterrence Fund, because there is still some
resistance here. I think that that is the way to do it, and it
doesn't interfere with other long-term viability of other
shipbuilding programs.
Admiral Richardson. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question.
First of all, I like what the fund stands for, which is that
this is a national program of absolutely top priority for
national security, and so it elevates the discussion to a
national level which is exactly where I think it should be.
With the authorities that the fund may provide which would
allow you to make very wise business decisions, the projections
are that you could save on the order of 10 or more percent
across the program, which is essentially getting one submarine
for the cost of, you know, free, right.
Mr. Wittman. For the total cost?
Admiral Richardson. Yeah, so significant savings achievable
by the use of a fund like that.
Mr. Wittman. Got you. General Neller, from your perspective
we look at all of the shipbuilding programs. Obviously, the
ones we are addressing are Ohio-class replacement, but also
amphibious lift. One of the elements is to look at, you know,
what we are doing with the next generation amphibious ships,
the LX(R), give us your perspective on the importance of the
timeliness of getting that program locked in as far as building
those ships.
General Neller. Congressman, similar to what the CNO said
about submarines, we build these ships. They have a certain
life expectancy, so if you don't have a replacement vessel,
they have to have an extension program or their maintenance
costs are increased, so you are spending money to keep
something older online.
So right now, due to the support of the Congress, and this
committee, we are going to get LPD-28, give us 12 LPD-17 class
ships. And the next class of ship is the LX(R) to replace the
landing ship dock, the Whidbey Island/Harpers Ferry class. The
first ship of that class is supposed to be built in 2020. There
is some advance procurement of long-lead items like
engineering, power, engines, and steel.
But there is a gap, and anytime you have a gap, the
workforce is not able to work. You forget what you have learned
and your costs go up. So there was a discussion about it of LPD
[landing platform/dock] repeat. Can't make the price because we
are all concerned with the cost, so there is a ship design, and
talking with the CNO, and the Secretary, and Mr. Stackley. The
plan is that we come up with a design. It is going to be bid
between a couple of different shipyards and we will start to
build that first ship in 2020.
If there were more money and we could come up with a design
faster, that all could possibly be moved to the left. But then
ideally, whenever we do start to build that ship we should
build--there should be not build a ship, stop, build a ship,
stop. It should be build a ship, start the next one so that
workforce gets smarter. That we know will drive the cost down.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you lady
and gentlemen for your service to the Nation. There can be no
greater honor for me as a Congressman than to serve on the
House Armed Services Committee that is charged with the
responsibility of authorizing expenditures for the national
security of this country. Which is guaranteed by our men and
women who serve us in the military and you all lead that
effort. And I thank you for that.
I will say that since 2011 you have been operating under
sequestration and each one of you have talked about how this
has eroded your ability to ensure the continued superiority of
the United States military, and we have heard a lot about the
impact on ships and planes. We know that the Air Force, and the
Navy, and the Marines, are very important elements of our
superiority. But we should not forget about the foundational
element of boots on the ground Army.
And so I want to ask about how sequestration, which is not
a program of President Obama. It is actually a statutory law
passed here in Congress. I think members of the Armed Services
Committee were not smitten with it at all because we knew what
impact it would have, across-the-board 10 percent cuts without
regard to need or jeopardy that we would place the Nation in.
But I want to talk about that in terms of the Army and how the
end strength of the Army has shrunk due to sequestration.
Mr. Murphy, and General Milley, would you address that,
please?
Secretary Murphy. Congressman, off the bat, budgets are
moral documents. It shows what our country's priorities are.
You know, I left the Congress 5 years ago and the budget for
the Army at that time was $243 billion. You heard my opening
testimony. We are asking for $125.1 billion. So we have
downsized our Army.
I would like to recognize, though, I was thankful also for
the BBA of 2015, which helped relieve that sequestration. We
are very thankful for that predictable and adequate funding.
But if you are asking me as far as what this budget request is,
it is minimal. It is minimally adequate. We are taking high
risk, as an Army and as a Nation, when you fund our Army at
this level, especially when you consider the OPTEMPO [operating
tempo] and the world right now, when you talk about ISIS, a
resurgent Russia, aggression with North Korea.
So we ask you to support our budget request at that level.
But I would like to, you know, when you look at brigade combat
teams, you know, again, we are a total Army but as far as 5
years ago, when I left the Congress, we had 45 brigade combat
teams on Active Duty, now we have 31.
Mr. Johnson. In addition to the diminution on end strength,
we also have issues of readiness and modernization. General
Milley, could you comment on that?
General Milley. Yeah, thanks, Congressman. As I mentioned
earlier, the readiness issues are our number one priority as we
go forward. Because we are uncertain, and I can't tell you or
anyone else that our Nation won't be in other conflicts next
week, next month, next year, or the year after that. None of us
at this table can do that. So we have always got to maintain
readiness, and readiness is a number one priority.
Right now the readiness of the United States Army, all
components of the United States Army, is not at a level that is
appropriate for what the American people would expect to defend
them. And I will be happy to give a classified briefing on the
exact specifics of that. But it is not at the levels it can
execute satisfactorily in terms of cost, in terms of time, cost
in terms of casualties, or cost in terms of military
objectives.
As far as the impact, specifically, on the Army of the
diminution of funding, et cetera, the Army is the largest
force, largest military force among all of the joint forces.
Right now, as I mentioned earlier, we do 46 percent of the
annual demand of the combatant commanders, and 64 percent of
everything they ask for on an emergent basis comes out of the
Army. And we have suffered something like 60 or 70 percent of
all the casualties over the last 15 years.
And we have been cut significantly, so you can imagine
there is a significant amount of stress on the force as a
result. And that also impacts readiness, so you have got the
largest force, the largest demand, the largest stress, and the
least budget. All of that is cumulative on the United States
Army. We will drive on. The caissons will go rolling along. We
will execute the tasks given to us on a day-to-day basis, but
it does come with risk, and people have got to be clear-eyed
and open-minded about what that risk is. And again, I will be
happy to talk in a classified session in more detail on the
risk if you desire.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Franks.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as always, the
generals and admirals, and all the service people there. We
express a great gratitude to you all for everything that you
do.
General Milley, I have been especially impressed with the
cogency and clarity of your comments in recent days and I
appreciate you speaking so clearly to us. Because I believe
your perspective is critically important.
With that, I am going to direct my questions to the
civilian command structure here. Secretary James and Secretary
Mabus, during its 7-year tenure, the Obama administration, I
understand, has reviewed and reassessed the need for the
nuclear triad. Has the administration conducted detailed
analysis of eliminating one or more legs of the triad or
significantly altering the U.S. nuclear posture. And if so,
what were the results of those efforts?
And I will start with you Secretary Mabus.
Secretary Mabus. Congressman, I am not aware of any
detailed look at that. We have been, obviously, focused on our
leg of the triad, the Ohio-class replacement, and have,
obviously, done very detailed analysis on how that program
comes into being in its own track for 2021.
Mr. Franks. Let me kind of re-orient the question. Why does
the administration continue to propose such strong support for
and recapitalization of the nuclear triad from your
perspective?
Secretary Mabus. Well, to quote the CNO, it is a matter of
our national existence. And from a Navy standpoint, it is our
top modernization program. It is the top program that we have.
It is on track to begin construction of the Ohio-class
replacement in 2021. That is when we have to begin.
But as this CNO, and the three that I have been privileged
to serve with have said, and I have said, you are going to have
to look at this program with a national lens because if you
drop this into the middle of a Navy shipbuilding budget, it
will just gut Navy shipbuilding for decades to come. And so the
reason that we are focused on it is because it is an
existential program, and the reason that we are focused on how
to do it is to do it without damaging our conventional
superiority as well.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, sir. Secretary James, I might
ask if you share the same endorsement and support to the
nuclear triad?
Secretary James. Yes, I absolutely support it and I believe
that the administration supports it precisely because it has
worked for us for decades. It has provided that deterrent and
each leg of the triad adds a little bit different aspect to
that.
So the ICBMs are considered responsive. The sea launched
are considered survivable, and the bombers, of course, are
flexible and they also are survivable because of the
dispersion.
If I could just add one point. Obviously, it is a certain
amount of money, and to the extent we fund one thing if we are
under budget constraints, we can't fund another. So I would
just like to say I am not fully familiar with the strategic
deterrence fund that you all have referenced here. But if that
is a strategic deterrence fund which would help or benefit one
leg of the triad, I would ask for consideration that all of the
legs of the triad be included in such an approach.
Mr. Franks. Well, Secretary Carter and Deputy Secretary
Work have made clear that the nuclear deterrence is the
Department of Defense's highest priority mission. Certainly, I
agree with that. But for the Navy and the Air Force, how are
you prioritizing your portions of the nuclear deterrence
mission within each service, and what nuclear deterrence
programs are you pursuing, and where do they rank in your
services' priority list? You kind of have to take an overview,
each of you, if you would, of those points.
Secretary Mabus. It is our top priority. We have said that
for several years now. The first boat is funded. We have funded
all of the research and development, all of the design work,
all of the engineering work going into this. As was said in
answer to an earlier question, we have been working with our
colleagues, the British, on a common launch, common missile
launch tube so that we do save some money there.
We have been driving down the cost of these boats and we
are on track to begin construction of the first one in 2021,
which will allow it to take its place in the fleet, and in the
rotation at the correct time when the Ohio-class begins to
retire.
Secretary James. And Mr. Franks, I would say there is three
parts. There is the people who perform the nuclear mission,
there is the readiness of those people, and then there is the
modernization aspects. And over the last several years we have
shifted billions of dollars in additional people to try to
address all of these areas.
So when it comes to modernization, of course, we have the
B-21, we talked about that somewhat earlier. We have the
ground-based strategic deterrent, which will be the future of
the ICBM force, and then we, of course, have to also fund
appropriately the weapons that would go with these.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all of you.
The Chairman. Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and I would like to
thank each of you for your testimony today and your service to
the country.
And I would like to ask Secretary Murphy and General Milley
a series of questions on readiness based on some of what we
have heard so far today.
Secretary Murphy, you defined readiness as the components
being a fully manned and fully trained force that we send into
harm's way, and General Milley has been very eloquent about the
consequences of a failure to do so. It really will end up
costing this country the lives of the service members who are
there fulfilling our missions.
If the publicly stated goal for the Army is to be at 90
percent readiness, and if we are in this setting somewhere
short of that, what does it cost to get us to our stated goal
if it is not in this President's budget?
Secretary Murphy. Well, Congressman, a couple of things. As
far as when you look at the budget, as I mentioned, it is
minimally adequate and we are taking on high risk. If you are
talking about end strength that is also, we are at the minimal
levels. We are in a glide path, as you know, to get down to
980,000 in the total force Army.
If you do give the Army money and extra money, it doesn't
mean that we are going to be at 90 percent the next day.
Readiness takes time to build and that is why we are expanding
CTCs, the combat training centers. And that is at total force.
So next year we have planned that we are going to double the
National Guard units, brigade combat teams going through the
CTCs. So it is multilevel.
So it is not just--the money is critically important. If
you give us the money, we will be more ready. We will give the
training. And as you know, we train like we fight.
Mr. O'Rourke. You really got my attention earlier when you
said you put us at high risk when you fund the Army at this
level, which leads me to this conclusion. I don't want to be a
passive witness to high risk. And so if more money is needed to
improve readiness and reduce risk, especially for the service
members whom we want to return safely, then I want to fund
that. I want to be an advocate for that funding, and I want to
be able to convince my colleagues that that funding is
necessary because it comes at a cost in tax dollars, other
opportunities, and other priorities.
So I want to know what that number is. I don't simply want
to assume that we must move forward with a high-risk posture
for the U.S. Army, so looking for a specific number that I can
advocate for.
Secretary Murphy. Real quick. We have, obviously, our base
budget request at $125.1 billion. We have an unfunded request
which is not part of that. Please fund the base. Then we have
unfunded. It is called UFRs [unfunded requirements], as you
know, at $7.5 billion, which helps mitigate that risk. But
again, that doesn't mean that we are at 90 percent the next
day. I mean, this is a process and, you know, I believe the
chief wants to comment as well.
General Milley. Congressman, the whole issue of readiness,
the very first question any of us needs to ask is readiness for
what? And as I mentioned earlier, the United States Army, you
can take it to the bank right now, is ready to fight ISIS, Al
Qaeda, al-Nusrah, and any other terrorist group,
counterinsurgency type thing. That is not what we are talking
about when we are saying risk.
We are talking about great power war with one of, or two
of, four countries. You are talking about China, Russia, Iran,
and North Korea. That is the guidance we were given. That is
how we are force sizing the budget, or that is how we are
sizing the force and that is how we planned the budget, in
accordance with the National Military Strategy, the Defense
Planning Guidance, and a wide variety of other documents. To do
those operations against those countries, if that day would
ever come, that is what we are talking about in terms of the
level of risk.
Now, we collectively can roll the dice and say those days
will never come. And that is a course of action. That is not a
course of action I would advise, and I think that the guidance
is correct. We need to size the force and train the force, all
the forces, Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines--not just the Army--
to be able to handle those contingencies. And I think there is
a high level of risk associated with those contingencies right
now.
Mr. O'Rourke. So let me ask this. If others before us have
said we are at the low ragged edge of what is safe or
manageable risk, if you say we are at high risk, does $148
million total base in OCO [Overseas Contingency Operations] for
the U.S. Army get you where you need to be, or do you need
something more to mitigate that risk?
I am accountable for this, so I want to make sure I am
advocating for, and we are legislating for, the appropriate
number to get you to where you need to be based on risk as you
see it.
I am out of time, so I hope that someone will follow up on
this question because I want to know what that number is.
Secretary Murphy. Congressman, it is a minimal level.
Mr. O'Rourke. I yield back.
The Chairman. Great questions. Mr. Turner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. I want to thank each and every one
of you for the fact that you have, with clarity, assisted us in
the debate on the issue of sequestration. Following on with a
previous questioner, we appreciate an understanding that the
base budget number that you need is $574, and we are certainly
working and struggling to get it to that level. It is
unfortunate that the administration did not follow the budget
deal that had been agreed to with the House and the Senate, and
did not send over a budget that was consistent with the 2-year
predictable funding that Secretary Murphy had indicated was
helpful.
The base budget sent by the administration is lower, and I
know you are all forced to present us budgets that were for
that lower number. We are hoping to restore some of those to
get back to what would give you some consistency in the funding
that you expected from last year.
General Milley, you had said that the issue of risk, and it
being unacceptable with respect to readiness, equated to
increased time and casualties.
Secretary James, the general gave a great description for
the Army. Are we currently at an unacceptable risk for the Air
Force with respect to readiness, and does that risk also equate
to increased time and casualties?
General Milley. Congressman, could I just make a quick
clarification? I did not use the word ``unacceptable.'' It is
not my choice to say whether the risk is acceptable or not
acceptable. My military professional advice tells the decision
makers, Congress, the President, the Secretary of Defense, the
Secretary of the Army, what I think the risk is. It is the
decision maker's choice to determine whether it is acceptable
or unacceptable.
Mr. Turner. I appreciate that you said that. So let's go to
you then, General. Help me with how to characterize that risk
because, obviously, as we attempt to advocate to put the base
budget at $574, I believe and I think many believe it is
unacceptable. How would you characterize the risk then
currently?
General Milley. The risk in terms of time, troops, and
tasks, and that is how we categorize it, is a military risk,
can you do the military tasks expected of you in the various
contingency operations? Yes or no. And if you can't do all of
them, what ones can you do? And that translates into a level of
risk.
Second is the effect on time. Can you do those tasks and
can you get them done on time in accordance with what is
determined by the decision makers of being an acceptable amount
of time for the American people to accept in the course of a
conflict. And troops----
Mr. Turner. General, I understand that balance very good,
but where are we in that balance?
General Milley [continuing]. Is casualties. I have said
that level of risk is high risk for the contingencies, that are
the higher-end contingencies. Not for the day-to-day.
Mr. Turner. I understand.
General Milley. But for the higher-end contingencies, we
are, in my view, my professional view, at a high risk to
execute the tasks that would be required. That is correct.
Mr. Turner. Excellent, perfect. So you are using the
general terms for those high contingencies. Is the Air Force in
the same place the Army is?
Secretary James. So half of our combat Air Forces are not
sufficiently ready for that kind of a high-end fight that
General Milley just described against one of those great
powers. Ready to do what? That is an excellent question. We too
are ready and we have been doing it for 25 years. To fly and
operate in the kinds of environments that you are currently
seeing in the Middle East, it takes a toll, but we are ready.
We are doing it.
I also want to agree with the point about time is a factor
here. So money is helpful for readiness, but freeing up the
time of our people to go and do this training is equally
important. And right now, we are stretched so thin, and we are
so small as an Air Force and we are so deployed we are having
difficulty getting the time freed up.
So yes, I am very worried about it. And yes, if you go into
a high-end conflict against a great power and you are not
sufficiently ready, history teaches me you lose more lives and
it is a prolonged conflict. And it is very worrisome.
Mr. Turner. General, to get back to you. You had talked
about rolling the dice, and maybe the day will never come, and
in looking at that calculus, don't our adversaries know it too?
So if we decide just to underfund assuming the day will never
come, don't we lessen our effects of deterrence and thereby
perhaps even increase our risk?
General Milley. I believe that is true historically, and I
believe it is true in the present, and likely would be true in
the future, that if you are strong that that aids or increases
your probability of deterring an aggressor.
Mr. Turner. General, going back to Russia then. You know,
considering that it very well could be our number one threat,
are we ready currently for direct military conflict if Russia
continues its adventuresomeness in Ukraine and the extreme
exercises that they have had in both scale and scope with
respect to the Baltics, are we ready?
General Milley. I think you have to look at that at three
levels, Congressman, tactically, operationally, and
strategically. At the strategic level, there is no doubt in my
mind that the United States would prevail. And it would be
catastrophic for an awful lot of people, but the United States
would prevail. Tactically, however, you are talking about a
different ball game here.
Mr. Turner. And strategic being nuclear?
General Milley. Well, I am talking subnuclear. No, I'm not
talking about a nuclear exchange. That would be, to me, that is
beyond the beyond. But my point is, I don't think we ever want
to get that question asked or answered. What we want to do, I
believe, is to deter further Russian aggression in Europe. And
they have been aggressive since at least 2008 or so. So I think
the key is to deter Russian aggression and assure allies. And
you do that with strong capabilities, some of which are
military, some of which are diplomatic, or informational, or
economic. There is a whole suite of a toolbox that we can use.
Mr. Turner. Thank you for your clarification on strategic,
because many people would translate that----
General Milley. No, that is not what I was talking about.
No, not at all.
Mr. Turner. I appreciate that you walked that back.
The Chairman. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
my colleagues here, and certainly the witnesses for focusing on
what we just discussed. What is strategic, and Mike laid that
out. And General Milley, your answer of strategic is something
that we need to be very, very aware of.
Normally when we talk strategic, we talk nuclear. But you
said something different. And I think that we need to
understand that. Specifically, question, Secretary James, what
is the cost of a single F-35?
Secretary James. I think the current unit is $105.
Mr. Garamendi. I am sorry how much?
Secretary James. It is $105 million is the current unit
cost.
Mr. Garamendi. And you are delaying how many F-35s which
you earlier said were essential for your mission?
Secretary James. In fiscal year 2017, five.
Mr. Garamendi. How many?
Secretary James. Five. In fiscal year 2017.
Mr. Garamendi. Five.
Secretary James. With the greatest of reluctance. That is
the budget.
Mr. Garamendi. So $600, $700 million, something like that?
Secretary James. That sounds about right.
Mr. Garamendi. And General Milley, to address your question
of risk, how much money?
General Milley. We have submitted a UFR through the
Department of Defense that would mitigate the risk. Again, it
goes back to what is the task, the task that were given to us--
--
Mr. Garamendi. No. We are talking about the strategic, your
discussion of strategic.
General Milley. That is what I am talking about. So the
tasks that were given to us, is be prepared to deter, fight,
and win. I would have to really talk to you in a classified
basis to tell you the exact tasks that were given to the Army
or any of us, because it is a classified document. It is
Defense Planning Guidance.
Mr. Garamendi. Is the dollar also classified?
General Milley. No. The dollar is not.
Mr. Garamendi. And that number is?
General Milley. Well, that number would vary. Again, it
goes back to what tasks are you willing to accept risk on?
Mr. Garamendi. Let's just say Europe.
General Milley. I think that the European task that we are
covering with the ERI [European Reassurance Initiative] in this
budget of three-point-something billion dollars, I think, will
go a long way towards deterring Russia and assuring allies and
we would ask for your support of that ERI. Should more be done?
Yes, I think more should be done.
Mr. Garamendi. And is the cost of that much more?
General Milley. Well, again, Congressman, that would depend
on the task. I am not trying to be cagy.
Mr. Garamendi. No, I understand.
General Milley. It depends on the specifies tasks. And
there is a menu of options. If we threw more money at it, we
could put--you know, ERI, we could put more equipment----
Mr. Garamendi. I am going to move on. Thank you. I get a
sense of additional money reducing the risk.
General Milley. Sure. That is right.
Mr. Garamendi. General Neller, you talked about your needs.
You have got needs that are not being addressed. Where I am
going here is to this nuclear issue. We are going to spend $3.3
billion on every single one of the nuclear weapons. That is the
bomb and related services to it. And we are going to be
spending somewhere around, I don't know, $113 million preparing
for the Minuteman IV, the next missile. And there has been
discussion back and forth around this table about priorities.
And the question that we need to ask ourselves is, are we
prepared to set all of you on a mission to spending close to a
trillion dollars over the next 25 years or so on revamping,
rebuilding our entire nuclear arsenal and delivery systems? You
know, we need to make that choice now and somebody said it is
the next President's choice. No, it is our choice today because
we set you on a path to do that.
And the question is, what are the real important things
that we need to do? Do we really need to replace the Minuteman
IIIs with Minuteman IVs in the next 20, 25 years? Do we need to
do that? Do we really need to have a new long-range cruise
missile, or can we delay that and instead, spend the money on
ramping up the Army?
General Milley. May I take a shot at that from an Army
perspective just briefly? I just want to be clear. I don't have
a part of the triad in a sense, but I can tell you that in my
view, my professional military view, and I am a member of the
JCS [Joint Chiefs of Staff], that the nuclear triad has kept
the peace since nuclear weapons were introduced and has
sustained the test of time. That is not unimportant. And that
system has deteriorated, Congressman. And it needs to be
revamped. It is not even an Army system. It needs to be
overhauled and brought back up to its level of readiness.
Mr. Garamendi. We are not debating that it needs to be
revamped. The question is how much and when?
General Milley. Okay.
Mr. Garamendi. And as we make that choice, right now the
choice is to do it now and get on with it and to spend an
extraordinary amount of money, which will come out of every
other program, not just the military, but every other program.
So there are some hard choices that need to be made.
General Milley. Uh-huh.
Mr. Garamendi. And right now our choice is to do it all. I
yield back.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mr.
Hunter.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, gentlemen and lady.
Thank you for being here today.
Mr. Murphy, it is good to see you. Mr. Rooney says hi, by
the way. Great to see you. Last time I saw you we debated Don't
Ask, Don't Tell on the floor, I think. It was a long time ago.
Secretary Murphy. That is true.
Mr. Hunter. It is great to see you. And let me just tell
you, it fills my heart with joy that no matter what
administration we have, whether it goes back and forth, to see
the uniformed leaders in front of me right now that we have
today, it just makes me happy. It is a very reassuring feeling
to see all of you here. The cream has risen to the top, and we
are glad you are in charge.
General Milley, I would like to just say, I want to go
through a few things that I have worked on over the last couple
of years with the Army. You had Will Swenson who ended up
getting the Medal of Honor [MOH]. His nomination got lost. My
office found it. It wasn't lost. It was mishandled. CID
[Criminal Investigation Command] agents even went through his
trash at his house, but he got the MOH and the Army did the
right thing in the end.
Major Matt Golsteyn. He killed a bomb maker who killed
several Marines. The Army wanted to put him in jail for about
20 years. Went to a Board of Inquiry. The violation could not
be substantiated. His case was handled okay. Secretary McHugh
revoked his Distinguished Service Cross over something that he
did that was unrelated. The Army kind of did the right thing
there.
Lieutenant Colonel Jason Amerine. The Army investigated him
for talking to me about hostage recovery. But because of Jason,
we were able to change the hostage policy for the country. This
committee and this Congress, and the President then followed
suit. We changed the hostage policy and this committee
benefited from his contribution to the Bergdahl report.
Earl Plumley. He was a soldier nominated for the Medal of
Honor in Afghanistan, supported by you and General Dunford.
Both of you signed down on it. The Army downgraded him to a
Silver Star, not even a Distinguished Service Cross. That case
is now with the IG [Inspector General].
Charles Martland roughed up a child rapist and the Army
tried to expel him. He has now been extended three times and
let me just tell you, he was rated number 2 out of 400 SF
[Special Forces] instructors. He is before a board now. We are
hoping the Army will do the right thing.
These are not just personnel cases to me. What they
represent are systemic issues that have huge policy
ramifications stemming out of each one of these issues. Each
one exposed a certain unique problem. We tried to fix the
problems by first fixing the personnel cases themselves, and
then trying to make a systemic change, and do our oversight
role here in Congress.
For the most part, the Army does the right thing, but it
does it kicking and screaming sometimes. You are restoring my
faith in what the Army should be. Your predecessor, the
previous Secretary never came to my office, never called,
wouldn't answer my phone calls, nothing. So everything that we
did, it wasn't a nice conversation with the Army or actually
trying to fix the problem. We had to bludgeon the Army with
media, and going in and doing as much as we can to make them
react to stuff that they should have reacted to simply with a
phone call to me, and we could have worked these things out.
You personally are restoring my faith and confidence in the
Army. My dad was in the Army, the 173rd. My little brother was
in the 4th Stryker Brigade. I forgive them for joining the
wrong service. I think you are the right leader for today's
Army. And I want to just keep engaging with you because I know
you are going to put the warfighter first. And in the end, your
dad is a United States Marine. So you can't be that bad. And I
just want to say thank you. Thanks for doing what you are
doing.
General Milley. Thanks Congressman, I appreciate that. And
I am very proud to be part of a joint team. My mother was in
the Navy as well, and brothers and cousins in the Air Force. So
like one of the other Congressmen, it is a joint family. So it
is a great team. And all of the services, every one of them,
are really doing a great job so I appreciate your confidence.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Ashford.
Mr. Ashford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just briefly, I am
from Omaha, and obviously, Offutt Air Force Base is in our
district. And I go way back. My father actually flew a B-26
bomber that was--we talked about this--it was manufactured at
the Martin Bomber Plant. The Martin Bomber Plant is still
there, and hopefully it will remain for a couple more years
anyway.
I was very impressed by so much that is going on there, the
sexual assault project at Offutt is an immense success. And
your comment on that is absolutely correct. I mean, they have a
mentoring project, a mediation project. The young airmen who
are involved in that project are making a significant
difference. Specifically, on the 55th and all other ISR wings,
the mission has changed dramatically in the last--as has been
mentioned by everyone here.
How do you see on the budget side, I know there are, I
think, 11 or 12 planes that are deployed at any given time, at
least on the 55th, and many of them are at Offutt being
maintained. Do we have adequate platforms and how do you see
the ISR function being maintained and sustained under this
budget and going forward? Madam Secretary.
Secretary James. So I will begin, if I may, and I am sure
the chief will jump in. There is a lot going on in the world of
ISR to state the obvious. It is the number one desire of the
combatant commanders. If you would go to any of them and say
what more of the Air Force do you want, it is ISR, ISR, ISR. So
we are adding some additional platforms, as I mentioned, some
additional MQ-9s, but even more importantly, let me come back
to the people.
So there is a lot going on to try to alleviate some of the
stresses to build up that force. Everything from, we are
looking at standing up some new units so that there are
additional places to rotate to. Other quality-of-life oriented
areas, additional compensation, if you will, to recognize the
special types of duties. So there is a lot going on and we do
need to build up that force some more.
Mr. Ashford. General.
General Welsh. Sir, I would just add that the focus for us
over the last 7 to 8 years has been a different part of the ISR
enterprise than the part that lives at Offutt Air Force Base.
The big wing ISR platforms have not been where we have invested
most of our time, energy, and money over the last 8 to 9 years.
That has been in the medium altitude unmanned fleet primarily,
because of the demand to support combat and contingency
activity over that time period.
We have got to get back at looking at what does a theater's
worth of ISR look like to a joint force commander in a bigger,
broader theater that is not involved in just a low-intensity
conflict or a counterterrorism fight. And when we do that, I
think we will find that we are going to have to also follow up
on recapitalization, modernization over time for the
capabilities of the 55th Wing because they are invaluable and
they contribute at the national level, to decision making.
Mr. Ashford. Right. And I realize the challenges on the
infrastructure side, and I appreciate the attention being paid
to that as well.
General Milley, could I just ask one question? I was very
impressed by your testimony, and your candor, and your
discussion about what happens after ISIS is destroyed. How do
you see that from a financial budgetary perspective as we move
forward after the destruction of ISIS and related affiliates?
General Milley. Well, I mean, it is obviously too early to
tell. The strategic task or the operational task given to us by
the President is to destroy ISIS. I am 110 percent confident
that we will do that over time. And we have made adjustments to
the current campaign plan, and I think over time, that will be
effective.
What comes next, though, what happens after ISIS is
destroyed? I think that is yet to be decided. I think there is
going to have to be a strategic choice that if we are
successful and ISIS is destroyed, something will have to go
into that space in order to stabilize that terrain for a period
of time, the terrain and the population. Ideally, that would be
international capability of some sort led by Sunni Arabs. But
we are a ways away from that and I think that the planning and
the thought and the analysis will have to go into that. How
much will that cost? I don't know. I haven't seen any cost
estimates, but I would imagine that wouldn't be cheap.
Mr. Ashford. Thank you, General. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Dr. Fleming.
Dr. Fleming. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Welsh, I am
encouraged by the Air Force's plans to move forward on
recapitalization of the weapons storage facilities and was
disappointed that despite the Schlesinger report, that the
previous facilities were decertified, but I am glad we are back
on track. So would you comment on the weapons storage facility
recapitalization programs in terms of timeline and what we can
expect for the near future.
General Welsh. Yes, sir. We have, over this next year,
roughly $40 million in our budget in 2017 to move forward with
that effort. It is almost $700 million over the FYDP. As you
know, F.E. Warren is being done right now. The weapons storage
facility is being renovated. The next step is Barksdale, and
that would begin in 2018. Beyond Barksdale, then I think the
order after that would be Malmstrom and then Whiteman. And so
we are on track. It is funded. The plans are in place. And we
think the design work that we have done so far in F.E. Warren
has been very well done, and it will provide us a standard
footprint that we can then modify as appropriate for each wing,
and that contract should be let this year.
Dr. Fleming. Okay. Great. Great news. Okay.
General Milley, I certainly want to endorse your comments
you made a few weeks ago about the Army not planning to cut one
more infantry brigade. We feel like we are already below where
we should be on this. I am very interested to learn about the
Army's repatching initiative. I understand that this will not
impact Active Duty forces' structure within the 310 Brigade at
Fort Polk and would like to know more about this concept of
repatching. I have not heard of that before, so if you could
comment and expand on that.
General Milley. Yes. Repatching is probably a misnomer, if
that is what people have mentioned to you. So what we are
looking at is really associated units--we took a page out of
the Air Force--so associated units between the National Guard
and the Active Component of the Regular Army.
Years ago there was a concept called ``roundout.'' It is
very similar to that. It is not exactly the same. And I wanted
to go both ways in the sense of National Guard units are
affiliated or associated with Regular Army divisions or
brigades, and they are essentially rounding out that force
structure. And then it can go the other way as well.
Specifically with 310, we are looking at putting 310--I think
we said for them Texas--I might be wrong on the division, but--
--
Dr. Fleming. I believe it is Texas.
General Milley [continuing]. To make them part of the 36th
Division.
Dr. Fleming. Yes.
General Milley. And that was an option. It has not yet been
decided, by the way--these are options----
Dr. Fleming. Okay.
General Milley [continuing]. That are coming forward after,
and we are going to do rigorous analysis and study that is
ongoing with the Army staff, and ultimately the Secretary of
the Army will be the guy making the decision.
But the idea is to associate National Guard with Active
Duty Component units, and we think that will overall increase
the readiness of both components. So that is the idea behind
it.
Dr. Fleming. Right. You don't anticipate any change in
manpower at Fort Polk? My understanding is----
General Milley. No.
Dr. Fleming [continuing]. While these Active Duty members
would be----
General Milley. No.
Dr. Fleming [continuing]. In essence, assigned to the
National Guard in Texas, they would remain stationed at Fort
Polk.
General Milley. They would be Regular Army Active Duty
soldiers. They would remain at their base station. There would
be no budgetary implications in terms of 304 funds or
mobilization funds or any of that kind of stuff. This is an
association of Active and National Guard units where they would
train together, Office of Professional Development classes,
NCOPD [Noncommissioned Officer Development Program]. They would
do FTXs [field training exercises] together. They would go on
deployments together and so on and so forth. What we are trying
to do is integrate the force to put teeth behind the idea of
total force, to make that real, to walk the walk, not just talk
the talk sort of thing.
Dr. Fleming. Right. Okay. That is great. And I will just
say in closing, I just want to thank all of the chiefs and
secretaries for being here today and the great service you
provide to our Nation. Thank you, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. Ms. Gabbard.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. Thanks
to all of you for your service and your leadership.
General Milley and Secretary Murphy, I just want to say, as
a soldier in the National Guard, I appreciate very much your
leadership and the role that you have taken in highlighting the
importance of this total integrated force that you have just
talked about and actually backing it up with plans and actions
and training that you have just laid out.
I think capitalizing on the resources and assets that we
have within our National Guard and Reserve Components is
critical. They have often been underutilized. And largely many
of the challenges have come from really a problem with the
culture in providing that wide gap between the Active Component
versus the Reserve Components. So I just want you to know that
the leadership you have taken on this has already trickled down
to the unit level that I have seen and heard when I go to my
drill training on the weekend and provided a very serious
morale boost where people feel like they are actually being
utilized for what they have been trained to do.
I want to touch a little bit on the end strength, this 980
number, and I think a lot of us have come at this from
different directions. I think it highlights the concern that
many of us have on what that number means and where we need to
be. I think the Commission on the Future of the Army talked
about, quote--this number being a, quote, minimally sufficient
force.
Secretary Murphy, you used the words, I think, ``minimally
acceptable force that has created a situation of high-risk.''
Considering the both unconventional and conventional threats
that we have, whether you are ranging from groups like ISIS to
North Korea, what is that end strength number that would be
sufficient to be able to confront these threats on at least two
fronts?
Mr. Murphy. Well, Congresswoman, first, thanks for being
part of the Army team and your service as well. You know, we
are obviously planning at that 980 level where we are still
drawing down and still we have a little bit to go there. But,
you know, we have been very clear; it is not just the end
strength numbers. I mean, Congress could pass a bill that gives
us higher end strength, but if it doesn't come with funding,
that will very much hurt our Army because then you have to cut
from--we have already cut from modernization.
As I said in my opening testimony, we are mortgaging future
readiness. We are mortgaging modernization to focus on current
readiness with the OPTEMPO that we are under right now. So, you
know, I can't give you an exact number. That is for
policymakers and the President to put forth. But unless that
end strength number comes with dollars behind it, it will
hollow out our Army. It would not be a wise decision.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
General Milley. And I would echo that, Congresswoman. This
budget, this President's fiscal year 2017 budget, takes us to
460 in the Active Component in the Regular Army by the end of
the year, and it takes the Guard to 335 and the Reserve to 195.
You know, is that sufficient? Again, it is readiness or
capability to do what? Yes, we can do the National Military
Strategy on a day-to-day basis, but can you do the tasks that
are embedded within the other documents that are classified,
and the answer to that is yes, but at high risk.
Okay. So then your question is, how do you lower that risk?
End strength is one of the variables. Readiness is another one.
Technology is another. Time, and there is a whole assortment of
that, but end strength is just one. So I caution everyone about
getting fixed on a fixed number, an end strength, a million,
500 thousand, 2 million, or whatever the number is. That can
lead you to a bad solution. And I would be concerned as the
Chief of Staff of the Army if someone put into law that the
Army will be at number X, but no money came with it for
readiness or modernization. That would actually hurt, not help.
If someone wanted to increase the end strength of the Army,
I am all for it. I think it is a good thing. I think it is
necessary, but it would need to come with the additional moneys
for readiness and modernization. Otherwise, it would end up
actually hurting.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you. I think that is a critical point.
As we go through this, oftentimes people are throwing around
different numbers without really explaining what the rationale
behind that number would mean and what the cost would be.
I have got just a few seconds left. I just want to
highlight a concern about the reduction in National Guard
MILCON [military construction] funding. As you well know, over
half the National Guard readiness centers were built between
the end of World War II and Vietnam. Places like the Pohakuloa
Training Center in Hawaii, host not only our Active and Reserve
Components, but also foreign military officers for RIMPAC [Rim
of the Pacific Exercise]. It was built during the Korean War
and is really in despicable shape. And just as we work through
this, I ask you to place that at a high level of priority with
regards to readiness. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Gibson.
Mr. Gibson. Well, thanks, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
the panelists. Let me follow up on that question from Ms.
Gabbard, and also earlier from Beto O'Rourke, and build on some
of the testimony earlier today but perhaps come from a
different perspective or different angle, because I am
interested in the best military judgment from General Milley
and General Neller.
Many of us here listening very carefully, building the
record, having testimonials about the risk, and even today, we
are hearing today about the very high risk associated to where
we are. And I understand there is a bit of a dance that has to
go on politically. I get that. But I want to cut through some
of that with this assumption that, you know, a number of us
here, in a bipartisan way, are building a bill that stops the
drawdown of the land forces. And when you consider the fact
that by 2018, we are talking about taking our land forces to
pre-World War II levels, I think it is important the American
people hear that, hear directly about where we are heading.
Now, with this bill, of course, and I heard the Chief of
Staff of Army mention just moments ago, and I concurred with
him completely, that this would have to come with the money
necessary for readiness and modernization. And I say the same.
And I met with General Neller about a week or two ago. But I am
coming at it differently saying it this way: If the Congress
was able to build the coalition to vote for and to pass
stopping the drawdown, essentially to bring with it the moneys
necessary so we don't hollow out the force, so that would be
55,000 numbers different from 2018 in terms of the 980 number
would go to 1,035, and the United States Marine Corps instead
would basically have 2,400 different, when you look at instead
of 182, the Active Marine Corps would 184. And the Marine Corps
Reserve instead of being 385, would be 389.
So my question is this: If we were able to get that done,
please explain to my colleagues and the American people how
this would impact readiness. Explain to us what you would do,
Army, Marine Corps Generals, in terms of this increased end
strength, what would that mean for the formations? How would
that address the risk? And what would that mean to the families
in terms of deployment and dwell? Thank you.
General Milley. Thanks, Congressman. Well, in terms of
readiness, it would, I think, assist us with the deployment
dwell and buy time because you would have the capacity and the
force to do the day-to-day OPTEMPO--because as the wars draw
down in Iraq and Afghanistan, they didn't end but they came
down considerably, but so didn't the size of the force. So the
OPTEMPO, the DEPTEMPO for the Army, has remained very high. We
are still at, you know, 1 to 1 or 1 to just a little bit less
than 2 in some capacity.
So time is critical to building readiness, the time to
train, the time to rebuild the force. It would also, I think,
probably allow for an increased number of capabilities, not
necessarily brigade combat teams, but various other
capabilities. Earlier, people talked about Patriot; Patriot is
one of our significantly increased or high-stress units. And
then on the families it would clearly reduce some of the
OPTEMPO stress on a day-to-day basis.
So if that were to happen, that would be wonderful. We
would welcome it. But, again, I just caution everybody; it
would have to come with the dollars associated with it in order
to fund the readiness, in order to fund the modernization
associated with those forces.
General Neller. Congressman, I think it would do two
things. If we increased the number of like units, it would
improve our dep-to-dwell, which gives us more time to train
before we deploy again, which overall improves our readiness,
reduces stress on the force and stress on the families.
That said, we are in a process right now, and we are
looking at what the force design looks like and--because I
think we have realized it is because we have been doing what we
have been doing successfully, but we have to look to the
future. Do we have the right force design for the future? Do we
have the right number of marines doing the right things? Do we
have enough people that do information warfare, do electronic
warfare, do cyber? Do we have enough communicators, enough
intel analysts, and I think the answer is no.
And so we would probably take that number of people and use
them to get those types of marines which would add those
capabilities to make the force better and more ready and better
prepared to go face the conflicts we think that we have the
highest probability of operating in in the future.
Mr. Gibson. I appreciate those comments. And for the
record, both general officers talked about the impact on
service members and their families. A lot of emphasis here in
the Congress has to do with post-traumatic stress, TBI
[traumatic brain injury], and other associated concerns for our
veterans. And, you know, this bill, fully funded, would help
address it.
And also in terms of the European Reassurance Initiative,
concerns with the Islamic State, dealing with North Korea, some
challenges potentially with China, you know, this is a very
important bill that we need to muster the political will to
pass. I thank the panelists. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to begin
by thanking our wide array of distinguished witnesses before us
today, and we certainly appreciate both your insight and your
dedication and service to our Nation. So thank you for that.
Secretary Mabus, and--actually before that, if I could just
acknowledge Mr. Murphy, and great to see you back before the
committee and to have you with us today. So thanks for your
service and what you are doing.
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson, with the resurgence
of Russia and the ascendance of China, and the role the Navy
plays in the conflicts throughout the Middle East, there is
obviously clear urgency to add more submarines to the fleet. In
light of the impending submarine shortfall, can we count on
efforts to extend the life of the Los Angeles-class boats? And
how can we best direct our immediate and long-term investments
to effectively mitigate any risks posed by the shortfall?
Secretary Mabus. Number one, Congressman, the Russian
activity that you were talking about is the highest level we
have seen since the Cold War. And the OPTEMPO for the Navy, and
particularly for our submarine forces, has been exceptionally
high for at least the last decade. The number of submarines
that we have today and the number that we are going to have
into the 2020s, is an example of why it is so important not to
miss a year in submarines. We have missed years building only
one attack submarine, and we just can't make those years back
up.
Where we can focus now is, number one, on making sure that
the submarines that we do have in service reach the end of
their life span, the Los Angeles class that you have mentioned
in particular, that to the extent we can extend those, but to
make sure that they reach that in a safe and effective manner.
Number two, right now we are looking at one Virginia-class
submarine in 2021, because that is the year that the Ohio-class
replacement begins to be built. We would very much like to and
need to have a second Virginia class in that year. We are
undergoing the studies, the look right now, to make that
happen. And we simply need, as we go forward, to build more
submarines, and particularly the attack submarines, and not let
the Ohio-class replacement effort have an impact on so many of
our other shipbuilding programs and in particular the attack
submarine program.
Mr. Langevin. I couldn't agree more, Mr. Secretary, and I
share that concern. And the faster we can get these boats into
the water, obviously the better.
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson, as you know, the
last eight Virginia-class submarines have been delivered ahead
of schedule, and the program has been touted as a model for
acquisition reform, largely due to the multiyear contracting
strategy and its use of economic order quantities, something
that I along with my then colleague from Connecticut, at times
several years ago strongly advocated for that change in how we
bought and paid for our submarines, allowing for a multiyear
contract, which never had been done before.
Now, based on the initial industry estimates of the cost
impact to module manufacturing, final assembly and testing, and
the supplier base, the estimated long-term cost impact of an
$85 million shortfall in AP [advance procurement] funding in
fiscal year 2017 could be between $110 million and $210
million. So with this in mind, what ramifications might the
Navy see, should we fail to provide robust funding for advance
procurement for the Virginia-class submarine program, and how
would the health of the force be affected?
Secretary Mabus. Everything you pointed out, you know,
shows why it is important to do these things 10 at a time as a
multiyear buy. We appreciate Congress allowing us to do that
very much. Part of that multiyear buy is the advance
procurement so that shipyards can buy in economic order
quantity.
And to show you the impact that something like that has, in
2014, when we signed the last multiyear for 10 subs over 5
years, we paid for 9 subs, so we basically got a submarine free
because we, with the help of Congress, let suppliers buy in
economic order quantity. They were able to keep and train the
workforce that was going to be needed. They were able to make
the infrastructure investments that they needed to make.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I know my time is expired. I hope
we are not going to let advance procurement slip. So thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Welsh, welcome to
the Armed Services Committee. The behavior in here is not
always this good. We might need you back in a few weeks. But
congratulations on your Easter Seals award dinner. I apologize
I didn't see you when I was congratulating General Welsh on it
and certainly look forward to having you back in Valdosta. I
think it has been 10 months and 2 weeks since I saw you down
there. I remember that because my baby was exactly 6 weeks old
at that time and so I look forward to seeing you again in
Valdosta, and General Welsh as well.
General Milley, I read about the issue with regard to the
pistols, and I think it is absolutely ridiculous that you don't
have the authority to pick a pistol for the Army. I would bet
that the four of you in uniform could probably, in 10 minutes,
come up with an agreement on what that platform should be. I
would think that with a quick click or two on an iPad, you
could figure out what the retail price of the pistol was, what
a decent price for the pistol was, and what we should be paying
for that pistol if we were buying it in the quantities that we
would buy it in. And I want you to know that I do believe you
should have that authority.
And I can't help but wonder that if it is this bad with a
pistol, what about optics? What about rifles? I mean, all of
the things that we are buying. How much bureaucracy is in there
that we could remove that would allow you to equip your men and
women better, faster, and with less money?
General Milley. Thanks, Congressman, and you are correct.
The pistol is only one of the systems that is symptomatic of
the system at large. First of all, we do, Secretary of the Army
and I, do have the authority to pick the weapon, but that is at
the end of the day. The problem is getting to the end of the
day and how long it is taking. So this thing has been going on
for like 9 years. And you have heard the whole litany of woe,
about 300 pages, and so on and so forth. The test itself is 2
years long on known technology. We are not talking about, you
know, nuclear subs or going to the moon here. We are talking
about a pistol.
So, yes, it is a long, drawn-out process. It is not as
adaptive. It is not as agile, it is not as quick. We don't have
as many authorities. There are a lot of legal requirements and
oversight and so on and so forth. We, the Army, would like to
cut to the chase a little bit more on some of these things. And
in the case of the pistol, we happen to be the one who's the
proponent. All the other services would use the pistol that we
get.
Mr. Scott. I would encourage all of you to get specific
language that you would like to see in the National Defense
Authorization Act that would help you cut through that red
tape.
General Milley. Right.
Mr. Scott. I mean, I heard it on the sniper fields at
Benning with regard to what a scope can be purchased for over
the Internet versus what it costs to get the same scope on a
rifle at a military base.
Secretary Mabus, real quick, thank you for naming the
series of ships after John Lewis, my colleague from Georgia.
Nobody deserves it more.
I want to go to Secretary James now with regard to the
JSTARS, if I can. We have discussed the ISR shortfalls. I know
we are making progress with the JSTARS. My concern still is the
ISR gap between the old platform of JSTARS and fielding the new
platform of JSTARS and how we intend to close that gap and what
suggestions that either you or General Welsh have for closing
that gap.
Secretary James. So, again, let me begin and then I will
yield to the chief. Just a couple of data points. I mentioned
we are getting going now with the recap of JSTARS. It has taken
too long for a variety of reasons, but in this 5-year plan, we
do have it funded. So that is point one.
We have three contractors already that are under contract
that are doing pre-EMD types of technology maturations, risk-
reduction types of activities, and we believe that we will get
a contract awarded for EMD, engineering, manufacturing and
development, in about the first quarter of fiscal year 2018. It
is one of those high-demand, low-density areas. And you are
right; combatant commanders want JSTARS and they want that
equivalent as well a lot. So we are moving forward with it, and
regrettably it has taken as long as it has.
General Welsh. Congressman, I think by the time we finish
this risk-reduction work and the technology maturation work in
fiscal year 2017, and we approach that EMD contract decision,
we will have a better idea of how much we can accelerate, if
any, at that point in time. We would like to accelerate from a
fiscal year 2024 IOC [initial operating capability] and move it
forward.
Mr. Scott. General, thank you for your time and for your
many years of service.
Ms. Welsh, good to see you again.
The Chairman. Mr. Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chair. This question is for
General Neller. We now have two special purpose MAGTFs [Marine
air-ground task forces], a new UDP [unit deployment program]
requirement to Australia, the Black Sea Rotational Force
[BSRF], additional requirements for embassy security, and an
uptick in exercise and security cooperation missions and, of
course, the regular MEUs [Marine expeditionary units] that our
marines go on. So I have three questions regarding the
sustainability of this OPTEMPO.
One, is the current deployment-to-dwell ratio of 1 to 2
sustainable in terms of training and also just general
retention of marines? Two, will we have the ability to surge
forces in the event of a full-spectrum conflict? And, three,
are there more opportunities--and I brought this up in private
with you--more opportunities to better leverage the Reserves in
any way to help in regards to the first two questions?
General Neller. So, Congressman, based on the current force
structure, we deploy the MEUs to maintain a 1.0 presence for
CENTCOM [Central Command]. There is also a forward-deployed
naval force MEU in Okinawa, but that comes off of unit
rotational forces. The BSRF and one of the special purpose
MAGTFs is one force, and the other one is in CENTCOM. So is it
sustainable? At a 2-to-1 ratio, at 24 infantry battalions and
the aviation logistics, yes, it is. We can sustain this.
Ideally, when I came in the Marine Corps, we were a 3-to-1
force. We had 6 months deployed, 18 months to reset. We had
been a 2-to-1 force. That is right at the very edge. And so we
do have some units that are inside that, and that is of
concern.
So can we surge? The force that can surge is the force that
is getting ready to replace these units that are forward
deployed or the units that have just got back from these same
deployments. And then there is always a life cycle to a unit,
and the readiness ebbs and flows. It is a very kind of
complicated algorithm involving people, the equipment, the
readiness of the gear, the training of the unit.
Depending upon what the requirement is and how much we have
the ability to surge with those that have just gotten back and
where they are in their training cycle, they would be at least
prepared to surge. The bottom line is we are going to go. The
Marines are going to go. And we are going to go, and we are
going to provide the best ready force that we can because that
is what you expect of your Marine Corps.
And part of that surge is the Reserves, the 38,500 marines
in the Reserve Component, which are part of the total force.
Just like with the Army, Navy, and the Air Force Guard and
Reserve, we are a total force. There is 2,400 Reserve marines
activated today that are forward deployed, and they are out
there as part of the 186,000 marines, 184,000 Active. So we
wouldn't be able to do what we do without the Reserves.
To have the Reserves surge, obviously we have to bring them
on Active Duty; we have got to mobilize them, and they have to
be paid. And if we were to replace one of these capabilities
with a Reserve battalion or a Reserve flight squadron, that is
expensive, and that is where you get in the issue of using the
Reserves as effectively as we probably could.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Mr. Nugent.
Mr. Nugent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
this panel for being here today. It is always enlightening to
hear from you.
Just a little disclosure here. I was an airman back right
after the Wright Brothers did their thing. But all three of my
sons are currently in the Army, two Active Duty, and one Black
Hawk pilot in the Florida Army Guard, and so, you know, that is
an Army family from that standpoint.
But this is for everyone. You know, SOF [special operations
force] is often referred to as the tip of the spear. In keeping
with that analogy, the vast majority of the rest of the spear
is provided by all of you, the service branches. Some in
Congress believe that national security could be provided much
cheaper by investing a little more in SOCOM [Special Operations
Command] and cutting a lot more from the Army, Navy, Air Force,
and Marines. I know that without the enormous share of the
service support you contribute to SOCOM, SOF doesn't function.
And while digging for hard data to support both your
traditional and special operations support expenses, I was
surprised to discover that none of the branches, none of the
branches, have a comprehensive list of common service support
that contribute to SOF or understanding of what it really costs
for you to annually support SOF.
So in this year's NDAA, I am pursuing language that would
direct each service to identify the support that they give and
how much it costs, because what I want to make sure is that you
are resourced properly and that, you know, this I think
sometimes misguided aspect that SOF can solve all of our
problems--you know, if we are going to resource SOF, then how
does it affect, you know, and we don't want it being taken from
the general services.
So if you could, and like I said, we have checked, would
you support that in regards to that kind of language?
General Milley. For the Army, absolutely, sure. In fact, it
is a great idea to come up with a list if I were supporting
SOF, because as General Votel testified, I think it was last
week, and I can certainly attest to that, is that the United
States military special operations forces depend upon the
parent services of all of us in the conventional forces for
their very existence, not only in their training, in their
manning, and their equipping, but also operationally. It is
much, much more difficult for them to operate when they are out
there just by themselves, but when they have got an
architecture around them, conventional forces, air, naval, and
land, then they are much more effective.
Admiral Richardson. Sir, the Navy would absolutely support
that.
General Neller. Sir, we would support it. And I, again, I
think all of us realize we are part of a joint team. And we
need the SOF guys and gals to do what they do, and as General
Milley said, and General Votel I am sure would validate, that
they can't do what they do without us being there to provide
the capability. So we operate as a joint force. And I think,
quite frankly, there are lot of things that conventional--and I
don't really like that term--that conventional forces do that
are part of what are perceived or seen as what the SOF is
doing, particularly in Iraq and other places where we are
involved in advising and assisting and training foreign
militaries.
But it is not about the credit. It is just about we work
with each other, and I would be certainly willing to show what
the costs are.
Mr. Nugent. General Welsh.
General Welsh. Yes, sir, we completely agree with that. By
the way, the good news for all of us is the greatest spokesman
for this necessity of a strong conventional force to support
SOF is the commander of U.S. Special Operations Command. He has
been for a while.
Mr. Nugent. He has repeated that on numerous occasions,
that SOF is great. It can do certain things and do them really
well, but they can't reopen the Strait of Hormuz. They can't
withstand an assault by a conventional force. You know, so
there is limitations, and we need to have all of that as a
joint task.
One last thing. And I appreciate when you talk about
readiness, in regards to deterrence. I truly believe, and this
is just, you know, an old sheriff saying this, that, you know,
when you have a high deterrence, it does deter nation-state
actors from doing something that is really stupid, I think. It
is not going to stop, you know, the knuckleheads out there that
are nonconventional, but it really does have a direct impact.
You know, I have a son currently over in Europe for 6
months and supporting what is going on over there. We are not
fooling anybody, you know, as it relates to Putin in regards to
what force structure we have. And so I think that as the Army
moves forward in regards to having prepositioned assets there
but also actually having, the old terminology, boots on the
ground to respond, is you can't do it from afar, particularly
on a conventional force.
So, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the extra time, and I
appreciate all of you being here. God bless you. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Byrne.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to reiterate my
thanks to all of you for being here today and for being so
patient with us.
Secretary Mabus, I want to talk to you about my favorite
topic, the littoral combat ship [LCS]. You testified before the
Senate committee yesterday and reiterated the Navy's need for
52 littoral combat ships. You will recall very well that 2
years ago, you undertook a study at the direction of the then
Secretary of Defense of the entire LCS program and recommended
52 ships, but the latter 20 be upgraded to frigates.
We had Secretary Stackley before the Seapower subcommittee
couple of weeks ago, and he said there is no new study that
validates a downsized 40. So what I would like for you to
respond to is, in light of all of that, what would be the
negative impacts of a reduction of the LCS program from 52 to
40?
Secretary Mabus. Well, first, it is absolutely correct that
we have a validated need. The force structure assessment says
we need 52 small surface combatants, and your discussion of the
study that was undertaken because of concerns with lethality
and survivability. And literally thousands of alternatives were
looked at. We came out the frigate program, the last 20, are
going to be far more survivable, far more lethal, and we are
going to be able to back-fit some of the original LCSs with
that survivability and lethality.
Any time you reduce the numbers in a shipbuilding program,
number one, the price goes up for what you are going to get. If
we down-select only one version, one shipyard would almost
certainly close. One of the things that we have learned and
other countries have learned, and it is a hard lesson, is that
if you lose these unique skills, it is almost impossible to get
them back. It takes years. It takes far more to get them back
than it does to maintain them.
Number three, the way that the 52 number was arrived at is
looking at all the missions that are required from the Navy and
what it takes to meet that, that goes from everything from
high-end combat against a near-peer competitor to the presence
operations that we have ongoing every single day of the year to
do what Mr. Nugent just said, deter and reassure, to the things
like disaster relief, humanitarian assistance. And also we are
very lacking in ships in SOCOM on the drug interdiction front.
So looking at all the needs that the Navy has, those would be
the impacts, if you reduced those in absolute numbers.
And, again, what we are talking about now, we are talking
about the fleet of the future. We are not talking about the
fleet of today. We are talking about the workforce of the very
near future. But the fleet of the future, how many ships we
have, what their capabilities are, how they can meet the
strategy, is dependent on that force structure analysis. We did
the one in 2012. We refreshed it in 2014. And a lot of people,
myself included, have been willing to bet the CNO's paycheck
that that number of the one we are doing today, right now, that
the number 308 is not going to go down.
And so even if you look at keeping 308 as a number, if you
look at the 30-year shipbuilding plan, if you reduce numbers of
any type of ship, you simply don't meet the requirement.
Mr. Byrne. And that was a good lead-in to my question for
you, Admiral. And that is, that if you look at the shipbuilding
plan with the recommendation of the administration, we get to
308, but then within a short period of time we go down
precipitously. So if we want to avoid dipping down pretty
quickly under the 308 after we get there, aren't we going to
have to continue to build these littoral combat ships at the 52
level instead of going down to 40?
Admiral Richardson. Certainly, sir. And that is, you know,
exactly the fact of shipbuilding, that they come out of service
as fast as they went in when they reach the end of their
service life. You can extend that a little bit, but eventually
they are going to come out at that same rate. And so you have
to be minding the decisions of the past, putting together a
program that is very thoughtful in terms of reaching and
maintaining the requirements of the future. Underneath that 308
number, it is the composition of that number that is important
as well, and the small surface combatant is an important
contribution.
Mr. Byrne. Well, thank you for that answer, and I do not
want to bet your paycheck. I want you to keep your paycheck,
but we want to keep building these ships too.
Admiral Richardson. I should be clear that after Mrs.
Richardson and our five kids get their cut, there is very
little discretionary money left in that paycheck.
Mr. Byrne. With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Ms. McSally.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you gentlemen
and ladies for your service and your patience during this long
hearing.
Mr. Murphy, I want to start off with you. Talking about the
WASPs [Women Airforce Service Pilots], these amazing women who
served in World War II as pilots, 1,074 of them, pioneers
opened the door for people like me to be able to serve. Do you
believe that they should be allowed to be in Arlington?
Mr. Murphy. Yes.
Ms. McSally. Do you believe you have the authority to let
them into Arlington quickly?
Mr. Murphy. Yes, through an individual exception of policy.
Ms. McSally. How about just as a group, the WASPs, we want
to let the WASPs into Arlington because of the amazing service
that they did?
Mr. Murphy. No, ma'am, and that is why I support your
legislation. That is why I have done another course of action.
Again, you know, ma'am, we all take an oath to support and
defend the Constitution. In that Constitution we have the rule
of law. I cannot violate law or U.S. regulations. U.S.
regulations right now--and I am not trying to give you mumbo
jumbo.
Ms. McSally. Yeah, that's okay.
Mr. Murphy. No, no.
Ms. McSally. I hear you.
Mr. Murphy. But, ma'am, that is why I support your
legislation. That is why I support a commission to address it,
but the quickest way to do this would be individual exception
of policy. These women, Air Force----
Ms. McSally. That is not what we are looking for, Mr.
Murphy.
Mr. Murphy. I am sorry.
Ms. McSally. We are looking for all the WASPs to be able to
let in. And just to be clear, so you are saying you can't make
that happen right now for all the WASPs. Can the Secretary of
Defense?
Mr. Murphy. No.
Ms. McSally. Can the Commander in Chief?
Mr. Murphy. No.
Ms. McSally. You believe nobody in the executive branch----
Mr. Murphy. The Congress can.
Ms. McSally [continuing]. Has the authority to make the
exception?
Mr. Murphy. The Congress can. I am trying to right the
wrong, ma'am. I agree with you. I support you 100 percent. But
Congress in 1977----
Ms. McSally. I just want to make sure----
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. After decades of service, they
allowed WASPs to be buried in veterans' cemeteries.
Ms. McSally. Right. Do you really believe the Commander in
Chief doesn't have the authority right now--I mean, he makes
executive orders all the time--that he can't say the WASPs are
allowed or a group exception to policy?
Mr. Murphy. Individual exception to policy, ma'am, he can,
but not groups.
Ms. McSally. So if I submitted an exception to policy for
1,074 of my closest friends, would that be considered?
Mr. Murphy. I would support that legislation, like I
support your current legislation, as long as it is an above-
the-ground inurnment, yes.
Ms. McSally. So you think it literally does take an act of
Congress as the fastest way to fix the problem?
Mr. Murphy. There was an act of Congress in 1977, ma'am, in
1977, which said they were allowed to be buried in veterans'
cemeteries, but they didn't allow them to be buried in
Arlington, ma'am. But what I am saying is Congress needs to
change what Congress did in 1977. I can't change it
unilaterally. SECDEF [Secretary of Defense] can't change it
unilaterally. The Commander in Chief can't. That is why we have
co-equal branches of government.
Ms. McSally. Okay.
Mr. Murphy. Now, I support your effort.
Ms. McSally. Thanks. I just wanted to clarify whether you
thought the executive branch had any ability to change it right
now, and the answer is no.
Mr. Murphy. To my understanding, I taught con
[constitutional] law at West Point. Again, from my counsel and
everything that I have researched in support of your efforts,
yes, ma'am.
Ms. McSally. Okay.
Mr. Murphy. And I know it is not the answer you want to
hear, but that is the answer.
Ms. McSally. That is okay. I just wanted to get the answer
on the record.
All right. Secretary James, it was great to see you last
week at Davis-Monthan, and thanks for coming out to visit.
General Welsh, I only have a couple minutes left. I do want
to follow up on the A-10. Thank you for not trying to put the
A-10 in the boneyard this year and continuing to keep it
flying, although I am concerned about the future plans, and it
seems like there is some inconsistencies within the Pentagon.
When the Secretary of Defense announced his budget, before
we actually saw the details, he said the A-10 won't be retired
until 2022, and his quote was, ``they will be replaced by F-35s
only on a squadron-by-squadron basis as they come online,
ensuring that all units have sufficient backfill to retain
enough aircraft needed to fight today's conflict.'' So we got
the impression as the F-35 became FOC [full operational
capability], squadron by squadron after 2022, that would
happen.
When we actually got the budget and we saw the plans of the
Air Force, we see that starting in fiscal year 2018, actually 2
squadrons are going in the boneyard; 2019, 49 more aircraft;
2020, 64 more aircraft; and 2021, 96 more aircraft. Last
August, the Test and Evaluation Office, Dr. Gilmore, agreed
that there is going to be a fly-off between the A-10 and the F-
35 to compare capabilities side-by-side. The earliest that will
happen is 2018. They think maybe even 2019. By the time we get
a report to Congress, that will be 2020.
Our perspective is that we shouldn't put one more A-10 in
the boneyard until this test is complete and we actually have a
report to assess any sort of risks, and then we move forward.
It seems like there is just a number of inconsistencies in the
timing here. Are you not willing to wait until the test is
complete to make a decision to move forward on putting any more
A-10s in the boneyard?
Secretary James. This is, once again, a budgetary issue,
and I will let the chief talk about how the SECDEF's comments
relate to the squadrons of the F-35. So we will come back to
that. I was impressed with the boneyard, by the way. I was
impressed with everything that I saw at Davis-Monthan.
It is strictly a budgetary matter. It was last year and the
year before as well. And you are right; our 5-year plan does
begin in fiscal year 2018, gradually to retire the A-10.
Ms. McSally. Chief, do you have any comments? I mean, when
Dr. Gilmore mentioned the fly-off, you said, I think--let me
just make sure that is you--the idea that the F-35 is going to
walk in the door next year when it reaches IOC and take over
for the A-10 is just silly. It has never been the intent. We
were never going to do that. That is not the plan. And really
gearing more towards FOC, which we are talking much further
down the road.
General Welsh. Yes, ma'am. And the idea, the F-35 is
considered to be the highest ranked CAS [close air support]
platform. We are losing CAS capacity. That is what the Budget
Control Act has done to us. The real issue in 2018, and the
reason that we start the divestiture in 2018, and I can't
account for why Secretary of Defense's comments were this way,
but the plan has been the same since it was submitted with our
budget; is that the workarounds we have put in place until now
allow us to bed down the F-35 through IOC by getting
maintenance manpower from other places, by contracting it out.
In fiscal year 2018, all those things kind of run out, and we
are now short people to stand up F-35 units.
And so if we keep the A-10, by fiscal year 2021, the
scheduled FOC date for the F-35, we will be about 50 percent
short of the maintenance manpower required to field the F-35.
So it is a manpower problem.
Ms. McSally. Okay. I am over my time, but we will follow up
with you. Thanks a lot.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I came back because I
have a great interest in our military, to have a strong
military, with the hopes that a strong military can make sure
that we get the attention of foreigners who want to attack
America and foreign countries.
It is pretty distressing really to hear the testimony
today, knowing that our readiness, knowing that our
modernization accounts need money, need to really rebuild this
military that most Americans, including myself, feel like we
need to have a strong military because of the world situation.
I want to touch on, and then I will get to my question very
quickly, many of my colleagues on the Armed Services Committee
don't agree with me on this, and that is fine. That is what
makes America great. I just get incensed by the waste of money
in Afghanistan. I had the former Commandant, Chuck Krulak, has
been my adviser for 5 years. I email him, he emails me back. He
gives me questions from time to time, or he will give me
thoughts that I can share.
In the last 2 weeks, this article appeared, ``Twelve ways
your tax dollars were squandered in Afghanistan, $10 billion.''
Then there was an article about the fact we spent $18 billion
in Afghanistan to train Afghanis to be policemen, and 36,000
walked off the job. Then you had John Sopko before the Senate a
month ago testifying that the Department of Defense spent $6
million to buy 9 goats from Italy--they are blond in color--to
ship to Western Afghanistan so they could start a goat farm and
get the wool and then start a cashmere business. He further
testified to the Senate, he doesn't know where the goats are.
And someone asked him, do you think they ate them? You know,
this is not a joke. I hear you telling us today that America is
not ready to defend this country if we keep going down this
path. So this is what I want to ask.
General Dunford I have great respect for, as I have great
respect for you as well. I know that from time to time he wants
your counsel because he has got the responsibility to say to a
President, Mr. President, this is the right policy. We must
continue this policy. Or maybe he would say, Mr. President, I
don't know if we should continue going down this black hole or
not.
So what I would like to note from you, primarily the
generals, because you would be the ones, maybe the secretaries
as well, that from time to time General Dunford would say we
need to have a policy discussion. And I would understand it
would be confidential and informal. But do you as a general
feel that if a policy--forget my position on Afghanistan--but a
policy that this country is pursuing is wrong for the American
people and wrong for the military, would you feel that it is
your duty, not publicly now, but your duty to say to General
Dunford in this case, you need to let the President know that
10 to 12 more years of trying to train the Afghans to take care
of themselves is not worth one dime, and it is certainly not
worth one pint of blood? Do you feel that this is part of your
responsibility--forget Afghanistan--but to be an adviser to the
President so we can give the President the support or not give
him the support, meaning money, in a lost cause? Would anyone
like to answer that?
General Milley. Congressman, you can get a quick spot from
all of us, I suppose. For me, we meet regularly with General
Dunford, very candid conversations amongst the senior
leadership you see here at the table. We talk policy. We talk
all kinds of strategic issues, very candid. And I have no doubt
in my mind, speaking for myself, that if I had a doubt in a
certain policy, et cetera, that I would bring it up to him, and
I have already done that on many occasions. Point one.
Point two is, we also have an obligation to render best
military advice to the Secretary of Defense, the President,
National Security Council, and Congress, and I believe that I
recognize that, and I accept that as a personal responsibility,
and I will execute it without failure as long as I am in this
seat.
Mr. Jones. General Milley, thank you very much. I think my
time is about to expire, and I tell the chairman all the time,
I am going to try to stick to the time. So thank you for at
least listening. I appreciate that very much.
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
your service.
There has been a lot of talk in the Senate on changing
Goldwater-Nichols. In fact, our Senate colleagues have started
hearings on that. Now, from your perspective, and I am going to
ask General Welsh and Secretary James this in particular,
because one of the wild rumors that are now flying around is
that SPACECOM [Space Command] is going to be moved or NORTHCOM
[Northern Command] and SOUTHCOM [Southern Command] are going to
be merged, or who knows what other rumors are out there.
Is the proposed Senate process sufficiently transparent and
deliberative? Those are two things I think that are critical.
Could you both comment on that, please?
Secretary James. I would begin, Congressman Lamborn, by
simply saying that I am not fully familiar with the full Senate
process. I am sure it is transparent and so on. But any law
that has been around for 30-plus years, it probably makes sense
to stand back and take a look at it. So I believe that was the
spirit with which they have initiated this. And by the way, the
Department of Defense is also reviewing some of these matters
in their working groups and so on. So that would be my comment.
General Welsh. Sir, like the boss, I am not familiar with
the internal Senate process on this, so I really can't comment
on that. We have been asked for our views and our inputs, which
I think is wonderful. The one thing I would comment on about
Goldwater-Nichols is sometimes we forget that it has been a
raging success, in my view.
Mr. Lamborn. Excuse me?
General Welsh. It has been a raging success, since 1986.
The joint capabilities of this force are night and day compared
to what they were in 1985, and all of us were serving back
then, so I hope we don't throw out the baby with the bathwater.
I don't think that will happen. But it has been 30 years. It is
time to take a look and see how we can make it better.
Mr. Lamborn. All right. Thank you both for your
perspective.
General Neller, I would like to shift to you. I want to
turn to Secretary Carter's recent decision to open all
specialties and units to women without exception. And I am
concerned about the very rapid implementation timeline that has
been given to you. And to me, if it is a very quick timeline, I
would be concerned that there is more politics involved than
actually what is best for the warfighter. So I want to ask you
about the timeline. If there is too quick of a timeline to
implement, does that make it difficult to resolve all of the
questions?
General Neller. Well, Congressman, I don't think we are--we
are on a timeline for a decision. The Secretary said by 1 April
he would tell us, he would accept our implementation plans,
which he has done. So we had been building in parallel an
implementation plan because we did not ask for an exception for
all ground combat elements, but now they are all open.
So we are going through the process, like the other
services, to find out what the propensity to enlist is. We have
changed--we have developed standards for men and women in the
pool to go in these MOSs [military occupational specialties].
We have got standards that, when they are in recruit training,
that they have to meet in order to go on to the MOS school. We
have got MOS-specific standards at the school that all marines
have to go through to earn the MOS. And then if and when female
marines pass, which I am sure they will, we have a plan to
successfully put them into these units so that they can
contribute, and then we can continue on with mission
effectiveness.
So there is three lenses that we look at this at the end:
the admission effectiveness for the unit, the health and
welfare of the force, and overall best use of talent of the
human capital that we have. So we are going to go through this
process. Our recruiters are out there now to see if there is
any indications that there is a propensity to do these
particular MOSs, and we will put people through school.
So how long is that going to take? I have no idea, but I
think we have got a plan. I think we are prepared to go forward
on this, and we will continue to track it. I think it is going
to take all of us, but I think more so the Army and the Marine
Corps. I am not going to speak for General Milley. But I think
we know we are going to collect the data on this, and so we
will see how this all plays out over the next 5 to 10 years
before we really have a good idea of how it has worked out.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I just hope that the needs of the
warfighter are first and foremost, and rushing too quickly, to
me, might compromise that. I would hate to see that
compromised.
General Neller. I don't personally feel under any pressure,
and I don't think the force does because we want every marine
to be successful. And this is about mission effectiveness and
effectiveness of the force.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. We have touched on a variety of topics. I
appreciate you all being here. We will need to stay in touch
with you moving towards markup and the floor, everything from
Goldwater-Nichols and acquisition reform, to dealing with our
readiness problem. But for now, again, you have our thanks. And
the hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:59 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 16, 2016

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 16, 2016

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

March 16, 2016

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FORBES

Secretary Mabus. Because of the long lead time needed for
shipbuilding, it is not the job of one administration. It is not the
job of one Congress. This Administration and Congress, in previous
budgets, have guaranteed we will reach a Fleet of 300 ships by FY19 and
308 by FY21. With the strong support of Congress and close adherence to
the long range shipbuilding plan over the period 2009--2016, the Navy
is certain to reach a Battle Force of 308-ships in 2021 (the nominal
year in which those ships procured by 2016 will have been delivered to
the Navy). This twelve year span required to go from a Navy of 278
ships in 2009 to 308 ships in 2021 exemplifies why shipbuilding must
remain a top priority for the Department of the Navy (DoN) if we are to
continue to provide the measure of maritime security and power
projection required of our naval forces in the decades ahead. The FY
2017 President's Budget and the corresponding FY 2017 to FY 2021 Future
Years Defense Plan (FYDP) establish the shipbuilding trajectory that
will shape our Battle Force and its underpinning industrial base in the
years following FY 2021.
In the 2020s the strict requirement to replace SSBNs of the Ohio-
class on a one-for-one basis as they retire, dictates that the Navy
procure the lead OR SSBN ship in FY2021, the second ship of the class
in FY2024, followed by funding one OR SSBN each year between FY2026 and
FY2035. In developing our FY 2017 President's budget, the Office of
Management and Budget increased the Navy's shipbuilding funds by about
$2.3 billion in FY2021 specifically for the start of OR SSBN
construction, allowing the Navy to better balance our resources across
the entire Navy portfolio. Within the Navy's traditional Total
Obligation Authority (TOA), and assuming that historic shipbuilding
resources continue to be available, the OR SSBN and CVN funding
requirements would consume about half of the shipbuilding funding
available in a given year--and would do so for a period of over a
decade. The significant drain on available shipbuilding resources would
manifest in reduced procurement quantities in the remaining capital
ship programs. Therefore, if additional funding is not available to
support the shipbuilding procurement plan throughout this period,
knowing that the OR SSBN will be built, the balance of the shipbuilding
plan will be significantly impacted.
Ohio Replacement (OR) remains our top priority program. The Navy
continues to need significant increases in our top-line beyond the
FYDP, in order to afford their replacement. Absent top-line relief, OR
SSBN construction will seriously impair construction of virtually all
other battle force ships. Without additional funding, the resulting
force composition and ship numbers will not only fail to meet the
requirements of the Navy's Force Structure Assessment (FSA), but there
will also be significant negative impacts to the shipbuilding
industrial base. The Navy greatly appreciates Congressional support in
overcoming the challenges posed by funding the OR Program,
characterized by the establishment of the National Sea-Based Deterrent
Fund (NSBDF) as an element of a funding strategy, and will work with
Congress to maximize the benefits provided by Economic Order Quantity
(EOQ), Advance Construction (AC), and Incremental Funding authorities.
[See page 15.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS
Secretary James. The programmed cost of current and planned
mitigation measures to reduce vulnerability associated with the
Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) convoy support mission is
$8.3M. These measures include the expansion of infrastructure and
personnel capacity, fielding of aerial gunnery capability, installation
of terrain avoidance systems, and establishment of multiple refueling
locations throughout the missile fields. For ICBM emergency security
response, the Air Force is unable to meet the full response requirement
because of the UH-1N's speed, range, and payload limitations.
Should non-Air Force assets and personnel be employed to perform
the emergency security response mission at the three ICBM wings,
preliminary estimates indicate the Air Force would incur approximately
$20M in up-front, one-time only infrastructure expenses (for hangars/
clam shelters, ramps, lodging, and operations/maintenance/alert
facilities). Additionally, approximately $40M in annual operating
expenses (for flight hours, per diem, and pay and allowance) would be
incurred by the service providing the interim capability.
The infrastructure expenses would be non-recoupable, regardless of
the timeline on which a replacement helicopter is fielded. However, it
is possible that the Air Force could repurpose some portion of this
infrastructure to support the operational requirements of a replacement
platform. The annual operating expenses incurred by the service
providing the interim capability would presumably cease once the Air
Force helicopter replacement program attains full operational
capability.   [See page 20.]
Secretary James. General Mitchell's study does say that the
worldwide ``launch capacity exceeds demand by a 3 to 1 ratio'' and
appears to be based on 2013 FAA Commercial Space Transportation
Advisory Committee data. My assessment is that we have the opportunity
to make the U.S. launch industry more competitive worldwide as
encouraged by our National Space Transportation Policy. In fall 2014,
the Air Force solicited feedback from industry via a Request for
Information. Those responses and continuous engagement with industry
provided evidence that a viable competitive launch market could exist
if commercial companies are able to close their business case with a
combination of commercial and government missions. This feedback
supports government investment in industry and enables the Department
of Defense, in accordance with National Space Transportation Policy, to
provide assured access to space with at least two families of
commercially viable launch vehicles that meet all National Security
Space requirements.   [See page 21.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 16, 2016

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN

Mr. Langevin. I believe we must ensure that you and your
counterparts here today have the flexibility and the agility needed to
acquire and utilize off-the-shelf capabilities that can quickly
transition to the warfighter. Can you describe how the services are
promoting public-private partnerships and leveraging the capabilities
of the private sector?
Mr. Murphy and General Milley. The Army works with the private
sector in a variety of ways. For example, we leverage the capabilities
of the private sector through the use of Other Transaction Authorities
(OTA). An OTA is a legally binding agreement that is not subject to the
traditional Federal and Defense Acquisition Regulations (FAR), which
apply to procurement contracts. Therefore, OTAs are more flexible
agreements. The Army recognizes the value and benefit of using OTAs to
bring new sources of technical innovation to the Department quickly and
economically to remain competitive in the commercial marketplace and
improve current capability. In Fiscal Year (FY) 2015, the Army had 240
OTAs valued at $634 million, double the amount in FY 2013 (117 totaling
$316 million).
Another way the Army leverages the capabilities of the private
sector is through the expertise resident in our labs and engineering
centers. Thanks to our highly skilled workforce of over 11,000
scientists and engineers, the Army is able to quickly assess the
ability for commercial solutions to meet the Warfighter needs (either
with or without modifications) and/or identify developing capabilities
that could address the immediate needs of the Warfighter. This is why
it is critical to maintain a strong Science and Technology enterprise
with a world class infrastructure and workforce.
Mr. Langevin. I believe we must ensure that you and your
counterparts here today have the flexibility and the agility needed to
acquire and utilize off-the-shelf capabilities that can quickly
transition to the warfighter. Can you describe how the services are
promoting public-private partnerships and leveraging the capabilities
of the private sector?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. The Department of Navy
(DON) has multiple initiatives in place, particularly within the Naval
Laboratories and Warfare Centers, where DON scientists and engineers
routinely collaborate with their private sector peers to identify,
evaluate and use off-the-shelf capabilities. Some examples include:
(1) Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs): Joint
research and development efforts allowing the sharing of facilities,
knowledge, experience and/or intellectual property between industry and
the DON. Provides data and intellectual property protection from the
Freedom of Information Act for an established period of time.
(2) Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) program: Promotes
small businesses and is phased to permit technology feasibility and
demonstration before full-scale development commercialization.
(3) Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR): Provides R&D funding
directly to small companies working cooperatively with researchers at
universities and other research institutions. STTR firms and the
research partner agree to a division of intellectual property prior to
the start of the STTR effort. As a result, each party retains the
intellectual property rights to technologies they develop under the
program.
(4) Memorandums of Understanding and/or Agreement (MOU/MOA): High
level agreements documenting and identifying areas of potential
collaboration and/or a strategy to do so.
(5) Patent License Agreement: Assigns the right to make, use or
sell government intellectual property. License fees and/or royalties
may be involved.
(6) Partnership Intermediary Agreements (PIAs): Allows DON
activities to partner with semi-private institutions to develop
potential interactions with State and local business entities.
(7) Other Transactions (10 U.S.C. 2371): ``Research projects:
transactions other than contracts and grants,'' allows for basic,
advanced, and applied research to be acquired through transactions
other than contracts, cooperative agreements, and grants. These
agreements stimulate new sources that have not historically dealt with
the Government.
(8) Educational Partnership Agreements (10 U.S.C 2194): Authorizes
the director of each defense laboratory to enter into one or more
education partnership agreements with educational institutions for the
purpose of encouraging and enhancing study in scientific disciplines at
all levels of education by loaning equipment, providing personnel to
assist in course development, and providing academic credit for
participation in research.
Mr. Langevin. I believe we must ensure that you and your
counterparts here today have the flexibility and the agility needed to
acquire and utilize off-the-shelf capabilities that can quickly
transition to the warfighter. Can you describe how the services are
promoting public-private partnerships and leveraging the capabilities
of the private sector?
General Neller. 1. Acquisition of Commercial Items. The current
acquisition process requires lengthy procurement action lead times
(PALT) and processes in order to award requirements that support our
Marines. For commercial off-the-shelf capabilities the Government can
utilize FAR Subpart 12.1, Acquisition of Commercial Items that provides
an expedited acquisition process.
Some of the other acquisition expediting tools that are utilized by
the Marine Corps are as follows:
a. External Contracting Waiver (ECW) Determination and Finding
(D&F) Process.
Marine Corps Systems Command and supported program executive
offices (PEOs) utilize the ECW D&F, enabling program managers to send
funding to other DOD components or civilian agencies to make awards
under existing contracts competitively awarded by the servicing agency.
This enables the Marine Corps to quickly obligate funds in order to
receive the necessary warfighting capabilities and technology solutions
without repeating the lengthy PALT times encountered by the servicing
agency.
b. Unsolicited Proposals. Private Sector firms can submit
``Unsolicited Proposals'' for innovative concepts and technologies. The
Government has stated interest in receiving unsolicited proposals that
contain new ideas and innovative concepts pertaining to our military
capability requirements.
An ``unsolicited proposal,'' as defined in FAR 2.101, is a written
proposal for a new or innovative idea that is submitted to an agency on
the initiative of the offering company (i.e., private sector firm) for
the purpose of obtaining a contract with the government, and that is
not in response to an RFP, broad agency announcement, or any other
government-initiated solicitation or program. For an unsolicited
proposal to comply with FAR 15.603(c), it must be: innovative and
unique, independently originated, and developed by the offering
company. The unsolicited proposal:
(1) Must be prepared without government supervision, endorsement,
direction or direct government involvement.
(2) Must provide sufficient detail to show that government support
could be worthwhile, and that the proposed work could benefit the
agency's research and development (or other mission responsibilities).
(3) Cannot be an advanced proposal for a contract requirement that
the offering company knows the agency will need and that could be
acquired by competitive methods.
c. Broad Agency Announcements (BAA). The Office of Naval Research
(ONR) utilizes BAAs under FAR Subpart 35.016, for the acquisition of
basic and applied research and that part of development not related to
the development of a specific system or hardware procurement. BAA's are
used by the Navy and Marine Corps through ONR to fulfill requirements
for scientific study and experimentation directed toward advancing the
state-of-the-art or increasing knowledge or understanding rather than
focusing on a specific system or hardware solution. ONR:
(1) Constantly seeks innovative scientific and technological
solutions to address current and future Navy and Marine Corps
requirements.
(2) Actively wants to do business with educational institutions,
nonprofit and for-profit small and other than small businesses with
ground-breaking ideas, pioneering scientific research and novel
technology developments.
d. Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDC).
Additionally, FAR Subpart 35.017, the provision for FFRDCs, enables the
Marine Corps to meet special long-term research or development needs
which cannot be met as effectively by existing in-house or contractor
resources. FFRDCs:

Enable government agencies to use private sector
resources to accomplish tasks that are integral to the mission and
operation of the sponsoring agency.

Are provided access, beyond that which is common to the
normal contractual relationship, to Government and supplier data,
including sensitive and proprietary data, and to employees and
installations equipment and real property.

Are required to conduct business in a manner befitting
the special relationship with the Government,

To operate in the public interest with objectivity
and independence,

To be free from organizational conflicts of interest,
and

To have full disclosure of their affairs to the
sponsoring agency.

Are operated, managed, and/or administered by a
university or consortium of universities, other not-for-profit or
nonprofit organization, or an industrial firm, as an autonomous
organization or as an identifiable separate operating unit of a parent
organization
It is not the Government's intent that an FFRDC use its privileged
information or access to installations equipment and real property to
compete with the private sector. However, an FFRDC may perform work for
other than the sponsoring agency under the Economy Act, or other
applicable legislation, when the work is not otherwise available from
the private sector.
e. Marine Enhancement Program. The Marine Enhancement Program
provides an opportunity for Marines, industry, and the public to
nominate commercial off the shelf items focused on the infantry
community for funding, testing, procurement, and fielding in a 9-24
month timeframe. The program utilizes a web based submission process
http://www.marines.mil/mep for nominations that anyone can submit. All
nominated items are reviewed and feedback provided to the submitter.
Outreach events and advertising are used to inform Marines and industry
about the program as recently as Marine South at Camp Lejeune NC on 6-7
April 2016. The program provides an opportunity for anyone with an
innovative idea for a commercial item that provides added value to the
Marines to have their idea heard and reviewed.
f. Modern Day Marine ``Integration with Industry'' Workshop. The
Integration with Industry workshop provides a venue for industry to
bring their product into the Marine Corps Systems Command's rifle squad
integration team for a collaborative integration workshop. The products
can range from prototype items to fully completed items ready for sale.
The integration team provides engineering and human systems integration
expertise coupled with all the rifle squad equipment and weapons to
enable a full system solution. The integration team provides the tools
and resources to conduct the workshop. Active duty Marines provide
feedback to the vendor on the usability and utility of the completed
integration solution. This event supports small business ventures that
may not have access to Marine Corps equipment in order to optimize the
integration of their product. This workshop has been offered to
industry during the annual Modern Day Marine event held in late
September at Quantico, VA.
2. Technology Transition

a. The Marine Corps Warfighting Lab provides for the
experimentation that enables adapting off-the-shelf capabilities.
Technology experimentation seeks to put prototypes into the hands of
end users, in relevant environments, to collect feedback on how well
those prototypes meet the users' needs. Technology must not only work
well in the laboratory but accomplish its mission when exposed to an
operational environment. MCWL works closely with ONR on Future Naval
Capabilities (FNC). FNC is an S&T program designed to develop and
transition cutting-edge technology products to acquisition managers
within three to five years. The program aims to deliver mature products
for integration into platforms, weapons, sensors or specifications that
improve Navy and Marine Corps warfighting and support capabilities.
MCWL and ONR facilitate informed Technology Transition Agreements with
program managers, which can tap into and rapidly adapt private sector
off-the-shelf solutions.
b. PEO Land Systems Marine Corps has published its Advanced
Technology Investment Plan (ATIP) 2016, the seventh edition of this key
document. The ATIP provides a thorough understanding of the S&T
challenges facing PEO LS programs and how proposed solutions/
technologies can meet those challenges. The document is accessible on
the Defense Innovation Marketplace (DIM), a web-based forum managed by
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering. The
DIM provides industry with improved insight into the R&E investment
priorities of the DOD. The Independent Research and Development program
is a contractor's own investment in basic and applied R&D for which DOD
may reimburse the company.
c. Naval Warfare Centers and Labs can be a means for private sector
participation when they award contracts for work not required to be
performed by government personnel. So too can Army organizations, such
as Tank-automotive and Armaments Command, and Aberdeen Test Center.
d. Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)/Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR). The Marine Corps utilizes the SBIR and STTR
programs established by Congress to strengthen the role of innovative
small business concerns (SBCs) in Federally-funded research (Federal R)
or research and development (R&D). Specific program purposes are to:
(1) Stimulate technological innovation;
(2) Use small business to meet Federal R/R&D needs;
(3) Foster and encourage participation by socially and economically
disadvantaged SBCs in working in technological innovation; and
(4) Increase private sector commercialization of innovations
derived from Federal R/R&D, thereby increasing competition,
productivity and economic growth.
SBIR has the advantage of tapping into a broad array of otherwise
innovative companies that may be marginally or infrequently engaged
with the Defense Department. It also is a relatively low-risk approach
with distinct stages of technology development and incremental levels
of investment. This provides off ramps if a technology is not panning
out--or allows the opportunity to elevate quickly a promising
technology to the next level of development.
e. Rapid Innovation Fund (RIF). The RIF provides opportunities for
agencies to award directly to companies who have demonstrated a
capability in response to DON requests for ``White Papers'' to meet an
innovative technology or need. MCSC is utilizing the Rapid Innovation
Fund program to transition innovative technologies (primarily from
small businesses) that can be rapidly inserted into acquisition
programs to meet specific defense needs. RIF efforts often build on
SBIR projects to transition mature technologies to programs of record.
In less than two years, a technology can go from mature to ready for
transition into a program for fielding. The deliberate planning and use
of these and many other science and technology tools enable program
managers to develop long-term strategies to modernize their programs.
Mr. Langevin. As we work to manage cybersecurity at an enterprise
level and evaluate the state of much-needed programs, such as OCX, it
is critical that the services understand the cybersecurity requirements
laid before them. Can you tell us how much was spent defending space
systems against cyber vulnerabilities last year, and how the Air Force
is working to incorporate cybertechnologies into requirements sooner?
Do you believe that other legacy systems may be vulnerable to
cyberthreats, and if so, to what extent?
Secretary James and General Welsh. Spending for the mitigation of
cyber vulnerabilities on space systems is included in developmental/
operational testing and information assurance (IA) efforts required for
Authority to Operate. These activities do not have discreet funding
lines and differ significantly from program to program.
The Air Force considers cybersecurity throughout cradle to grave
lifecycle, and is working to incorporate cyber technologies into
requirements sooner. Cyber technologies are incorporated into the
requirements process at Pre-Milestone A when the draft Capability
Development Document is written.
For space systems, Communications Squadron Next pathfinders will
examine standing up operations centers with manpower and tools to
actively defend ``blue'' networks, including the space control ground
networks. In addition, Headquarters Air Force, Air Force Space Command,
and 24th Air Force are analyzing the cost to employ cybersecurity
technologies in defending both the ground and space segments.
For other legacy systems, the Air Force has a Cyber Campaign Plan
(CPP) that will examine how to incorporate cyber resiliency
technologies into requirements earlier in the process. Specifically,
one planned line of action would integrate cyber system security
engineering into Air Force systems engineering. This effort
specifically would ``bake-in'' cyber resiliency to future warfighting
systems.
On a regular and recurring basis, the Air Force completes IA (level
1 and level 2) cyber threat assessments on legacy systems. These
assessments have indicated that cyber vulnerabilities do exist in our
legacy systems at a low level of risk; however, no definitive cyber
threat evidence has been found. Lines of action in the CPP examine the
possibility of using intelligence collection to validate cyber threats.
In addition, the CCP would also assess mission threads across the Air
Force and system-by-system vulnerabilities as well as demonstrating
mitigations.
Mr. Langevin. I believe we must ensure that you and your
counterparts here today have the flexibility and the agility needed to
acquire and utilize off-the-shelf capabilities that can quickly
transition to the warfighter. Can you describe how the services are
promoting public-private partnerships and leveraging the capabilities
of the private sector?
Secretary James and General Welsh. The Air Force promotes public-
private partnerships and leverages the capabilities of the private
sector this through multiple venues. For example, the Defense
Innovation Marketplace contains DOD research and development (R&D)
strategic documents, solicitations, and news/events on warfighter
requirements that can be fulfilled by leveraging commercial off-the-
shelf capabilities.
A second example of public-private partnership is the Air Force's
Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business Technology
Transfer program. The program stimulates technological innovation by
using small businesses to meet the Air Force's R&D needs. It also
offers frequent opportunities for small businesses to compete for
federal funding, build partnerships with program offices and industry
leaders, and to commercialize technological innovations. The Air Force
also uses Industry Days, Broad Area Announcements, Requests for
Information, and technology workshops to promote collaboration between
the Government, Federally Funded Research and Development Centers, and
the private sector to exchange information on off-the-shelf
capabilities that may quickly transition to fulfill warfighter needs.
A third example of an innovative public-private partnership is the
Other Transaction Authority (OTA) Agreements for the Rocket Propulsion
System Prototype Investment. These OTAs facilitate a competitive,
flexible selection process allowing the shared investment of a
commercially viable product with four industry partners supporting the
Air Force strategy to transition from the RD-180 engine.
Lastly, the Air Force also leverages the newly formed DOD-wide
initiative Defense Innovation Unit--Experimental. This initiative is
designed to create a hub for facilitating increased communication,
knowledge exchange, and access to innovating, high-tech start-up
companies and their leading edge technologies. By connecting the Air
Force with non-traditional companies developing inventive technological
solutions, this initiative enables the Air Force to learn how to
identify and leverage leading-edge technologies, business practices,
and ideas.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SHUSTER
Mr. Shuster. As you know, Patriot Missile Battalions are some of
the most deployed units in the Army, and crucial to our military
efforts around the world. Given this high operations tempo, how
comfortable are you with the level of readiness of Patriot Battalions?
General Milley. The Army Air and Missile Defense (AMD) force
continues to meet mission readiness requirements despite an
unprecedented rotation rate. AMD units are a key strategic enabler of
choice that provide a ready, reliable, credible, and non-provocative
deterrent force demonstrating U.S. resolve. We are constantly working
on initiatives to increase not only the readiness of our short range
air defense and Patriot batteries, but their availability and strategic
flexibility as well. These initiatives to reduce stress on the Patriot
force will improve operations tempo and personnel tempo challenges,
which may have a positive effect on readiness. We will assess the
progress of these initiatives and adjust as necessary.
Mr. Shuster. Do you believe that if Kim Jong-Un started marching on
Seoul tomorrow, we would have adequate Patriot resources available on
the Korean Peninsula?
General Milley. The Army, as part of the Combined and Joint force,
has enough Patriot resources to meet the requirements of the Combatant
Commander.
Mr. Shuster. Our industrial base is critical to supporting
readiness across the Armed Forces and particularly in the Army. In my
district I have seen firsthand the highly technical and extremely
important work being done at Letterkenny Depot, and I believe we must
continue fully support our nationwide depot network. My question is
this: Do you believe we have enough depot capacity to support the
Army's worldwide commitments? Do you specifically believe we have
enough depot capacity to meet the needs of Patriot recap and
recertification?
General Milley. Yes, we have sufficient capacity at the five
maintenance depots to sustain readiness and to support the Army's
worldwide sustainment maintenance requirements. Specifically, the Army
has sufficient capacity to modernize (recap) Patriot ground support
equipment and meet missile recertification requirements for the Patriot
Advanced Capability-2 missile at Letterkenny Army Depot. Additionally,
actions are underway to establish a capability for support to the
Patriot Missile Segment Enhancement
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CONAWAY
Mr. Conaway. Who at DOD is charged with overseeing the Farm-to-
Fleet initiative?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. DOD oversight for all
operational energy initiatives is conducted at the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense (Operational Energy), which reports to the Office
of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Energy, Installations, and
Environment).
Farm-to-Fleet is a Department of Navy (DON) partnership with the US
Department of Agriculture (USDA). DON participation in the partnership
is overseen by the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy
(Energy), which reports to the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Energy,
Installations, and Environment).
USDA, not the DoN, administers Commodity Credit Corporation funding
and makes payments to eligible alternative fuels producers.
Mr. Conaway. The National Defense Reauthorization Act for Fiscal
Year 2016 restricted the Department of Defense from making bulk
purchases of drop-in biofuels unless the price is at cost parity with
conventional fuels. Were CCC funds used by the DOD to bring biofuels
into cost parity with conventional fuels?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. Defense Logistics Agency
(DLA) Energy's September 2015 alternative fuel contract award fully
complied with applicable law, including the Fiscal Year (FY) 2015
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). While the FY 2016 NDAA was
not signed into law until November 25, 2015, DLA Energy's award was
also compliant with its requirements.
The law requires that the fully burdened cost of alternative fuel
purchased for operational purposes be cost competitive with the fully
burdened cost of traditional fuel. That determination of cost
competitiveness is made by DLA, not by the Department of the Navy or
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
DLA Energy's April 2015 Rocky Mountain West Coast (RMWC) bulk fuel
solicitation stipulated that alternative fuel producers who used U.S.
agricultural feedstocks might be eligible for up to $0.25 per gallon in
USDA Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) funding.
In September 2015, DLA issued a contract award to AltAir to supply
a total of 77.6 million gallons of F-76 containing a blend of 10
percent alternative fuel and 90 percent traditional fuel. The amount
paid by the Department of Defense for the AltAir fuel blend is
approximately $2.04 ($2.00 per gallon to AltAir for the fuel blend plus
$0.04 per gallon for transportation of the fuel). AltAir qualified for
just under $0.16 per gallon in USDA CCC funding.
To determine cost-competitiveness, DLA compared the alternative
fuel blend offered by AltAir with traditional fuel offers for both the
2015 and 2014 RMWC solicitations. AltAir's offer was not reduced or
otherwise lowered by the amount that would be paid with CCC funds.
Rather, DLA's cost competitiveness analysis considered the full $0.16
per gallon in CCC funding.
Mr. Conaway. Under what authority did DOD use USDA Commodity Credit
Corporation (CCC) funds to buy down the cost of biofuels?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. Pursuant to the Commodity
Credit Corporation (CCC) Charter Act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 714(c) et seq.,
alternative fuels producers who use U.S. agricultural feedstocks are
eligible for payments from CCC funding. The Department of Agriculture
(USDA) administers USDA CCC funding and makes payments directly to
eligible alternative fuels producers. This is consistent with the 2011
Memorandum of Understanding between the DoN, USDA, and the Department
of Energy.
As explained in the response to Question 14, the law requires that
the fully burdened cost of alternative fuel purchased for operational
purposes be cost competitive with the fully burdened cost of
traditional fuel. That determination of cost competitiveness is made by
DLA. In DLA's assessment of cost competitiveness for the 2015 Rocky
Mountain West Cost solicitation, DLA did not ``buy down'' or reduce the
cost of the alternative fuel from AltAir by the amount that would be
paid with CCC funds.
Mr. Conaway. Provide an accounting of all CCC funds expended by the
DOD under the Farm-to-Fleet initiative.
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. The Department of
Agriculture (USDA), not the Department of the Navy (DON) nor the
Defense Logistics Agency (DLA), administers USDA CCC funding and makes
payments directly to eligible alternative fuels producers.
Mr. Conaway. What is the current difference in dollars/gallon
between conventional fuels and biofuels that DOD is paying using CCC
funds?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. The price paid by the
Department of Defense (DOD) for the drop-in alternative fuel blend
supplied pursuant to the 2015 Rocky Mountain West Coast bulk fuel award
is equal to the price DOD would have paid for 100 percent traditional
fuel. In accordance with the terms of the solicitation, the alternative
fuels vendor qualified for $0.16 per gallon in Department of
Agriculture (USDA) Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) funding. USDA,
not DOD, administers the CCC funding and makes payments to the
alternative fuels vendor.
Mr. Conaway. Are there other service programs that expend money on
their behalf that was appropriated to other Federal Departments?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. Farm-to-Fleet is a
Department of Navy (DON) partnership with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. The other military Services are not involved in Farm-to-
Fleet. DON cannot speak to programs that the other Services may have
with other Federal Departments.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Lamborn. There has been a lot of talk on the need for
Goldwater-Nichols reform and our colleagues in the Senate have
undertaken a hearing series on the topic. a. What is the problem that
such reform is trying to solve? Is there a problem we need to solve? b.
How can we best prioritize the ``do no harm'' principle as we consider
potential major reform? c. How is the communication between the defense
committees and the OSD and Joint Staff working groups that are also
examining the same issues?
Mr. Murphy and General Milley. Although the Goldwater-Nichols
Reorganization Act of 1986 successfully restructured our national
security establishment, consideration of possible reforms is
appropriate and timely. The current global situation has changed
dramatically since the Cold War. There are opportunities worth
exploring. Potential consolidations within the military departments
could help make us a more agile institution, and better position us to
respond to and shape the future.
For specific answers to your questions, the Army defers to the
Office of the Secretary of Defense on this issue. OSD is the lead for
examining Goldwater-Nichols reform.
Mr. Lamborn. Can you each outline your top cyber challenges in
terms of manning, resourcing and authorities? Are you properly
resourced to handle these challenges?
Mr. Murphy and General Milley. Manning: Recruiting and retaining
the Army's cyber workforce, both military and civilian, remains a
challenge; one that arises from having to develop work role
requirements and competing opportunities in the private sector. On
September 1, 2014, the Army established a cyber branch and continues to
closely monitor its progress. Current manning will not prevent our
ability to respond to a cyber attack and support the Joint force.
Resourcing: The Army's number one priority is readiness. Current
funding levels require the Army to prioritize the advancement of cyber
capabilities and capacity. In accordance with the DOD Cyber Strategy,
the Army is building the capability and capacity to support our cyber
mission in an ever increasing operational tempo. The Army is
continuously trying to balance between readiness, end strength, and
modernization; a balance that takes years of stable funding levels and
flexibility in execution of resources to achieve. There are some major
initiatives still under review, such as Army Cyber Resiliency, that
will have resourcing implications; the full impact of these initiatives
on the Army's resources is unknown at this time.
Authorities: The Army is providing its portion of the Cyber Mission
Force in coordination with USCYBERCOM, operating under its current
authorities. Within the Army, we assess our current authorities as
sufficient to meet our mission.
Mr. Lamborn. There has been a lot of talk on the need for
Goldwater-Nichols reform and our colleagues in the Senate have
undertaken a hearing series on the topic. a. What is the problem that
such reform is trying to solve? Is there a problem we need to solve? b.
How can we best prioritize the ``do no harm'' principle as we consider
potential major reform? c. How is the communication between the defense
committees and the OSD and Joint Staff working groups that are also
examining the same issues?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. a. The Goldwater-Nichols
Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 was the last major
legislative initiative which sought to improve DOD efficiency and
effectiveness. In the 30 years since Goldwater-Nichols, evolving
threats and the emerging strategic environment compel us to identify
and evaluate potential reforms to ensure the Department of the Navy is
optimally organized to support Joint Warfighting in current and future
national security challenges.
b. During this period of military reform, our priority must be to
protect U.S. forces involved in military operations today and to
maintain those policies and structure that enable agile and effective
military responsiveness in the future.
c. The Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Staff have
kept the Services and Military Departments informed of the working
level dialog.
Mr. Lamborn. Can you each outline your top cyber challenges in
terms of manning, resourcing and authorities? Are you properly
resourced to handle these challenges?
Secretary Mabus and Admiral Richardson. Manning Current manning
meets Department of the Navy (DON) requirements, but it is an area of
concern, because we must compete with industry and the other Services
for cyber talent. DON and Joint mission demands are increasing, and
with the added need to support the Cyber Mission Force (CMF), cyber
manning will continue to be a challenge. Besides the fact that we
cannot compete directly with the salaries that our commercial
competitors can pay, we are further hampered by such impediments as the
slow, complicated Federal hiring process.
Authorities The DON has the necessary authority to execute its
cyber missions, however additional hiring flexibility will assist the
Navy in recruiting and retaining skilled cyber professionals (i.e.,
authorities similar to Title 10 Chapter 83 for cyber workforce).
Resourcing We are finding it increasingly difficult to address
steadily growing cyber requirements without jeopardizing mission
accomplishment elsewhere. For instance, beginning with its President's
Budget for 2015 submission, the Navy re-prioritized hundreds of
millions for Command, Control, Communications, Computers and
Intelligence (C4I) security. When a budget is already as lean as that
the Navy was working with, it is a nearly impossible feat to repurpose
such significant sums without creating unacceptable risk somewhere
else.
For the Navy and Marine Corps to do what they need to do to secure
their information and data, without jeopardizing operational success
elsewhere, considerable new investment will be required.
Training A shortcoming in the deployment of the CMF is a persistent
training capability. Request Congress' support in funding this training
capability that will prepare the CMF to conduct offensive and defensive
cyber operations.
Mr. Lamborn. There has been a lot of talk on the need for
Goldwater-Nichols reform and our colleagues in the Senate have
undertaken a hearing series on the topic. a. What is the problem that
such reform is trying to solve? Is there a problem we need to solve? b.
How can we best prioritize the ``do no harm'' principle as we consider
potential major reform? c. How is the communication between the defense
committees and the OSD and Joint Staff working groups that are also
examining the same issues?
General Neller. a. What is the problem such reform is trying to
solve? Is there a problem we need to solve? Over the last 30 years
since the enactment of the Goldwater-Nichols Act, the Department of
Defense and the Marine Corps have adapted to the end of the Cold War
and have fought major conflicts in the Middle East. In the meantime,
the overall global situation has changed and both our and our
adversaries' military capabilities have changed. We need to take a
critical look inward to ensure that we are properly structured and that
we have the correct processes in place in order to make the most
effective and efficient use of the resources provided by the congress.
The ``problems'' driving reform efforts are less about structures and
processes that are broken, but that were designed for previous threats
and an earlier global environment and have had to be adapted to the
present and to the future. These include the combatant command
structure that is regionally focused where our current and evolving
threats stretch transregionally, and if you include the cyber and space
aspect, globally. Our acquisition system has been built to accommodate
an older pace of technology development, where the government was in
the lead, and where numerous regulations have been added over time.
Many of these regulations were legislated for good reasons. However,
the result has been an unwieldy system that is not responsive and
doesn't allow service chiefs to exercise the responsibility and
authority which goes hand in hand with their accountability for
equipping the force.
b. How can we best prioritize the ``do no harm'' principle as we
consider potential major reform? The original Goldwater-Nichols Act and
other defense legislation mandated specific actions, but also provided
a great deal of flexibility to the Department. Flexibility in direction
has allowed us to evolve and adapt, to make corrections, without
recourse for new legislation. In order to maintain this positive
environment that supports growth and flexibility, we will take a
conservative approach to recommending actual changes in legislation,
and prioritize making changes within the authority already existing
under current laws. We will take the approach of focusing on the
outcomes we want, which allows for flexibility in the ``hows'', vice
trying to dictate very specific processes and structures that are
difficult to undo.
c. How is the communication between the defense committees and the
OSD and Joint Staff working groups that are also examining the same
issues? The Marine Corps has been participating in the OSD and Joint
Staff-led reform efforts and, from our perspective, have seen no issues
with their communication with legislative defense committees. However,
I would defer an answer to this question to the responsible OSD and
Joint Staff leadership.
Mr. Lamborn. Can you each outline your top cyber challenges in
terms of manning, resourcing and authorities? Are you properly
resourced to handle these challenges?
General Neller. We project MARFORCYBER's manpower models to be
sufficient to present forces to USCYBERCOM as planned in the Cyber
Mission Force build. While we anticipate achieving the hiring goals
required for MARFORCYBER teams to reach FOC, we will continue to face
challenges recruiting top-tier talent for critical, niche billets such
as tool developers. The demand for cyber-related military occupational
specialties has out-paced our ability to fill them, particularly in the
staff-noncommissioned officer ranks. In the near-term, we are
strengthening our manpower posture by employing manpower tools such as
re-enlistment bonuses and lateral movement career opportunities. Our
long-term solution will require a large-scale force modernization
effort of the communications/cyber occupational field. While we are
making strong progress towards building capacity and achieving
operational outcomes with our current resource baseline, maintaining a
credible force will remain a resource intense challenge beyond the
initial build due to the constantly changing cyber environment.
Equipping cyber teams with effective cyber incident response tools and
acquiring cyber tools to obtain real time awareness of network activity
and defend our networks, are our top priorities. We continue to refine
our requirements in response to the rapidly evolving threat
environment, leveraging industry and government resources where
appropriate. We continue to be challenged by the lack of a rapid
acquisition authority responsive enough to meet the demands of a
dynamic, rapidly changing operating environment. While we are working
within the service to refine our existing procedures, we continue to
accept risk by using acquisition procedures that favor efficiency over
effectiveness. Similarly, we remain challenged by the need to build and
maintain a specially trained, highly skilled workforce of contract
civilians to provide capabilities complimentary to those of the
uniformed force. Sourcing solutions constrained to lowest cost vendors
are unlikely to satisfy this requirement.
Mr. Lamborn. There has been a lot of talk on the need for
Goldwater-Nichols reform and our colleagues in the Senate have
undertaken a hearing series on the topic. a. What is the problem that
such reform is trying to solve? Is there a problem we need to solve? b.
How can we best prioritize the ``do no harm'' principle as we consider
potential major reform? c. How is the communication between the defense
committees and the OSD and Joint Staff working groups that are also
examining the same issues?
Secretary James and General Welsh. The Goldwater-Nichols Act has
been hugely successful in achieving joint levels of operation that we
did not have 30 years ago when the Act was passed. After 30 years of
experience operating under the Goldwater Nichols Act, a review can help
identify needed improvements. The trans-regional, multi-functional and
multi-domain integration required to engage in today's security
environment is quite different from 30 years ago. It is the right time
to assess roles and responsibilities to effectively plan and react to
threats; identify opportunities to ensure we continue to provide the
best military judgement and advice across the Joint Chiefs of Staff to
the President, Secretary of Defense and Service Secretaries; and
continue to find areas where we should eliminate duplication in
structure and staffs to put resources towards operational capability
versus management overhead.
As we consider potential major reform the ``do no harm'' principle
is very important. We suggest first consideration to the changes
developed and presented from the ongoing DOD Organization and
Responsibilities Review. Where there are more ambitious proposals for
reform being considered by defense committees from those proposed by
the Department, we should ensure they have been adequately studied and
there has been thoughtful discussion between defense committees and
Department leadership (to include Service Secretaries and Joint Chiefs)
before those proposals are legislated and acted upon.
Regarding communications between the defense committees and the OSD
and Joint Staff working groups the insights we have indicate they have
been helpful, but more discussion is needed as the Department
recommendations for reform and those proposed by defense committees
become more mature.
Mr. Lamborn. Can you each outline your top cyber challenges in
terms of manning, resourcing and authorities? Are you properly
resourced to handle these challenges?
Secretary James and General Welsh. To date, the Air Force has
fielded 26 Cyber Mission Force (CMF) teams at initial operating
capability or better and the remaining 13 teams are tracking toward
initial operating capability by the end of 2017. All 39 teams are
projected to be at full operating capability in 2018. Within the
current fiscal constraints, there are manning and resource challenges
in meeting these target dates:
The Air Force's top resourcing challenges are (1) establishing
Squadron support staffs and (2) creating adequate training capacity.
The resourced CMF billets (1,715 Air Force) did not include classroom
instructors, on-net trainers, polygraphers, and unit support staff. To
meet these requirements, the Air Force moved manpower authorizations,
hired additional personnel and organized support staffs within an
already strained force structure and budget. Further, the increased
training capacity requires an increase in physical space and some
modifications to existing structures to include: constructing a new
schoolhouse at Joint Base San Antonio; renovating the schoolhouse at
Hurlburt Field, Florida; and accrediting classrooms as Sensitive
Compartmented Information Facilities (SCIFs) at the existing Keesler
AFB schoolhouses.
With respect to authorities, there are no challenges. USCYBERCOM
possesses and has delegated the required authorities to subordinate
commands to accomplish their assigned missions.
To meet these challenges, the Air Force is partnering closely with
USCYBERCOM and the other services in the fielding of the cyber mission
force. Within the Air Force, we are continually monitoring and
adjusting personnel and training policies and processes to speed the
fielding of the cyber mission force, while building a sustainable Air
Force cyber enterprise.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. COFFMAN
Mr. Coffman. Since 2009, the Army has separated at least 22,000
combat veterans who had been diagnosed with mental health disabilities
or traumatic brain injury for misconduct. These discharges have
significant impact on those veterans' eligibility for benefits and
services from the Department of Veterans Affairs, including mental
health services. The Department has instituted several changes to its
discharge process to prevent the improper separation of servicemembers
suffering from PTSD, but I believe many are still falling through the
cracks, and thousands more were discharged prior to the Department's
changes. I also believe that this situation applies to all of the Armed
Services, not just to the Army. Do any of you believe that your
services' discharge review boards should be more friendly to veterans
appealing their discharge on account of PTSD diagnosis? And if so, do
you have any specific proposals?
Mr. Murphy. Yes, the Army Review Boards Agency (ARBA) is committed
to providing Army Veterans due consideration for each application.
Since June 2015, ARBA has taken a more aggressive approach in
requesting medical reviews of all cases involving claims of Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or Other Behavioral Health (OBH)
issues. As of November 2015, ARBA has a full-time civilian Clinical
Psychologist on staff specifically to review those types of cases. In
the near future, ARBA will add another civilian Clinical Psychologist,
a uniformed Clinical Psychologist and a civilian Psychiatrist.
If a previous applicant reapplies for a discharge upgrade and
claims PTSD, given the new guidance, ARBA will consider it as a new
case. As we review the Army process, we will identify any required
additional authorities and work them through the Department of Defense
accordingly
Mr. Coffman. Currently, veterans of the National Guard and Reserve
forces are disproportionally denied on their VA claims for service-
connected disabilities. I believe a major reason for this is the fact
that the services can decline to provide them separation physicals,
which are actually mandatory for active duty members. Do any of you
believe that end-of-service physicals should be permitted for National
Guard members and Reservists if they'd like a physical to document any
service-related injuries or disabilities? How do you ensure that Guard
and Reserve members' service-connected injuries are documented?
Mr. Murphy. In accordance with current policy, any Army Soldier,
whether Active or Reserve Component, may request a Separation Health
and Physical Exam (SHPE) even if one is not required. The Army believes
that every Soldier with a validated service connected injury should
receive treatment at a DOD military treatment facility, DOD TRICARE
network, or Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) facility. The Army
supports this by ensuring that all eligible Soldiers complete a SHPE
prior to separation in accordance with Headquarters, Department of the
Army (HQDA), Execute Order (EXORD) 162-15. There is a pending
Department of Defense Instruction (DODI) that will supersede this
guidance and apply to all Services. The Separation Physical and Health
Exam requirement applies to members of the Reserve Components on
contingency orders for greater than 30 days or active duty orders other
than training for 180 days or more.
Service-connected injuries, illnesses, or exposures for Reserve
Component Soldiers are documented and adjudicated using the Line of
Duty (LOD) determination process in accordance with AR 600-8-4. All
clinical documentation relating to the injury is captured in the Health
Readiness Record (HRR). Any Reserve Component Soldiers with an ``in
line of duty, yes'' (service-connected) determination are eligible for
treatment at a military treatment facility or through the Military
Medical Support Office (MMSO). If the Soldier does not reside in in the
general area of a military treatment facility, the Soldiers and his
unit, coordinates through MMSO for civilian provider care, which is
then paid through TRICARE. Soldiers may be eligible for loss-of-income
payments via the Incapacitation Pay (INCAP) program or Reserve
Components Managed Care (RCMC). Detection and discovery of service-
connected injuries can result from information transfer at the time of
injury, from PHA medical surveillance events, or from Soldier
disclosure. It is the Soldier's unit's responsibility to initiate an
LOD investigation as appropriate upon discovery. All clinical medical
documentation compiled over the career of the Soldier will be
electronically transferred to the VA via the Healthcare Artifacts and
Images Management Solution (HAIMS) interface upon request, or within 45
days of Soldier discharge, for use in determining disability.
Mr. Coffman. Please outline your plans for operationalizing the
Guard and Reserve forces? Where might the Air Force's model could be
applicable as a guide? What do you need from Congress to assist you in
working toward an operationally-ready Guard and Reserve Force?
General Milley. We are committed to operationalizing the Army
National Guard (ARNG) and Army Reserve in support of Army requirements.
This begins with increasing the number of ARNG Combat Training Center
rotations from two to four per year and increasing the number of Army
Reserve forces' annual training days. We also plan to increase ARNG and
Army Reserve Component deployments to Europe, the Middle East, and
Asia, reinforcing our commitment to the Army Total Force Policy. The
U.S. Air Force's associated unit model has proven instructive as we
examine additional ways to integrate Active and Reserve Component
formations in support of operational missions. The Army just announced
the Associated Units Program to associate ARNG units with Active
Component formations and vice versa to deepen ties and increase the
readiness of both components. Going forward, we request Congress fully
support the Department's Overseas Contingency Operations and Base
funding request for 12304(b) authorizations--roughly 3,000 man-years--
so that the Army can resource its Total Force Policy and operationalize
ARNG and Army Reserve forces.
Mr. Coffman. Since 2009, the Army has separated at least 22,000
combat veterans who had been diagnosed with mental health disabilities
or traumatic brain injury for misconduct. These discharges have
significant impact on those veterans' eligibility for benefits and
services from the Department of Veterans Affairs, including mental
health services. The Department has instituted several changes to its
discharge process to prevent the improper separation of servicemembers
suffering from PTSD, but I believe many are still falling through the
cracks, and thousands more were discharged prior to the Department's
changes. I also believe that this situation applies to all of the Armed
Services, not just to the Army. Do any of you believe that your
services' discharge review boards should be more friendly to veterans
appealing their discharge on account of PTSD diagnosis? And if so, do
you have any specific proposals?
Secretary Mabus. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Coffman. Currently, veterans of the National Guard and Reserve
forces are disproportionally denied on their VA claims for service-
connected disabilities. I believe a major reason for this is the fact
that the services can decline to provide them separation physicals,
which are actually mandatory for active duty members. Do any of you
believe that end-of-service physicals should be permitted for National
Guard members and Reservists if they'd like a physical to document any
service-related injuries or disabilities? How do you ensure that Guard
and Reserve members' service-connected injuries are documented?
Secretary Mabus. All members of the Department of Navy (DON)
preparing for release from active duty are required to take a
comprehensive Separation History and Physical Examination (SHPE) prior
to their scheduled date of release. This also applies to Reserve
Component (RC) members in an active duty status for 180 days or more or
RC members serving on active duty for a period of more than 30 days in
support of contingency operations.
Additionally, if at any time an RC member incurs or aggravates an
illness or injury while on active duty for 31-179 days, their current
health status will be documented on DD Form 2697, Report of Health
Assessment, before completing their scheduled tour of duty.
Service members separating from Selected Reserves not otherwise
required to receive a SHPE may request a SHPE within 6 months before
the scheduled date of separation.
All medical documentation from the SHPE is filed into the Service
member's Service Treatment Record. All Service members are required to
provide complete and accurate information for the documentation of the
history and symptoms of illnesses or injuries in the Service Treatment
Record. This includes documentation of care received from civilian
sources.
Mr. Coffman. Since 2009, the Army has separated at least 22,000
combat veterans who had been diagnosed with mental health disabilities
or traumatic brain injury for misconduct. These discharges have
significant impact on those veterans' eligibility for benefits and
services from the Department of Veterans Affairs, including mental
health services. The Department has instituted several changes to its
discharge process to prevent the improper separation of servicemembers
suffering from PTSD, but I believe many are still falling through the
cracks, and thousands more were discharged prior to the Department's
changes. I also believe that this situation applies to all of the Armed
Services, not just to the Army. Do any of you believe that your
services' discharge review boards should be more friendly to veterans
appealing their discharge on account of PTSD diagnosis? And if so, do
you have any specific proposals?
Secretary James. The Air Force Discharge Review Board (AFDRB)
adjudicates cases with a focus on fairness, equity and due process for
all who appear before the Board. While cases that entail a PTSD
diagnosis are a small subset of the total cases reviewed by the AFDRB,
the Board does provide close scrutiny for these cases, regardless of
the service characterization, and carefully addresses the unique
conditions related to a PTSD diagnosis and a corresponding
administrative discharge.
Prior to administrative separation from service, processes are in
place to ensure that mental health conditions are considered. All
Airmen subject to administrative separation are afforded a medical
evaluation. Members identified with PTSD or other potentially
disqualifying mental health conditions receive evidence-based treatment
and have their progress tracked by the installation Deployment
Availability Working Group (DAWG), which makes recommendations for the
appropriate disposition for members with conditions that may render
them unfit or unsuited for military service. Service members who have
served in an imminent danger pay area and have an unsuiting mental
health diagnosis as the basis for an administrative separation
recommendation have a secondary review of their case by an additional
mental health professional, the Air Force Surgeon General or their Flag
Officer designee. Additionally, if an Airman is being discharged for
reasons other than mental health, providers must consult with the DAWG
if the Airman reasonably alleges PTSD or traumatic brain injury (TBI)
affected their behavior or the conditions that led to their pending
discharge.
Through the AFDRB, mental health conditions of veteran's are again
considered. When a veteran's case reaches the AFDRB, all applications
receive review by a medical professional for any mental health
diagnosis (including PTSD and TBI). Applications with a mental health
diagnosis are referred to a Mental Health specialist (psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist) for thorough review. The Mental Health
specialist is also a voting member of the AFDRB for applications with a
mental health diagnosis.
These procedures ensure any behavior associated with the PTSD
diagnosis is addressed during the AFDRB proceedings and explained to
all AFDRB members. Additionally, the AFDRB offers the following
Personal Appearance options: personal appearances before the Board may
be made in the DC area (Joint Base Andrews, MD) and via regional video
teleconference (VTC) for other AF installations. Regional VTCs are
scheduled on a quarterly basis in Georgia, Texas, and California. The
Board is exploring the possibility of expanding the VTC option for
applicants to use other Federal Agencies (not limited to AF
installations). The Board is also reviewing options to include
Skype
TM
or Face Time related applications--including how to
handle the pre-hearing records review with the applicant. These options
allow all applicants an opportunity to present their case, including
those with a PTSD diagnosis who may have travel restrictions.
Mr. Coffman. Currently, veterans of the National Guard and Reserve
forces are disproportionally denied on their VA claims for service-
connected disabilities. I believe a major reason for this is the fact
that the services can decline to provide them separation physicals,
which are actually mandatory for active duty members. Do any of you
believe that end-of-service physicals should be permitted for National
Guard members and Reservists if they'd like a physical to document any
service-related injuries or disabilities? How do you ensure that Guard
and Reserve members' service-connected injuries are documented?
Secretary James. Yes, in fact Guard and Reserve members currently
have multiple avenues to report service-related injuries or
disabilities in a timely manner throughout their career. These include:
a) Members complete the mandatory AF Web Health Assessment (self-
reporting health status tool) annually IAW AFI 44-170, Preventive
Health Assessment.
b) AFI(s) 10-203, Duty Limiting Conditions and 48-123, Medical
Examinations and Standards, directs members to notify commander and
medical unit of any change in health status.
c) AFI 36-2910, Line of Duty (LOD) Determination, Medical
Continuation (MEDCON) and Incapacitation (INCAP) Pay directs members
who incur or aggravate an injury, illness or disease while in a duty
status to report within 24 hours to the member's commander and
servicing medical facility/unit. For Air Reserve Component (ARC)
members, when not in a duty status, report ideally within 72 hours or
less. This instruction also provides guidance for case managing to
ensure ARC members receive the proper treatment, evaluation, benefit
counseling, and referral services.
d) DOD requires a total of five Deployment Related Health
Assessments (DRHAs) [DRHA #1-DD Form 2795, DRHA #2-DD Form 2796, DRHA
#3-DD Form 2900, DRHA #4-DD Form 2978, and DRHA #5-DD Form 2978]. DRHAs
assist with the early identification and management of deployment-
related health concerns and conditions that may surface in the months
before or the months to years after deployment.
e) AFI 48-145, Occupational and Environmental Health Program,
ensures all occupational and environmental illnesses reported are
investigated, initiated in Air Force Safety Automated System (AFSAS),
and closed within 30 days IAW requirements in AFI 91-204, Safety
Investigation and Reports.
f) The Separation History and Physical Examination which occurs
after being on orders for named contingencies 30 continuous days or
greater, or on orders of 180 days or longer, DOD Instruction 6040.46.
Mr. Coffman. There have been recent discussions about eliminating
the use of the Atlas V launch vehicle. Please explain about how this
might increase costs or create scheduling delays for our national
security space program? Are there other risks or implications?
Secretary James and General Welsh. A majority of launches performed
by United Launch Alliance (ULA) use the Atlas V launch family. As a
result, not as many Delta IVs are produced and ULA has not maximized
the throughput for the Delta IV family. It will take time to increase
this capability, resulting in launch delays until ULA's manufacturing
capability catches up. This will lead to increased satellite storage
costs and increased costs to fund any obsolescence costs associated
with the Delta IV. Tory Bruno, CEO of ULA, publicly stated at the HASC
Strategic Forces subcommittee hearing on 26 Jun 15 that it costs 35%
more to build a Delta IV launch vehicle than an Atlas V. Since the
Delta IV is not commercially competitive, ULA currently plans to end
single core Delta IV production after Phase 1 launches are completed in
FY 2019.
ULA has committed to producing the Delta IV Heavy Launch Vehicle to
meet National Security Space (NSS) requirements for as long as the DOD
requires, funds, and/or until the ULA Vulcan or another New Entrant is
certified to meet those Heavy Spacelift requirements. At this time, the
pre-decisional Air Force estimate projects a cost increase in excess of
$1.5B to shift from executing Phase 2 with a mix of Falcon, Atlas V,
and Delta IV Heavy launches to a Delta IV/Falcon split buy. In
testimony Secretary James provided a range of $1.5 billion to $5
billion in potential extra costs for responsibly transitioning our
space launch from reliance on the RD-180 rocket engine. The $5 billion
estimate represents Air Force projections considering a worst case
scenario of an immediate loss of RD-180s. Such a scenario assumed
planned launches would be re-manifested, a lack of competition until
2022, and infrastructure for Delta IV rockets would be maintained.
Mr. Coffman. On the subject of space access and launch, can you
explain the Air Force's position on the necessity to optimize the
launch vehicle with the first stage engine?
Secretary James. As Dr. LaPlante, former Assistant Secretary of the
Air Force for Acquisition, testified during last year's Space Launch
Hearing, we know from our prior experience in developing rockets
throughout the past several decades that a rocket engine and its
associated launch vehicle must be designed concurrently. In essence, we
build the rocket around the engine. In cases where launch vehicle
families had new engines installed, the launch vehicles were either
significantly redesigned or the overall system was operated with
limitations that provided less capability than would have been possible
if the launch vehicle were redesigned. Technical challenges that must
be addressed include vibrations from the engine that ripple throughout
the vehicle during its travel, potentially damaging the satellite;
ensuring the launch vehicle structure can withstand these ripples and
loads without breaking; optimizing fuel storage and flow for the
engine's performance characteristics; and one of the greatest
challenges, combustion stability of a high-performance engine.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BROOKS
Mr. Brooks. Secretary Murphy, Congress has demonstrated their
desire for the Department of Defense to use Tubular LED (TLED) lights
to replace fluorescent lights through many legislative means in the
recent past. Congress has also encouraged the DOD to change the Unified
Facilities Criteria (UFC) to allow greater usage of TLEDs on military
bases. I was surprised to see that on 3 March 2016, the UFC was changed
to prohibit the Army from using TLEDs. Can you please explain why a
proven technology, which can save the Army over $50 million in energy
cost each year, is being banned in the face of Congressional will and
in contradiction to the Navy allowing TLEDs?
Mr. Murphy. The Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) prohibited
Tubular LEDs (TLEDs) in Army lighting projects due to safety concerns
over several TLED manufacturer recalls, as well as a lack of
consistency in vendor products. The Army has been following the
progression of the technology. TLED products have matured, and there is
now more consistency in the products, allowing minimum requirements to
be established. As a result, the Army has made the decision to allow
TLEDs in retrofit projects. Waivers to the UFC are being allowed while
the UFC 3-530-01 is being modified to allow TLEDs for the Army. The
change will be published by June 1, 2016. The lighting Unified
Facilities Guide Specification that identifies the minimum TLED
requirements will be published by May 15, 2016. These modified criteria
documents will give the Army an additional tool to reduce energy
consumption, while providing a safe solution for meeting our energy
goals.
Mr. Brooks. Secretary Mabus, Congress has demonstrated their desire
for the Department of Defense to use Tubular LED (TLED) lights to
replace fluorescent lights through many legislative means in the recent
past. Congress has also encouraged the DOD to change the Unified
Facilities Criteria (UFC) to allow greater usage of TLEDs on military
bases. Mr. Secretary, with your continued efforts to both introduce
innovation and to increase energy efficient technologies, I was
surprised to see that on 3 March 2016, the UFC was changed to restrict
the use of direct wire TLED on Navy facilities. I was pleased when the
Navy brought the new, safe direct wire TLED technology to the Fleet
with great energy and manpower savings. Can you please explain why a
proven technology, which can save the Navy more than $50 million
annually in energy cost for the fleet, is being banned in the face of
your efforts to provide a Navy that is on the cutting edge of
innovation?
Secretary Mabus. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Brooks. Secretary James, Congress has demonstrated their desire
for the Department of Defense to use Tubular LED (TLED) lights to
replace fluorescent lights through many legislative means in the recent
past. Congress has also encouraged the DOD to change the Unified
Facilities Criteria to allow greater usage of TLEDs on military bases.
I was surprised to see that on 3 March 2016, the UFC was changed to
prohibit the Air Force from using TLEDs. Can you please explain why a
proven technology, which can save the Air Force over $40 million in
energy cost year, is being banned in the face of Congressional will and
in contradiction to the Navy allowing TLEDs?
Secretary James. Over the last few months, the Air Force has been
meeting with experts from private industry, the other Services, and the
Department of Energy to ensure it understands the performance and
safety issues surrounding TLEDs. As the requirements for each Service
differ, the Air Force wanted to ensure the switch to permitting TLEDs
would not jeopardize the health and safety of its Airmen. Based on the
analysis conducted, the Air Force drafted a policy to remove the
prohibition of TLED lamps found in UFC 3-530-01, Interior and Exterior
Lighting Systems and Controls. This policy, which is currently in
coordination, had not been finalized in time to be incorporated into
the last UFC revision.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BRIDENSTINE
Mr. Bridenstine. The recent rise in nuclear threats from countries
like North Korea and Iran and non-state actors such as ISIS, who are
making serious and dangerous attempts to obtain nuclear material to
create a ``dirty bomb,'' puts our troops at increased risk for exposure
to dangerous levels of radiation. Given this nuclear threat, what is
the Army's acquisition plan to field a modern dosimeter system capable
of detecting radiation on the battlefield that is not susceptible to
being incapacitated by electromagnetic pulse?
Additionally, the United States Government has paid billions of
dollars to individuals who were exposed to radiation through their
participation in the nation's defense efforts. Modern dosimetry
technology allows the Government an equitable means to justly
compensate claims in a timely manner. What steps is the Army now taking
to ensure any fielded dosimeter system is capable of providing a legal
dose of record which can be maintained in a soldier's medical record
for the duration of their military career?
Mr. Murphy and General Milley. The Army's acquisition plan is to
field a modern dosimeter system capable of detecting radiation on the
battlefield that is not susceptible to being incapacitated by
electromagnetic pulses (EMP). This plan includes continuing to field
and use the current DT-236 series dosimeters and future fielding of the
Joint Personnel Dosimeter--Individual (JPD-I). The JPD-I will also not
be incapacitated by EMPs.
Dosimeters are designed to record and indicate the absorbed dose of
radiation received by Soldiers. The Army is ensuring that the dosimeter
system being used by warfighters correctly records the legal dose of
radiation in Soldier's medical records for the duration of their
service. The current system being fielded in the DT series, the DT-236A
and the JPD-I, are both able to provide this legal dose of record.
The Army plans to begin fielding the JPD-I to the Active and
Reserve Component in Fiscal Year 2020.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STEFANIK
Ms. Stefanik. Through the posture hearings of the past few months
we have heard about evolving strategic threats from a resurgent Russia,
destabilizing threats from both state and non-state actors in the
Middle East, and increasingly provocative activity coming out of the
Pacific region. I want to focus on readiness, but in the context of
emerging threats, and maintaining the edge on a 21st century
battlefield:
1) ISIL was able to establish a presence online that allowed them
to rapidly recruit and radicalize through social media at unprecedented
levels even in ungoverned space. What is the DOD capacity moving
forward to counter this capability through both digital technology and
messaging strategy?
2) We've seen cyber play a more significant role in our emerging
strategic challenges--how confident are you moving forward that our
cyber capabilities are robust enough to take on the threats of the
future? What level of risk are we assuming with our cyber community,
and what do you consider an acceptable level of risk when it comes to
our cyber capabilities?
General Milley. 1) With regard to countering ISIL capability
through digital technology, the Joint Force Headquarters Cyber has
prepared and continues to prepare forces to respond, in support of
Combatant Commanders, across the continuum of threats. DOD directed the
creation of 133 Cyber Mission Force Teams of which the Army is
responsible for creating 41 teams (37 Initial Operating Capability and
11 Full Operating Capability). A portion of these teams are actively
supporting U.S. Central Command operations. With regard to messaging
strategy, Army Service Component Commands support the appropriate
Combatant Command with synchronized messages and actions.
2) The Army is building our cyber capabilities to neutralize and
defeat the threats of the future. The Army's cyber initiatives are
synchronized with the Department of Defense. The Army is on track to
build our portion of the Joint Cyber Mission Force. We have developed
the Army Cyberspace Strategy that address our challenges and way
forward from building the cyber force to industrial outreach. When
assessing our risk to meet Combatant Commander and Departmental
requirements, to date, the Army has met the demands for cyber forces
and is meeting the Department's cyber goals. However, the Army is
concerned about the development of near-peer cyber threats and the
Army's capability to be resilient to those attacks and negate the
threats. In response to this concern, the Army developed a Cyber Strong
Resiliency plan and continues to monitor its impact.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. FLEMING

Dr. Fleming. General Milley stated before the committee: ``Less
than one-third of Army forces are at acceptable readiness levels to
conduct sustained ground combat in a full spectrum environment against
a highly lethal hybrid threat or near-peer adversary.'' He also
testified before the committee stating that increased end strength
would buy Army the time needed to mitigate its readiness shortfalls and
alleviate the strain on the force due to the high OPSTEMPO.
Is Army's readiness adequate and its OPSTEMPO sustainable for
meeting current and emerging requirements and how specifically would an
increase in Army's end strength mitigate the strain on the force and
build the readiness over time needed to challenge a near-peer adversary
like Russia?
Mr. Murphy and General Milley. The Army provides ready forces to
meet Combatant Command requirements however, this comes at the expense
of building core readiness required for future emergent and contingency
demands. Current operations tempo, growing global instability, and lack
of consistent and predictable funding over time will challenge the
Army's ability to regain and sustain the combined arms proficiency
needed for future contingencies.
An Army at 980,000 is at high military risk of being unable to meet
Defense Planning Guidance requirements to defeat an adversary in one
major combat operation while simultaneously denying the objectives of
an adversary in a second theater.
Dr. Fleming. General Milley stated before the committee: ``Less
than one-third of Army forces are at acceptable readiness levels to
conduct sustained ground combat in a full spectrum environment against
a highly lethal hybrid threat or near-peer adversary.'' He also
testified before the committee stating that increased end strength
would buy Army the time needed to mitigate its readiness shortfalls and
alleviate the strain on the force due to the high OPSTEMPO.
Dr. Fleming. General Dunford recently testified that: ``the Joint
Force will be stressed to execute a major contingency operation,'' and
that a ``response to aggression by another adversary at the same time
would be further limited.'' Please explain your assessment for how the
Army in particular will be ``stressed'' and ``limited'' in these
scenarios. In light of the ongoing changes in the strategic environment
as it relates to ISIS, Russia, China, and North Korea, would Army
recommend that the Department revisit its current force sizing
construct for the Army?
Mr. Murphy and General Milley. If asked to respond to a single,
major contingency operation involving high-intensity ground combat
against a modernized adversary, the Army will be stressed. Given
current global operational tempo, such a contingency may require use of
unready forces, delayed timelines, excessive casualties, and the
inability to achieve objectives. These risks are compounded for a
second adversary, and the Army may be limited in how it is able to
respond.

[all]
