- [H.A.S.C. No.114-41]CAPACITY OF U.S. NAVY TO PROJECT POWER WITH LARGE SURFACE COMBATANTS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-41]

CAPACITY OF U.S. NAVY TO

PROJECT POWER WITH LARGE

SURFACE COMBATANTS

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JUNE 17, 2015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TONGRESS.#13

________________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-316                            WASHINGTON : 2015
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia, Chairman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          RICK LARSEN, Washington
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
PAUL COOK, California                    Georgia
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            SCOTT H. PETERS, California
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana               GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Katherine Rember, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Forbes, Hon. J. Randy, a Representative from Virginia, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.................     1

WITNESSES

Fanta, RADM Peter, USN, Director, Surface Warfare (N96), U.S.
Navy...........................................................     2
Mercado, RADM Victorino G. ``Vic,'' USN, Director, Assessment
Division (N81), U.S. Navy......................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Forbes, Hon. J. Randy........................................    29
Mercado, RADM Victorino G. ``Vic,'' joint with RADM Peter
Fanta......................................................    31

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]
CAPACITY OF U.S. NAVY TO PROJECT POWER WITH LARGE SURFACE COMBATANTS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, June 17, 2015.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:02 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. J. Randy Forbes
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. J. RANDY FORBES, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Forbes. We want to welcome everyone to this hearing on
the Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee regarding the
capacity of the U.S. Navy to project power with large surface
combatants. I am going to, in the interest of time, waive my
opening statement and put that in the record because we
understand we may have votes at about 3:15 and we think this is
an important hearing. We want to make sure we get as much of it
in as possible.
We are delighted today to have two witnesses that have a
great deal of expertise in this matter. We have with us Rear
Admiral Peter Fanta, Director of Surface Warfare, and also Rear
Admiral Vic Mercado, the Director of the Assessment Division.
And in just a moment I am going to ask--I think, Admiral
Fanta, you are going to give the opening statement for both.
But I would like also, Admiral Mercado, if you would take just
a moment after that opening statement and give us a brief
overview of what the director of the Assessment Division does.
And Admiral, also after your opening statement, if you
would tell us a little bit about your capacity as director of
Surface Warfare, so our members have a good feeling of the
capacity you bring to the committee.
With that, I would like to recognize my ranking member, Mr.
Courtney, for any comments that he might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Forbes can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, in the
interest of time I am going to waive all opening remarks and
make sure the floor is available to our two witnesses as soon
as possible.
Mr. Forbes. Without objection, we will put all of the
opening statements and make them a part of the record. And with
that, Admiral Fanta, we look forward to any opening remarks you
may have for us.

STATEMENT OF RADM PETER FANTA, USN, DIRECTOR, SURFACE WARFARE
(N96), U.S. NAVY

Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir, thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Courtney. I will keep this brief so we can get to your
questions and hopefully satisfy you with our answers.
You asked us today to discuss the capacity of the large
surface combatants in the United States Navy [to] project
power. The cruisers and destroyers we have of today were
created during the height of the Cold War. That said, we didn't
rest on our laurels. We have continued to upgrade them and
modernize them over the past 30 to 40 years of their service
life, and we will continue to do so.
We took that technology that was in there from the 1960s
and 1970s and we have continued to modernize it and evolve it,
and in fact, the technology going in today's destroyers are the
height of what is available around the world in that level of
surface combatant.
Bottom line is, we are installing these advanced
technologies on our new surface combatants because if we cannot
own the seas and control the seas, we cannot project power from
the seas.
You asked us about the capacity of large surface combatants
to project power. The answer is not a simple one, but really a
three-phased question and a three-phased answer.
We have the fight today and what is our capacity and
capability to do that. We have the fight in the near- to
midterm, maybe 5 or maybe 10 to 15 years from now. And we have
a peacetime presence and deterrence mission. All those have to
be factored in, as my colleague, Admiral Mercado, will tell you
about how he factors all those when he checks my math on
whether I have enough ships. So it is really not just about a
single answer, but it is a multitude of answers we have to put
together.
If you ask me about the fight today and can we win against
a near-peer adversary, the answer is, absolutely. Now there is
always risk in war and we might take some damage here and
there, but against a near-peer adversary in a fight today
against the United States Navy, we will prevail.
That is based upon our best intelligence estimates of what
is out there throughout the world and what our capabilities are
against those assets. But that is today.
Tomorrow's fight is slightly different, and it must be an
estimate of where we think we will get in tomorrow's fight. And
that fight may be 10, 15, or 20 years down the road. And again,
you are asking us to provide our best guess on what we see
based on what is evolving in technology and where our current
technology is to counter these new threats.
So what we will tell you here is that we see risk in
tomorrow's fight. If we do not modernize fast enough, if we do
not build fast enough, if we slow down our build rate of large
surface combatants, if we slow down our modernization rate of
large surface combatants, there will be a risk when the
advanced threats arrive in numbers from the development stages
they are in now to a production stage from a potential
adversary sometime in the next decade-plus. That is the war
fight.
I will keep this brief and just quickly describe the
noncombat operations or the presence operations. Those are
governed by what we call the Optimized Fleet Response Plan.
That is basically a long sentence to tell you how long we
deploy for and how often. We deploy optimally for 7 months out
of every 36. The rest of that time we are not sitting there,
but we are training, we are modernizing our ships, we are
maintaining our ships, and we are making sure our sailors know
how to fight our ships.
We also maintain a surge capability in case something comes
up in the world. So that is that blend that we have between
today's fight, the fight of tomorrow 10 to 15 years down the
road, and what we have for peacetime presence.
When I don't have enough ships, I have to take risk or I
incur risk, and that is whether in the war fight or in the
peacetime presence requirements somewhere around the world. We
will talk to you about, when asked, about ballistic missile
requirements, about high-end warfighter requirements, about
peacetime presence requirements, and what that capability and
capacity mix is between them.
It is not just about large surface combatants. I am the
director of Surface Warfare for the United States Navy. You
asked what I do. I buy not only ships and weapons systems, I
also buy the sailors--I pay for the sailors that man them. I
make sure they are trained and pay for their training.
I buy everything from training systems to Tomahawk cruise
missiles. I buy civilian manpower, and I buy civilian milling
machines in our shipyards. I buy everything from advanced
weapons systems to sailors to sonars.
Funding all these puts pressure on just the simple number
of capacity of our large surface ships to do their job, but I
have to have this blend of high-end capability and the numbers
we need. It takes me 15 years to develop and field a new ship.
It takes me 7 years to develop and field a new weapon system. I
have to make sure I am keeping an eye on both of those to make
sure that someplace 15 years down the road we are not short on
ships or we don't have an advanced capability that does not
allow us to win the future war fight.
So whether we are at wartime steaming or peacetime presence
operations, the number of ships determines if we are at sea.
The sailors, weapons, readiness determines how capable and
lethal we are. Presence without lethality and without a capable
force is impotence. Presence with a lethal and capable force is
deterrence against any future adversary.
With that, we are standing by to answer your questions. I
have already described slightly what I do. I buy surface ships,
weapons, sailors, training, modernization, maintenance, and
everything in between.
I own the movies that they watch in the evening when they
are off watch. I own putting ice cream machines on the mess
decks so they can put on that extra 5 pounds in deployment. I
also own the ability to shoot down long-range ballistic
missiles when they are coming at our carriers. I own that range
of everything that you see, and I make sure our sailors are
ready to operate and maintain these systems.
Over to my colleague, Admiral Mercado.
[The joint prepared statement of Admiral Fanta and Admiral
Mercado can be found in the Appendix on page 31.]

STATEMENT OF RADM VICTORINO G. ``VIC'' MERCADO, USN, DIRECTOR,
ASSESSMENT DIVISION (N81), U.S. NAVY

Admiral Mercado. Mr. Chairman, members of the committee,
thank you for allowing me to appear before you today. The best
way to describe my job, and Admiral Fanta alluded to it, is I
grade homework. I am the director of Assessments Division. As
you all well understand that we have many, many competing
requirements and we have very limited resources, or a finite
number of resources.
So I have a team that goes through and assess all the
programs and things that Navy can invest in and give my
recommendation to the CNO [Chief of Naval Operations], based on
a priority of what I call integrated warfighting. So we have
threats that are out there that we project out into the future
in the near term, and then we have a number of programs
designed to pace or outpace those threats. My job is to review
those, assess them based on data, and make the recommendation
to the CNO.
I have been in this job now for about 6 weeks, and
previously I commanded Carrier Strike Group Eight out of
Norfolk.
[The joint prepared statement of Admiral Mercado and
Admiral Fanta can be found in the Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Forbes. Well, thank you both for being here. I am going
to use just a little bit of my time for my opening statement
for questioning, but help me, and either of you can respond to
these. No magic in the order or who would respond.
But as we look right now, one of the concerns we have, of
course, is with our surface combatants and how many we are
going to need as we look out to the future. But also one of the
things that impacts that is the deployment cycles that we are
on right now. Both of you have spoken with Mr. Courtney and I
about the concern we have with current deployments being as
much as 9 months on some of our ships.
Can you tell me why that has a negative impact and what we
are doing to try to mitigate that and reduce those down?
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir. Average deployment length right
now that we are seeing across the Navy is 9.2 months, based on
the data we have seen over the last about 2 years. That is a
function of being everywhere to cover every contingency that we
have been asked to for the last several years.
Some ships that we have have been on four deployments in 4
years. We recognize that is a strain on our force. That is a
strain on our sailors, that is a strain on the ships
themselves, that is a strain on whether I can modernize them
fast enough, and that is a strain on, frankly, our resources
and our funding. Because every time I keep it out at sea I have
to bring it back and fix even more things because I am
exceeding that 7 months out of 36 that I would ideally deploy a
ship.
So what we are doing to counter that is we are
establishing, as I said in my opening statement, this fleet
response plan that allows us to get on a steady-state operation
that blends this modernization, maintenance, training, and
surge time to match what we would ideally like to be a 7-month
deployment out of a 36-month cycle.
We are not there yet. We have just deployed our first--or
we have just put our first strike group into that process. This
is a learning time for us to see where the pivots and where the
shortfalls are on it, but we are on the track to get to that
stability, and our intention is to get to that stability in the
late teens to early 2020s with the full-up strike groups being
on that cycle.
With the number of ships we have right now, that will be a
challenge, but as you know, I am building ships at a rate and
keeping ships on board at a rate that I expect in the early
2020s allow me to get to those deployment cycles of maybe not 7
months but someplace between 7 and 8 months.
Mr. Forbes. So would it be fair to say, as you just
mentioned, that the number of ships has a huge impact on
whether you can get down from that 9.2 to your goal of 7?
Admiral Fanta. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Forbes. And would it also be fair to say that if you
don't get down to that goal, as you mentioned it puts an
additional strain on your sailors, which I take it would mean
strain on their families, strain on their lives, and maybe even
strain on your difficulty in retaining those sailors.
Admiral Fanta. All those are a blend, sir. When we resource
this, all of this, we have to put all of this together, and
that includes the recruiting of new sailors and the retention
of current sailors.
Mr. Forbes. So it would have an impact on both the
recruitment of new sailors and the retention of existing.
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir, it would.
Mr. Forbes. Also it has an impact on the lifecycle of our
ships and how many years we can get out of those ships. Is that
fair to say?
Admiral Fanta. I can't tell you an exact number, but if I
deploy four times in 4 years, there will be an impact on
whether I can get that ship to 35 years of service life, 38
years of service life, or ideally what I would like to do, 40
years of service life.
Mr. Forbes. And if we don't have the number of ships that
we need, you mentioned two things in your opening statement,
and I know I specifically told you that you didn't have to put
your written statement in, but in your written statement you
talked about a third. So you mentioned war fight and peacetime
presence.
But also both of you in your combined written statement
talked about the importance of deterrence, and that is a part,
I guess, of the peacetime presence. Is that correct?
Admiral Mercado. Yes, sir. I say it is a combination. It is
a part of our peacetime presence, but also that high-end
warfighting capability that we have strategically as a Navy I
think serves to underpin any kind of deterrence whole-of-
government model. So yes, we have to be there and we have to be
forward deployed. We have to support the COCOM [combatant
command] demand and the peacetime presence as outlined in their
theater campaign plans.
But also we need to preserve our capability and capacity to
conduct high-end warfare against a near-peer competitor. As
long as we also show that and demonstrate that, I say that also
underpins any deterrence strategy.
Mr. Forbes. So it would be fair to say if we have fewer
ships, if we don't have the deployment time so that we can do
the high-end training that you would need, it could impact our
deterrence capabilities.
Admiral Mercado. Yes, sir, and I think the fleet response
plan model that Admiral Fanta talked about helps us get on that
road. I mean, we need to get discipline into starting our
availabilities on time, ending them so we can go into a
consolidated basic training phase and get the ships trained in
the basics of getting underway and fighting the ships
individually.
Then we go into what we call the integrated phase so we can
get--gather them together to fight as a carrier strike group.
Mr. Forbes. So--I am sorry. I didn't mean to cut you off.
Admiral Mercado. I am saying what we lose when you talked
about continuous deployments, we lose that opportunity to go
back and bring the ships back, to get them into that training
cycle because high-end warfare capability and training
atrophies over time because even when you are deployed and you
face an adversary, it is never to the level that you see when
you ramp up during your training in the fleet response plan.
Mr. Forbes. So if I look at that fleet response plan, and
Admiral Fanta, maybe you can help me with this, but we were
also talking about our BMD [ballistic missile defense]
requirements. And as I understand it, the current BMD
requirements are 40. I think your goal, and you now have 33
ships. Is that correct? Don't let me put words in your mouth.
Tell me if I am incorrect.
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir. My requirement at this point is 40
advanced capability ships that have the capability of both
knocking down an incoming ballistic missile while
simultaneously looking for and firing upon an incoming cruise
missile that is at the surface of the ocean. So that is a
minimum of 40 advanced capability ballistic missile ships.
I have approximately 33 ballistic missile capable ships.
That is not to say they are advanced to that level. And we will
reach that in a current build rate of that 40 ships in
approximately the mid-2020s at this point, of those advanced
capability ships, sir.
Mr. Forbes. So you need on your requirements 40 with the
advanced capabilities. Right now you have 33, but they do not
all have advanced capabilities on them.
Admiral Fanta. That is correct, sir. We are modernizing
those ships, and we are building more with the advanced
capability even as we speak.
Mr. Forbes. Does your fleet modernization plan apply to the
BMD ships, as well?
Admiral Fanta. Ideally it will when we implement it, but at
this point----
Mr. Forbes. I am sorry, the fleet response plan.
Admiral Fanta. The fleet response plan, yes, sir. Ideally
it will. At this point it is primarily--we have started it
around the carrier strike group. A lot of the ballistic missile
deployers are independent deployers, so what we would do
eventually is to bring them into that response plan. They are
not necessarily currently under that cycle. That would be out
toward the 2020s before we put all these together.
Mr. Forbes. So it would be fair to say that today we have
the need for 40 with the advanced capability. We only have 33,
and they do not all have the advanced capabilities. And that
right now we do not really have a plan of getting those
deployments down from the average 9.2 to 7 or something around
there for our BMD-capable ships. Is that fair?
Admiral Fanta. Let me adjust that slightly, sir. There is a
difference because the advanced capability ships are primarily
used to defend Navy assets in a high-end fight at sea against a
near-peer competitor with advanced capabilities. The BMD ships
that I spoke of earlier that we have in the low 30s right now
and continue to build more, are primarily for COCOM requests to
defend other assets such as defended asset lists in various
parts of the world.
So they are perfectly capable of handling advanced threats,
but just in that one BMD capability. What we don't want to do
is mix the peacetime presence requirement of those--I won't
call them lesser capable, but baseline capability ballistic
missile ships with the advanced ones I need to beat a high-end
competitor at sea in the middle of a fight in the middle of the
ocean.
Mr. Forbes. And I am going to try not to be too much
longer, but I just want to make sure I have got this. On the
40-ship requirement that you have, and I know that is for the
advanced capability, you now have 33 BMD-capable ships, not all
with the advanced capability.
But it is my understanding from what you have said that I
really do not at this time--I hope to later--have a plan that
will help me get the deployments down on the ships that I have
from that 9.2 to roughly 7 to 8 months at that time. Is that
fair?
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir, that is fair. It is not that we
don't have a plan. It is that we need to get to the numbers to
allow us to implement.
Mr. Forbes. So you would need more numbers to get there.
Admiral Fanta. I would need more total numbers of
capability, not capacity. In other words, I need to modernize
to get to those numbers.
Mr. Forbes. So you would need more numbers to get there,
and then two last bullet points and then I will shift to Mr.
Courtney. The demand signal is actually much higher than the
requirements. Your current demand signal from the COCOMs for
BMD ships would be around 77 ships. Is that fair to say?
Admiral Fanta. The demand signal is twofold, sir, for a
high-end naval war fight and protection of naval assets and our
bases that we need to fight in various places of the world is
those 40 ships I discussed.
Mr. Forbes. Okay.
Admiral Fanta. On top of that, COCOMs have a requirement,
and if you look at it from another X number of spots, today it
might be 77, all right, total ships, including the 40, 77 spots
around the world that we might put a ballistic missile defense
ship to cover some contingency of some nation threatening us or
threatening an ally or threatening a vital asset with a
ballistic missile at that point.
So if you don't think upon it as I need a ship there all
the time, it is a spot in the ocean where I might need a ship
sometime in the future against a potential adversary that
threatens us or an ally.
Mr. Forbes. But you can't cover all of that today with the
current fleet that we have. Would that be fair to say?
Admiral Fanta. That is fair. I need to modernize to get to
those numbers.
Mr. Forbes. And you need more numbers.
Admiral Fanta. I need to at least modernize. If I have
every ship modernized to the point where every ship can handle
that threat, then the numbers work out correctly.
Mr. Forbes. Let us go back to the 33 that you have got.
Would it help you if this committee could help you get 3 more
ships and you had 36 versus 33?
Admiral Fanta. It depends on when, because----
Mr. Forbes. Suppose we could give them to you tomorrow.
Admiral Fanta. Then it would always help, yes, sir.
Mr. Forbes. Suppose I could get you, instead of three I
could get you six. Would that help you better than the three?
Admiral Fanta. I can't build them that fast but----
Mr. Forbes. But let us assume I could.
Admiral Fanta. If you could, absolutely.
Mr. Forbes. The flipside, would it hurt you if you had less
than the 33?
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir. From a warfighting perspective.
Mr. Forbes. Then tell me how in the world the Navy can
suggest that we can take out 11 cruisers when 5 of those have
BMD capability on them.
Admiral Fanta. Because of the way that I am blending in the
capability, that advanced capability.
Mr. Forbes. That is not my question. I don't want to put
you on a difficult spot, but here is what I am saying. You have
just told me if you have five more, it will help you
significantly.
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir.
Mr. Forbes. We have got five cruisers out there with BMD
capability that the Navy is telling me they want us to pull
offline today. So I am not promising you those next month or 6
years. I am saying, you have got them today, and the Navy is
telling me they want to take them out of that fleet.
It has got to make sense that that would hurt us and
stretch us on our BMD capabilities that we currently are
looking at today. So explain to me how that would not.
Admiral Fanta. Yes. First answer is yes.
Mr. Forbes. Okay.
Admiral Fanta. Second----
Mr. Forbes. Go ahead. I don't want to cut you off. You
answer.
Admiral Fanta. I have more concerns 5 to 7 years from now
when the numbers of threats increase----
Mr. Forbes. I have got you there.
Admiral Fanta [continuing]. So I would rather have those
cruisers available at that time.
Mr. Forbes. But what you are saying is, and you have been
fair in saying this, you are taking risks today so that you
will have them tomorrow. But what we are also saying is, and
the Navy is telling us this because the Navy, when they first
came out, suggested we took seven of those cruisers out. Never
even talked about having them tomorrow. The Navy doesn't have
them in their FYDP [Future Years Defense Program] at all.
Basically what I think we can agree on is if you have five
less BMD-capable ships, it is going to be much more difficult
for you, at least in the short term, than if you had those five
cruisers. Is that fair to say?
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir.
Mr. Forbes. With that, I ask Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and to both witnesses
for your testimony and your service. Again, I just want to sort
of go back over a point that the chairman touched on a moment
ago, which is the request from the combatant commanders, which
we hear a lot about on this committee, and then obviously the
Optimized Fleet Response Plan.
How do they sort of intersect and, you know, does someone
have to kind of adjudicate, you know, the signals and the plan?
Admiral Mercado. Sir, when we talk about the requirement,
we have talked about--I think you have been briefed on this
force structure analysis and the number has been talked about
40 BMD. So if we talk about 40 BMD, that is the latest update
we did to the force structure analysis that defines what the
BMD requirement is for Navy-unique missions. Which is, you
know, we have ships that defend fixed land sites. So if we
needed to come up with a number, say, to defend the sea base
and to defend expeditionary sites, the number for that is 40.
Now when you get into COCOM demand, they will put out
today's requirement, and based on situations that are evolving,
we see Syria, any number of situations, so the COCOMs will come
up and say, here is the demand. We need two, three, five sites.
I guess the 77 number is their potential sites for all COCOMs
that they have identified that they could use a BMD ship for.
So when that demand comes in, based on the inventory that
we have available today, not out of maintenance or things, then
we will try to source that. If we cannot then it has to be
adjudicated. Then we go back and work with the COCOM Navy,
COCOM Joint Staff, and OSD [Office of Secretary of Defense] to
adjudicate who--which COCOM will get the ship and which will
not.
Mr. Courtney. Again, talking about the short term which you
alluded to a moment ago. I mean, the balloon goes up if there
is just some all-out conflict going on which we have a national
security interest in and the order goes out. I mean, you have
obviously got the structured force plan.
But describe what happens if that is the case. Does the
plan get set aside and, you know, all hands on deck?
Admiral Fanta. Sir, the plan is just for peacetime and
presence operations to allow us that stability. If the balloon
goes up as you describe it, we surge everything that we need as
fast as we can. We have faith in both the industrial capability
of the country to patch up in days and weeks what it normally
takes months and years to do.
We have faith in our training systems and our training that
our sailors will be ready. We will strip everybody from every
schoolhouse as an instructor that has already got that high-end
knowledge and put them to sea, and plus-up where we need to go,
and we will go fight and we will take everything, and we will
put it into that fight. Now that is against a high-end near-
peer competitor. But we will surge everything we have, and we
have sufficient capacity to do that at this point.
One of our assumptions is that if we get into a fight, all
this nice time about how long you are at home and how long you
are at sea and how much time you get from maintenance goes
right out the window and we go fight the fight. We don't stick
to a plan just because something, you know, something else
happens in the world. Yes, sir.
Mr. Courtney. And your testimony, Admiral, earlier was that
you feel that, you know, in terms of a near-peer competitor, I
mean, right today in the near term we are actually in a strong
position to, you know, make sure that our country is protected.
Admiral Fanta. I have sufficient capability and capacity in
my large surface combatants. I will not speak for the rest of
the Navy. I get to be very parochial in my job. I get to deal
with surface warfare only. Of my large surface combatants, to
fight that large fight today, against the capability and
capacity that I see out there in advanced threats from a near-
peer aggressor.
Mr. Courtney. So looking out 10 years from now or 15 years
from now, I mean, what keeps you up awake in terms of--or at
night, rather, what keeps you awake at night thinking about
that timeframe?
Admiral Fanta. So I am concerned that I will not be able to
modernize, or build new, fast enough to be able to get to the
capacity you and the chairman have mentioned, in that 10 plus
or minus year period. So I right now, based on what we assume
and what we think will happen around the world on build rates
of advanced weapons, that is where we start to worry about the
capacity and capability. That is where we think that our
biggest risk lies right now, and that is what we are judging
ourselves against.
Mr. Courtney. And the existing shipbuilding plan talks
about, again, the number of large surface combatants starting
to go up probably within the next decade or so. I mean, does
that give you some sort of margin for error?
Admiral Fanta. So my shipbuilding plan in the late teens,
early 2020s, exceeds my current 88 number that we have set as a
minimum of Navy large surface combatants. I get to just over
100, and then my decision point becomes on whether I can keep
the oldest destroyers, that, by the way, I am modernizing first
right now with some advanced capability.
If I can keep those to more than 35 years of life then I
can stretch them for about 5 years to 40 years of life. These
are large capital investments. Surface shipbuilding of any sort
is the largest single expenditure other than entitlements the
United States Government bestows on any program, so we intend
to keep those as long as possible.
Allowing us to keep those to 40 years by maintenance and
modernization then keeps me above that 88 minimum requirement
well into the mid-2020s, sir.
Mr. Courtney. Which just about coincides with the Ohio
replacement sort of surge in the budget, which again, the
shipbuilding plan assumes that future Congresses are going to
find money for that, or that we are going to implement our Sea-
Based Deterrence Fund to, you know, shield the rest of the
fleet. But again, I mean, that is actually not a bad hedge to
deal with that challenge, which is going to be, you know,
definitely a reality for the Navy in the 2020s.
Admiral Mercado. Sir, I would say that you have hit on my
biggest concern. First of all, since I look across the
spectrum, I can say that our assessment is that as a Navy we
can deal with a near-peer competitor with some risk. The number
that we have talked about here, 88, is the minimum requirement
that we see we need to address steady-state requirements, and
the most stressing scenario that we see, which is a near-peer
competitor fight.
But those numbers also assume that the ships are properly
maintained so that they--and used so that they reach their
expected service life. If that doesn't happen then that is a
concern.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Conaway is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Conaway. Well, thank you.
Thank you, gentlemen. If we had more than one high-end
near-peer competitor come at us, the assessment looks like
what? At the same time.
Admiral Fanta. If we have more than one high-end near-peer
competitor today, as far as numbers we would split our forces
and the risk would increase. I cannot tell you that. It depends
on the scenario, the ocean, where we are, and how determined we
both are.
Admiral Mercado. My assessment, sir, is based on a single
near-peer competitor.
Mr. Conaway. Right. Seven-month deployment, existing ships.
You guys live this stuff every day. It is second nature, and
members of the committee have a little bit better
understanding, but we have got to convince other folks in this
conference that don't have the insights as to what that looks
like and why it is important that we get there. We need
graphics or metrics.
Can you describe what, if you take--if you were limited to
7-month deployments with these ships, obviously the other
stretch is you are not everywhere you need to be or you want to
be, and you are not doing all these other kind of things.
How do we describe to other policy deciders what that gap
looks like from if you--you know, if you were just sticking
with the 7 month in this deal versus what we give up, where we
are not, all those other kind of risks that associate.
Is there a way to put that into graphics and easily
understood, you know, 1-minute elevator kind of talk?
Admiral Mercado. Sir, if you are looking where we are
operating today, we have essentially a carrier operating
forward deployed in Yokosuka, Japan, a carrier strike group.
And we also have a carrier now operating in the Middle East.
So if you talk about what the fleet response plan does, it
allows us to maintain at least two carriers deployed, but more
importantly, it----
Mr. Conaway. But that is with 9-plus month deployments.
Admiral Mercado. No, sir, this is still with the 7-month
deployment construct in a 36-month cycle. But what it does
allow us to generate is three additional strike groups ready to
surge in an amount of time.
Mr. Conaway. So the differential between where we are right
now and where you would like to get to is three carrier strike
groups.
Admiral Mercado. Yes, sir. We are at two and we want to
build up our capacity to surge to five, with three on standby
in a certain amount of time and this will allow us to do that.
In the past----
Mr. Conaway. But that doesn't get you to 7-month
deployments now.
Admiral Fanta. Let me put this.
Mr. Conaway. Trying to get you to 7----
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir. So 7-month deployments. So when we
were at almost 600 ships, we were deploying approximately 100
ships at a year across the world. Right now we are at around
300 ships and we are still deploying 100 ships around the
world.
When we do that, we stretch these out. When I was in the
Middle East, sir, one of my ships went to 11\1/2\ months and
they set the record for the longest deployment out there.
Mr. Conaway. We are on the same side of this. I am just
trying to figure out a way. How do I communicate those issues
to folks who really don't know much about it and say, all
right, here is the risk, here is the gap. If we went to 7
months--if Congress put in the NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] that you couldn't have a ship at sea more
than 7 months out of 36, subject to a fight, you know, we are
going to have to say, well, we can't be everywhere we are right
now.
Because you are taking whatever ships you have got, and you
are stretching across all those requirements to make that
happen. I am just trying to get a feel for what we don't get to
do if we went to the--if we had the capacity that you wanted.
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir. If I look at it from that
perspective that you are trying to put this in a contextual
sense; 7 months out of 36 I miss one birthday or one Christmas
every 3 years, all right. I miss one anniversary every 3 years.
Right now I am at 9 out of 27, which means I am up at missing 2
birthdays, 2 Christmases, and 2 anniversaries every 2\1/2\
years.
If I go and keep going on this path and I hit beyond nine,
at that point I don't watch softball games, Christmases, etc.
Admiral Mercado. Sir, Carl Vincent just came back from
deployment. She did a little over 9 months, to San Diego, and
my son was part of that deployment. I just came from the fleet
and we have planned now to schedule our future deployments at 7
months.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Let me ask you this, Admiral Mercado.
You mentioned all of government. We want to make sure all of
Defense is in this fight. Are there folks just like you at the
other services doing the same kind of analysis work on
refereeing between all the various things, and then do you guys
talk to each other, and how?
Admiral Mercado. Yes, sir. I have already spoken to my
Marine counterpart once. I am fairly new in the job so I am
reaching out to my Air Force counterpart. I have not spoken to
my Army counterpart as yet.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. There may be some value in making sure
that you guys all talk to each other.
Yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks, gentlemen, for your service and the happy news
today.
Mr. Forbes. In a follow-up to Mr. Conaway's questioning,
have you guys done any war-gaming in conjunction with our new
strategy, and if so, what does that suggest in terms of the
additional large surface combatants that we will be needing?
Admiral Fanta. A lot of the war-gaming, sir, we have been
doing with the numbers we expect to have. What we do now is we
now war-game with advanced weapons capabilities that actually
increase the capability of those ships that we will have.
As I said, it takes years to build a ship, so what I am
really doing now is increasing the capability of those ships,
no matter how many I have and how long I have them, and getting
them to be more lethal and getting them to see more, to allow
me to have that deterrence so the fight doesn't start.
Mr. Forbes. At some point in time what we would just like
for maybe you to do is come over and give us a briefing to
follow up with what Mr. Conaway was saying, not of what we are
trying to get to but of what the war-gaming would show we would
have today if we had to be in one of those fights.
Admiral Fanta. We can do that, yes, sir.
Mr. Forbes. With that we recognize the distinguished lady
from Guam, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral Fanta, and
of course Admiral Mercado, it is good to see you again. Thank
you both for your testimonies today.
My first question is regarding large surface combatants'
role in the rebalance strategy. As we continue to rebalance to
the Asia-Pacific region, can we assume that this will lead to
an increased emphasis on Pacific deployments for amphibious
readiness groups and their L-class ships? Either one of you.
Just a yes or a no.
Admiral Fanta. So on the large surface combatants, the
first capability I have of the advanced capability ships are
being deployed to the Pacific, ma'am.
Ms. Bordallo. Okay. Admiral.
Admiral Mercado. I think by our presence and how we are
increasing our presence and putting our most capable ships
there, I think the answer is yes, ma'am.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you. Concurrently, recent events in
Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East highlight ever-
increasing requirements and commitments, despite a decreasing
number of large surface combatants.
Now for instance, it is reported that combatant commanders
receive less than half of their Amphibious Readiness Groups,
Marine Expeditionary Unit requirements. How do we resolve this
dilemma?
Admiral Mercado. Having just come from CENTCOM [U.S.
Central Command], that Marine amphibious units and the
amphibious ships that support them are hugely valuable and in
high demand, as you know. So I think to support the Marines
have established a special purpose MAGTF [Marine Air-Ground
Task Force] to increase their presence and enhance their
response.
We have to be able to support them, so I know from a force
provider standpoint, again, we have to contain two biases: CNO
wants us to be forward, and I know whatever we can't provide,
you know, that has to be adjudicated.
Ms. Bordallo. All right, thank you. Now I have one final
question. With the proliferation of long-range precision strike
missiles and sophisticated anti-access/area denial [A2/AD]
systems throughout the Persian Gulf and in the Western Pacific,
what is being done to ensure access into these contested
regions? And what role do amphibious forces play in peeling
back these A2/AD rings to ensure access to contested maritime
and littoral domains?
Admiral Mercado. I would say from a capability standpoint
the capabilities that would peel that back would fall primarily
on the large surface combatants and the aircraft carriers,
along with our partners in the Air Force, and also the
submarines, because, you know, that is where we--that is the
capability and the capacity that we have to do that to help
support and gain access for our amphibious ships.
Ms. Bordallo. Any comments, Admiral Fanta?
Admiral Fanta. Ma'am, from the perspective of if I have
lethal capability on my ships and I shoot first and I shoot
further, they have to stay further away. And I get more of a
shot and I get more defensive and offensive capability.
From the Marines' amphibious strike groups that are
deploying now, we have to understand that they are about to
start deploying the Joint Strike Fighter, which is the first
fifth-generation fighter we will have at sea, whether that is
Navy or Marine Corps, and that will give us a significant
advantage in that high-end fight.
Ms. Bordallo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Forbes. I thank the gentlelady, and we recognize now
the gentleman from California, Mr. Cook, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chair. You answered one of my
questions about the F-35B, but this--all the talk about
missiles. I am a little bit unclear. I will show my ignorance
right now by talking about the Aegis missile system, and
particularly the role of the system that is going to be in
Romania.
You know, obviously we are going to not be discussing about
moving it from point A to point B. Romania is a big anchor to
pull up and move, but how do you think this experiment is going
to play out in terms of fleet projection if you have got one
stationary site there with covering all these different areas
there. Is that going to relieve part of the deployment
pressure?
Admiral Fanta. So the two things that blend together. One,
the Romania site is a defense of Europe site, and from that
perspective it is put in a spot that allows us to take care of,
without going classified, the most likely threat against that
area.
What it adds to is it allows us to move our destroyers, and
we have forward deployed four destroyers out of Rota, Spain, to
currently cover that mission. It allows us to, one, cover more
areas, and two, cover more missions than just the ballistic
missile mission. So those four forward-deployed ships are right
now assigned to it and they will see less pressure to be
continuously in one or two spots in the ocean to do what
Romania will pick up.
Romania plus the future site in Poland will relieve even
further the pressure on those forward destroyers that we have
there. That is not to say we will pull them back, because that
capability is cumulative, but what we will do is now they don't
have to stay in that one spot in the ocean for that length of
time.
Admiral Mercado. Yes, sir, you are right. We don't consider
that a Navy-unique mission. When I talked about peeling back,
before, we made an assumption that all 85 large surface
combatants would be BMD-capable, but when we peeled back that
onion, it was instructive to assess to sow what the force
structure we need for Navy-unique missions, and that mission is
not Navy-unique.
Mr. Cook. No, and you are right. I know about NATO [North
Atlantic Treaty Organization] and everything like that, and
Poland. I hope that if that works out well in terms of being a
success, and we do have pressures with all these different
deployments and we don't come through with all these ships and
everything else, I am wondering if at least in terms of gaming
this or CPX-ing [command post exercise] it or whatever term you
are going to use in the future at the war college or what have
you, that that being part of the plan, because obviously it is
part of the NATO plan.
I have got my fingers crossed because I am not really sure
how that is going to work out.
Admiral Fanta. We have two aspects there, sir. It is part
of the plan, it is part of the war games we exercise. I
recognize that these ships are forward. They are away from the
continental United States and they have their own stresses on
them, but if I put two dozen ships over there, I would still
have a waiting list of people wanting to go over there and do
that mission.
I have to turn people away in droves to go live in Spain
and live forward deployed on a destroyer, no matter how tough
that mission is and how long they are at sea. So it is a
combination of sailors doing what they want to be, forward and
operational, and defending our allies throughout the world.
Mr. Cook. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Graham, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have quite a large
Air Force and Navy presence in my district, the Second
Congressional District in Florida, panhandle essentially, and I
have heard from both the Air Force, and maybe not so much the
Navy, about challenges they face with maintenance.
I was curious. Are you all facing any difficulties with
just the maintenance component of keeping your ships ready to
go if necessary?
Admiral Fanta. So we for years have been fighting to drive
down what we call a backlog in maintenance. We have built up
over years of multiple rapid deployments that continuously
surged to wherever the hotspot in the world was, we built up a
lot of maintenance backlog that we now have to drive down.
Just like the Army or the Marines that were in the desert
for years at a time, stress on their equipment now requires
that to come back and be reset and recapitalized back in the
CONUS [continental United States] to allow them to go through.
I have to do the same sort of thing.
The Army puts tanks into depots, the Marines put
helicopters into depots to get that long-term deep maintenance
done. I have to put ships into depots to get back to what I
need, and that is 35 to 40 years of life out of each ship.
Admiral Mercado. I can also say it is better. Before, it
was a concern, we were challenged, we had issues. Having just
come from the fleet, and a lot of my ships and carriers were in
maintenance, and the maintenance is now getting done. We have
just got to now be smart about how we do it, make sure again we
start and stop on time, but now we see the surge where we are
getting better with our maintenance.
Ms. Graham. That is really good to hear. You mentioned the
backlog, Admiral. How long is the backlog, even if it is
getting better?
Admiral Fanta. So we have brought it down from
approximately 3 years' worth of backlog. We are down to less
than a year now. We have put a consolidated amount of effort,
time, and resources against this. Both fleet commanders have
taken this on personally, both type commanders, the surface
forces on both the east and the west coast have taken this on
personally.
We have put billions of dollars against getting this
backlog down and getting to the point where we can have a
knowledge of what is wrong, a plan to fix it. We have a 6-year
plan that we can lay out to exactly how much maintenance and
modernization has to be done every year to stay on that.
Where we fall short, and frankly, as your colleagues behind
you were saying earlier, if we have to all of a sudden surge to
a crisis, that takes up time from this. We are not saying we
won't go. We will absolutely go, but it takes up time from
getting to this backlog.
Ms. Graham. Is maintenance and modernization, are those
combined? Are they considered the same or are they different?
Admiral Fanta. Modernization is when I take new systems, as
the chairman was alluding to, and put new systems on cruisers,
put new systems on destroyers, put new weapons systems
throughout the fleet. That is modernization.
Maintenance is a pump breaks, I need to put a new seal in
it. I put it back together, I put it back in the ship and the
pump keeps working. So we blend those two together a lot of
times because it goes in the same time. While I am putting a
new radar on the ship, I am also fixing the pumps that have
broken during that period of time, ma'am.
Ms. Graham. That is good common sense. Thank you very much.
I appreciate your answers very much.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman from California, Mr. Hunter, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just got a
simple question. We have been told this whole year, just about
by everybody who comes in and briefs the full committee, that
all of the near-peer competitors are very close to matching us
technologically. We are all fairly close right now, and it is
going to be closer and closer as we go forward and other
countries have the same software engineers that we have here
for the most part.
So my question is, when does quantity trump quality? Chuck
Yeager told a story, when we were flying prop planes in World
War II and the Germans had jets, I said, well, gee, that has
got to be a hard dogfight. How do you shoot down jets? He said,
well, they were all on the ground, we blew them up. Because
they were just swarming them. We would just swarm them with
prop planes.
That is my first question is, when does quantity trump
quality?
Admiral Fanta. So quantity is not just in ships, but it is
about weapons systems I can employ. When we talk about
capability and capacity, it is not just how many ships I have
at sea but how many weapons and how capable those weapons are,
and from how many directions I can hit the adversary.
What I want to do is hit him from multiple directions and
not even let him leave port, same thing that Chuck Yeager did
during World War II. Let me hit him now, let me hit him soon,
and if I can't, that is risk to us. If I let him come all the
way out, that is risk to us. If I let him continue to get all
the way around me so I have got a 360-degree fight, that is
risk to us.
Now, I understand that may not always be possible, so we
have to both defend and provide offense. We have to give the
best capability we have to defend against those jets versus
props, as well as now providing an offense to hit them on the
ground with bombers before we start.
Admiral Mercado. Yes, I have to, sir, characterize that in
the air realm where I look at is, you know, the best example
for me is that modernization, going from, say, fourth-
generation to fifth-generation fighters. As our air wings
evolve from, say, the F-18E/F and the Joint Strike Fighter, and
we start to populate our air wing with more higher end
fighters, the faster we can do that, then the exchange ratios
between a fifth-generation fighter and a fourth-generation
fighter, you know, are what we like.
If we don't do that and we stay onto the fourth-generation
model then those exchange ratios aren't really what we want.
Mr. Hunter. But the numbers you were giving the chairman
over there are the numbers of ships. Those numbers were our
place technologically versus other people right now, other
near-peer competitors technologically. The numbers that you
gave them represent that.
So if everybody is even, your numbers change dramatically
for us. We would obviously have to have way more because you
wouldn't have that technological edge over a near-peer
competitor, right?
Admiral Fanta. So if I characterize it from a physics
perspective, I think that is maybe the easiest at this point,
the faster the missile coming at me and the lower the radar
cross-section, if you are talking about advanced capability,
the more power I have to put out of my radar and the more
processing I take out of my software.
That means that I will have to have more of those radars on
more ships around a wider area to handle a 360-degree fight.
Sometime in the future when I am fighting in the middle of a
360-degree battle against high-end weapon systems, I may have
to have more ships.
Vic's job right now is to model those numbers and tell you
what they are, and that is what he is doing.
Admiral Mercado. When we look at the numbers, because when
we talk about where the 88 number came from, that is after
analysis based on a planning scenario against what we call our
most stressing environment, which is that near-peer competitor.
That is where we come up with the minimum number to be able
to defeat that threat. The minimum number. So your point is
well taken. That number does matter. The 11 carriers, 88 large
surface combatants, those numbers do matter, but they are
minimum.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Fanta, Admiral Mercado, thank you so much for
joining us. I want to ask a question related to how aircraft
impact our large surface combatants. As you know, the F-35B is
in the process of achieving IOC [initial operational
capability] as its capability and as, you know, we are bringing
on the F-35C, hoping that it gets ramped up, is able to be
deployed with our carrier strike groups.
How will the increased capability that comes with those
aircraft, both in large-deck amphibs, but also there in the
aircraft carrier fleet, how is that going to affect the
employment of large surface combatants then as part of carrier
strike groups within the overall projection of power within the
Navy?
Admiral Fanta. So broadly, the further back I can keep the
adversary from shooting with a fifth-generation fighter pushing
out deeper into his area, the less missiles come at me.
Tactically that is more sensors in the air to look for incoming
threats.
Every time we put a fifth-generation aircraft with its
sensors in the air, that is more things I have looking for
incoming threats, which means the more data I have to my ships,
even the large surface combatants, to understand where those
threats are coming from and to be ready for it, and to counter
that threat well before it gets to me.
So it is both the fight in the long-range, it is the fight
in the high end, and it is the number of sensors, advanced
sensors I have in the air at any one time.
Admiral Mercado. I would say, sir, any carrier strike group
environment, you know, we always talk about defense in depth.
So while we have the number of five surface combatants, three
BMD-capable, AAW-capable [anti-aircraft warfare], now we have
that layer whereby that Joint Strike Fighter can be that outer
ring defense.
It still matters, a fifth-generation fighter against a
fifth-generation adversary. And it is complementary, so our
ships can help control that Joint Strike Fighter. And then we
also have the E-2s and things like that so we can fight
alongside as well as our Air Force and Marine brothers.
Mr. Wittman. Got you. Let me ask about the 35-B as part of
our amphibious--our large-deck amphibs. What does that do to
the Navy's ability to project power? Obviously we have our
large-deck amphibs that are part of our MAGTFs, but give me
perspective on how the Navy looks over all of that F-35B
capability on the decks of our large-deck amphibs?
Admiral Fanta. So it is a significant increase over the
current Harrier fleet, even with the latest upgrade of the
Harriers that carry air-to-air weapons. It is integrated, where
a Harrier is essentially a put it up there, tell it where to
go, tell it what to shoot, and bring it back. It is integrated
into that battle force.
It is integrated with the carriers, the large-deck amphibs,
any cruiser, any destroyer, any small surface combatant that is
out there. That integration now is what brings us to that next-
generation fight. It is not just point, shoot, forget, bring
back.
Admiral Mercado. I think it also gives us huge flexibility,
sir, because our carriers cannot be everywhere. Then our large-
deck amphibs, they have a battle rhythm and they support
specific missions for the COCOMs.
So now if you have the flexibility for a large-deck amphib,
with the striking power that a Joint Strike Fighter brings, it
gives us much more capability where you may not need a carrier.
Mr. Wittman. Got you. I want to go back to an answer of the
question that you gave Mr. Hunter when you talked about the
number of large surface combatants that are now functioning in
the newer environment of A2/AD.
As you said, the structure now for carrier strike group is
five large surface combatants with that strike group, but you
talked about needing potentially more within that A2/AD
environment. Give me your perspective on how many more, and
under what type of situations. Would that be in all situations
or only in certain situations? Give us a little more refinement
because I am interested in the comment that you had about
needing more than five in that as part of the carrier strike
group.
Admiral Fanta. That five is a baseline number that we use.
The higher the fight, the more intense the fight, obviously
every commander out there, Admiral Mercado just came back,
would like more, and more coverage and more weapons to employ.
It is not just about large surface combatants.
And I recognize this hearing is about large surface
combatants, but small surface combatants with a heavy
antisubmarine capability, integrated into that strike group,
now take away some of the pressure of that large surface
combatant to have to do that antisubmarine mission while it is
also looking for ballistic missile or air threats.
So it is not just I need X number of ships that have to be
full-up, large surface combatants. I will need the emphasis of
those large surface combatants targeted against the highest
threat that is coming at me, and then I will need to relieve
some of the pressure on things like antisubmarine warfare with
P-8s off the land bases, with littoral combat ships, with
helicopters, with submarines in a direct support role, out
there providing that screen.
We don't just fight with a carrier strike group and a bunch
of destroyers and cruisers. We fight as a Navy, and that will
allow me to essentially do my mission with the number of ships
I have, whether that is 5, 6, 7, 10.
As Admiral Mercado and I were talking before we walked in
here, if we had the choice, we would walk across the Pacific on
the deck of a destroyer, occasionally stubbing our toes
stepping down onto a submarine and up onto an aircraft carrier.
We would love more but we also recognize I can only build so
many, and I need all these ships and all these aircraft and all
these submarines and aircraft carriers working together to get
me where I need to go.
Admiral Mercado. Sir, I would add that that is one of the
benefits of the Optimized Fleet Response Plan. While we ramp up
our training and we have a carrier strike group with five
surface combatants, and we run it through its training, what we
have done in this construct is with the independent deployers
that we have that are primarily trained to fill a BMD demand,
what we endeavor to do now is to bring them in with this strike
group training.
So now you have a strike group who was deploying and you
have independent deployers, maybe two or three DDGs
[destroyers], who are going to be out there at the same time.
It makes perfect sense to bring them into the training because
you never know when you are out there where you need to re-
aggregate.
These ships are not just single-mission ships. They are not
single-mission BMD ships, so that allows us actually the
flexibility to grow if required based on the mission.
Mr. Forbes. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from Rhode Island is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for your service and for your
testimony today. Admiral Fanta, I think the last time I saw you
I believe we were discussing small surface combatants. So it is
good to see you here to talk to the other side of the coin, if
you will.
So I have noted with interest Vice Admiral Rowden's article
in ``Proceedings'' earlier this year that talked about
distributed lethality and hunter-killer surface action groups.
It is an intriguing concept, I believe, and attractive in many
ways, but given the mix of capabilities on ship classes
involved, in particular with the dearth of defensive anti-air
on the Independence and Freedom classes, I am curious as to how
it could affect the demand signal for certain capabilities.
How do you foresee this concept, if applied, affecting the
demand for large surface combatants? Would it cause the Navy to
reprioritize certain programs such as LCS [littoral combat
ship] modernization efforts?
Admiral Fanta. So there is a perception that LCS does not
have an anti-air capability. Right now the SeaRAM [anti-ship
missile defense system] and RAM [rolling airframe missile]
capability I am installing on LCS is one of the most capable
weapons in the world against a high-end threat. That is today.
That is being installed on LCS today.
There is a misconception that I have to guard LCS against
air threats. Right now I am installing that same SeaRAM
capability not only on LCS but my high-end destroyers that
deploy to various parts of the world that may face those same
threats, so I am leveling the force.
As you mentioned, Admiral Rowden's article that we co-
authored with both the Surface Forces Atlantic, us, and Admiral
Rowden, the idea is, if it floats, it fights. I give every ship
the capability of an offensive punch and a defensive punch.
Now that may not be just the capability of an oiler to
shoot a ballistic missile down. That is not what we are talking
about. But every ship out there should be able to contribute to
the fight, to the capability that it has.
As you know, we are looking at the expansion of the LCS
program to include what has now been called the frigate, and
that will have over-the-horizon missiles. Over-the-horizon
missiles knocks the enemy back. It makes him think about every
LCS out there as a potential threat.
When we put these defensive systems on LCS, it not only
makes it survivable but it makes it lethal to the adversary. We
have to be able to make him think about not just large surface
combatants, not just aircraft carriers and submarines but about
every surface ship that is afloat out there, everywhere that it
can deploy from.
Admiral Mercado. Sir, I would say distributed lethality has
huge potential. As we transition our mindset from purely
defensive and we give more offensive capability to our surface
combatants, that is just another resource for the COCOMs to use
in adjusting their plans, you know, against any potential
competitor. And once, as this progresses, then that comes back
to my shop to do the assessments.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Thank you for that answer. Let me
turn to something else I spend a lot of time on, and that is
directed energy. Can you provide us with an update on your
efforts to prepare the surface fleet for the integration of
directed energy weapons? What role do you envision those
capabilities taking on, both on LCS and other ship classes,
that would be covered under the concept of distributed
lethality?
Admiral Fanta. So just today Admiral Mercado and I were
discussing one of the latest successes in that energy type
weapon system. Our forward fleet operating base of Ponce, the
USS Ponce out in the Middle East, shot down multiple drones
with a directed energy weapon. Results of that just came back.
We are at that level that we can shoot down both--not only
dazzle the adversary but we can shoot down his surveillance
assets, and we have proven that.
We are expanding that to not only look at drones but high-
end weapon systems, and the advances that we have. We are not
there yet, but we are close and we are continuing to advance in
that.
Admiral Mercado. In our assessment, sir, munitions matter.
Numbers of munitions matter in any type of exchange. So when
you can use directed energy or low-cost munitions then that
increases your advantage.
Mr. Langevin. Well, I want to again commend the Navy on
being forward-leaning on directed energy, more so than any of
the services right now. I think this is a capability that is
maturing faster than what most people realize, and it is good
to see that the Navy has already got something fielded and you
are both--it is a test platform but also an active system.
I know my time has expired. I have got a bunch of other
questions but I will submit those for the record. Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. We thank the gentleman for his hard work in
this area at so many different times.
Mr. Conaway has one follow-up question, then Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Conaway. I am a CPA [certified public accountant], so
trying to get back to an answer on my ham-handed question. So
let's hold 100 ships constant, 9.2 months. That equates to
about 27,600 days at sea. You divide that by 210 days, you get
131 ships. So is the differential for this conversation 31
ships additional to get you to 7 months?
Admiral Fanta. The math works, as you said. I won't,
because this----
Mr. Conaway. Well, I know there are a lot of variables but
on the back of a napkin----
Admiral Fanta. At 88 to 90 ships you are at 9 months, 9
months plus. The math works out to around 100 to 105 ships, you
are at 8 months. At around 110 or 112 ships, you are at 7
months. The math, you are absolutely right. It is a 0.19 ship
availability and that is how you get to that number, sir.
Mr. Conaway. I got you. So somewhere in the 25- to 30-ship
range, you would be whole at the 7-month deployment.
Admiral Fanta. Holding all else constant, yes, sir.
Mr. Conaway. I got you.
I yield back.
Mr. Forbes. It is always good to have a CPA on the
committee.
[Laughter]
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have the force
inventory chart which shows the next 30 years for all different
categories, which I guess that is kind of what your portfolio,
as you are looking over all the time. But as far as the
requirement for advanced ballistic missile defense ships, the
40 that we have been talking about and the 33 that we are at
today, I mean, we don't have that chart.
Maybe you said this already, but can you just sort of give
us some projections starting in 2015? When do we hit the 40
requirement, and will we stay there or will we keep going up
or, you know, is there going to be----
Admiral Fanta. I am building them now and I am modernizing
to that capability now, so I have the first ships out there
already of that advanced capability, of the 40. We start that
as a subset. Roughly at the build rate of 2 new ships a year
and modernization of approximately 2 destroyers or destroyer/
cruisers a year, I will have hit my 40 ships at 2026.
If you increase those numbers by any amount, the soonest I
could have them is in 2024\1/2\. So if I give you three a year,
four a year, five a year basically, you know, I can only build
two new ships a year right now. That is kind of constant based
on my Ohio-replacement numbers, but it is the modernization
that moves me up and down on that, whether I move left or right
on the 2026 number. That is for the high-end capable ships.
The ships that don't get modernized to that high end will
still have ballistic missile capability, and now will make up
not only--beyond that 40 will make up the additional ships up
to, as has been mentioned, 77 or give or take that number
around the world.
Just because I have not upgraded that ship to the highest
end capability, it does not mean it is put it off to the side.
It is good for that defense of Europe, defense of somewhere
else. That defended asset list that I have now got at sea, the
advantage of mine is, I am portable. If you change that, if
somebody points a ballistic missile at a different part of the
world, and I have got ocean space in there, I can put that ship
in there.
I hit my 40 number in about 2026 based on the current build
and modernization rate.
Mr. Forbes. And Admiral, just to follow up on that, these
are very important. You have emphasized how important they are.
Why did the Navy take out five of their destroyer
modernizations for BMD in the FYDP this year if they were so
crucial?
Admiral Fanta. Fiscal challenges.
Mr. Forbes. So it was purely money.
Admiral Fanta. Purely money.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Langevin I recognize for one additional
question.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral, so I have heard a variety of explanations as to
why the DDGs are less capable in the air warfare commander
[AWC] role in a carrier strike group: lack of staffing, lack of
facilities, the more senior and experienced leadership
generally found on CGs [cruisers], deeper magazines, et cetera.
Is it a physical or staffing limitation that drives the
desire for CGs in the AWC role? Which concerns are able to be
mitigated and which are not?
Admiral Fanta. Primarily the physical capabilities of the
ship, having two radar deck houses vice one on a destroyer is
something--I can't add another deck house to a destroyer. I
cannot have that redundancy nor can I add another 30 missiles
to a destroyer. That is a physical limitation.
I could make the crew more senior, I could give them more
experience, I could put more of them on to the limits of the
amount of bunks I have on that ship. I am bunk-limited for the
number of people I have on that.
So from the flexibility of the experience, the training and
the, to some extent a few more people, I could increase that
to--towards the level of that cruiser, but I cannot physically
change the dimensions of the destroyer primarily in the amount
of redundancy and the amount of weapons it has on board, sir.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Forbes. Gentlemen, as we mentioned to you earlier, we
can't thank you enough for the service you have both given to
our country, but we thank you. One of the things we would like
to do now is offer you any additional time you need for things
that you think are important that we get on the record that
maybe no one has asked, or any clarifications you need to make.
Admiral Fanta, why don't we start with you.
Admiral Fanta. Yes, sir. I recognize that there is always a
tension between what we have to fight today and what we have to
fight tomorrow. There is always risk we will miss something and
not catch the latest development by a potential adversary. That
is our job to blend those risks back and forth.
There is the risk that I won't fund that key element
somewhere that would make the entire--change the entire face of
something 10 years down the road. We offer our best estimate on
the most risk-mitigated way forward, given what we see as
resources today and tomorrow.
What we are recommending is that we blend the large surface
combatants to a number of minimum of 88, and exceed that where
we can over the next 15 years or so while we are building the
Ohio replacement, to allow our Nation to recapitalize that one
key element that we cannot forsake, and that is our ability to
be safe using a nuclear deterrent.
We recognize, as much as I am a parochial surface warfare
officer, I recognize also that there is a higher need for some
elements of the national defense. I would ask that we can blend
those large surface combatants at 88 or above over that period
of time where we are recapitalizing this force.
If, sir, you can help us take that off the table and make
it all about large surface combatants, we are all in, and from
that perspective we are ready to have that conversation on how
many and how fast. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you.
Admiral.
Admiral Mercado. Sir, we talked about this a little bit
here but my primary concern is warfighting and capability and
capacity against that near-peer competitor, like we said. So my
biggest concern is downstream is essentially Ohio replacement
and the potential impact it could have on our capability and
capacity if we are tasked to fund that entirely.
So right now we can do, just like Admiral Fanta said in the
opening, we can deal with a near-peer competitor with the
numbers we have. My concern is the effect on that capability
and capacity depending on how we address the build of Ohio
replacement.
Mr. Forbes. Well, let me just tell you guys to hopefully
allay some of your fears. This is probably one of the most
bipartisan subcommittees and maybe committees in Congress, and
we are the best team we know how to field to do exactly what
you want to do. We are going to continue to fight.
We have 321 Members of Congress that agreed with you the
other day, and I think that will continue forward, but we are
going to fight to make sure that we accomplish those goals that
you just laid out for us.
With that, if we don't have any additional questions, thank
you both for being here, and we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 17, 2015

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 17, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
