- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-44] UPDATE ON FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 2014 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE NUCLEAR ENTERPRISE REVIEW

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-44]

UPDATE ON FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 2014
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE NUCLEAR
ENTERPRISE REVIEW

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JUNE 25, 2015

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-319 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri, Chairwoman

JEFF MILLER, Florida                 JACKIE SPEIER, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                    Georgia
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona              GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
Heath Bope, Professional Staff Member
Mike Amato, Professional Staff Member
Abigail P. Gage, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hartzler, Hon. Vicky, a Representative from Missouri, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations...................     1
Speier, Hon. Jackie, a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations...........     2

WITNESSES

Benedict, VADM Terry, USN, Director, Strategic Systems Programs,
United States Navy.............................................     5
Brumer, Dr. Yisroel, Director, Strategic, Defensive, and Space
Programs, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Cost Assessment
and Program Evaluation.........................................     4
Clark, Maj Gen Richard M., USAF, Commander, 8th Air Force, United
States Air Force...............................................     7
Weinstein, Maj Gen Jack, USAF, Commander, 20th Air Force, United
States Air Force...............................................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Benedict, VADM Terry.........................................    40
Brumer, Dr. Yisroel..........................................    33
Clark, Maj Gen Richard M.....................................    56
Weinstein, Maj Gen Jack......................................    50

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Air Force Global Strike Command ICBM Force Improvement
Program (FIP) Recommendations..............................    69

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Ms. Speier...................................................    85

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mrs. Hartzler................................................    89
Ms. Speier...................................................    92

UPDATE ON FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 2014 DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE NUCLEAR ENTERPRISE REVIEW

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Washington, DC, Thursday, June 25, 2015.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:04 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Vicky Hartzler
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. VICKY HARTZLER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSOURI, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

Mrs. Hartzler. Welcome. I am delighted to convene this
meeting.
Nuclear deterrence remains the foundation of national
security for the United States and our allies. It is also
fundamental to preserving international stability. Our nuclear
deterrent not only keeps potential adversaries at bay, it also
assures and comforts our allies. This central, but often not
immediately visible role has prevented both nuclear war and
large-scale conventional war between the world's great powers
for 70 years.
Seven months ago, in an open letter to the men and women
who serve with U.S. nuclear forces, then-Secretary of Defense
Hagel declared that ``our nuclear deterrent plays a critical
role in assuring U.S. national security.'' He also said, ``no
other capability we have is more important.'' I agree.
I am honored to represent the officers and enlisted
personnel assigned to Whiteman Air Force Base. Among these are
the very talented and capable members of the 509th Bomb Wing
and 131st Bomb Wing who fly and maintain the B-2 Spirit bomber.
Theirs is a demanding and challenging job, carried out away
from the limelight but with dedication and perseverance.
These Air Force personnel form a critical part of the U.S.
nuclear triad that carries out this priority mission. Yet, we
are at a critical inflection point for our nuclear forces.
As the age of U.S. nuclear weapons increases and some of
our bombers, submarines, and intercontinental missiles become
older than the personnel who maintain and operate them,
potential adversaries are fielding newer and more advanced
nuclear arms. Many prospective foes are also making nuclear
weapons more, not less, central to their national strategies.
Chairman Thornberry has turned his committee's attention to
these vitally important topics this week. The committee is
convening a series of open hearings and classified briefings to
learn more details of the challenges facing our nuclear
enterprise. Today's oversight hearing is part of that broader
effort.
Not long ago, then-Secretary of Defense Hagel called on
both internal and external teams of specialists to consider the
various deep-seated problems confronting our nuclear
enterprise. The report of the Nuclear Enterprise Review was
sobering.
It set forth many important recommendations to fix serious
shortcomings which inhibited work of those at Whiteman Air
Force Base and its Air Force and Navy counterparts in the ICBM
[intercontinental ballistic missile] fields and across the
submarine force.
This afternoon, we will hear from the Defense Department's
Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation [CAPE] office. The
Deputy Secretary of Defense, who we heard from at a hearing
earlier today, charged this office with the responsibility for
assessing and measuring implementation of the recommendations
contained in the Nuclear Enterprise Review.
We will also hear testimony from the senior commanders
responsible for the Air Force bomber and missile units and for
the Navy's sea-based nuclear weapons carried by submarines. The
subcommittee seeks to know what has been accomplished. We also
seek to know which recommendations of the Nuclear Enterprise
Review remain problematic. We must solve the challenges
confronting our nuclear enterprise in a long-term and
sustainable fashion.
So before I introduce the witnesses, I turn to Oversight
and Investigations Subcommittee ranking member for her
introduction.

STATEMENT OF HON. JACKIE SPEIER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

Ms. Speier. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you to all of
the witnesses here today.
The Congressional Budget Office estimates that we spend
approximately $350 billion over the next decade to sustain and
modernize our nuclear arsenal. Over the next 30 years, this
bill could add up to $1 trillion.
A letter sent to this committee last year by STRATCOM [U.S.
Strategic Command] Commander Admiral Haney suggested nuclear
weapons could consume close to 10 percent of the defense budget
for a period of time, though he has since walked back from that
statement before this committee.
Under Secretary Frank Kendall stated earlier this year and
I quote: ``We do have a huge affordability problem with nuclear
modernization,'' end quote. But even as we spend vast sums to
modernize, there has been extreme troubling lapses in the
leadership underpinning our system of nuclear weapons.
At the highest levels of leadership, the former deputy
commander of STRATCOM was removed after revelations that he was
spending 30 hours a week gambling at an Iowa casino using fake
poker chips.
A two-star general in charge of all U.S. intercontinental
ballistic missiles was drunk and offensive while he partied
with Russian women during an official trip to Moscow.
In 2013, 76 enlisted sailors were involved in cheating at a
naval reactor training facility. Similarly, in the officer
ranks of the ICBM force, over 90 missileers were implicated in
cheating on tests and several were prosecuted on narcotics
charges. Furthermore, one missileer was charged with having
been a gang leader.
A 2013 RAND study warned that morale was low judging from
these recent incidents. I can see why. In 2007, six nuclear
weapons were loaded on a B-52 bomber and flown across the
country before anyone realized the mistake. We are beyond lucky
that nothing has happened. And as all of you know, we cannot
rely on luck when it comes to our nuclear arsenal.
Surprisingly, this is the first hearing that our committee
has held to examine these more recent problems and what is
being done to address them. I am encouraged that Secretary
Hagel and now Secretary Carter are taking these issues
seriously and have put in place a system to remedy these
issues.
I look forward to hearing from CAPE about progress on
implementing the recommendations of the Nuclear Enterprise
Reviews and hearing from the Navy and the Air Force on what
challenges remain and what improvements are still needed.
These problems must be detected early. And more
importantly, we must restore a culture of effective leadership
and integrity throughout our nuclear forces.
I am concerned that several of these problems such as the
cheating in the Air Force missileer ranks may have been
commonplace for years and perhaps decades. This significant
lapse in integrity was never surfaced or corrected and was
simply accepted.
Moreover, many of the problems surfaced in the press by AP
[Associated Press] reporter Bob Burns and the Air Force first
minimized these issues. Moving forward, Congress must be
informed of any ongoing or new problems as well as the progress
to correct these issues.
Effective change in leadership and culture may take time,
but must begin immediately. We cannot accept risks when it
comes to our nuclear arsenal.
I would like to thank Chairman Thornberry and Chairwoman
Hartzler for holding this hearing and look forward to hearing
from our witnesses. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Ms. Speier.
Members of the committee who are not assigned to this
subcommittee could be with us today. Therefore, pursuant to
committee procedure, I ask unanimous consent that non-
subcommittee members be permitted to participate in today's
hearing after all subcommittee members have had an opportunity
to ask questions.
Is there objection? Without objection, non-subcommittee
members, will be recognized at the appropriate time for 5
minutes.
Now, I am happy to introduce our witnesses. Dr. Yisroel
Brumer is the director for Strategic, Defensive and Space
Programs at the Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation office
in the Office of the Secretary of Defense. The office is tasked
with tracking, monitoring, and independently assessing the
implementation of the recommendations of the Nuclear Enterprise
Review.
Vice Admiral Terry Benedict is the director of the U.S.
Navy Strategic Systems Programs. He directs the training,
systems, equipment, facilities, and personnel of the Navy's
strategic weapons.
Major General Jack Weinstein is the commander of the 12th
Air Force and is responsible for the Nation's intercontinental
ballistic missile force.
Major General Richard Clark is the commander of the 8th Air
Force which oversees the Air Force nuclear bombers.
So, Dr. Brumer, we will start with you for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. YISROEL BRUMER, DIRECTOR, STRATEGIC,
DEFENSIVE, AND SPACE PROGRAMS, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE, COST ASSESSMENT AND PROGRAM EVALUATION

Dr. Brumer. Thank you. Chairwoman Hartzler, Ranking Member
Speier, and distinguished members of the committee, I am
honored to join you today. And I do appreciate the opportunity
to testify about how my team is executing the tasks resulting
from the recent internal and external reviews of the nuclear
enterprise directed by former Secretary Hagel.
These reviews concluded that without intervention, issues
relating to resourcing, personnel, organization, and culture
have put the nuclear enterprise on a path to more frequent and
greater problems than we have previously witnessed.
Former Secretary Hagel directed the Department to place a
renewed emphasis on the nuclear force. He specifically charged
the director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation to
track, monitor, and independently assess the implementation of
the review's recommendations with particular focus on assessing
the health of the nuclear enterprise. He also tasked us to
provide monthly updates to the Deputy Secretary of Defense and
regular updates to the Secretary.
Our team includes current and former Active Duty military
members as well as scientists and data experts to support
technical assessments. This team has shown unwavering
dedication to improving the enterprise by delivering the most
honest and objective analysis, data, and assessments possible.
Senior leadership has been keenly interested in
comprehensive and sustainable solutions rather than short-term
efforts that merely check boxes without placing the enterprise
on more solid footing.
This charge has proven to be the most important and the
most difficult aspect of our task. It is easy to verify an
instruction has been modified to relieve the force of an
unnecessary burden or that needed equipment and gear has been
delivered. It is much more difficult to measure changes in
culture or personal attitudes toward the mission. We believe
this kind of analysis is important to facilitate real change
while also remaining vigilant to identify unintended second-
and third-order effects.
Our team has made significant strides in a short time.
Since September, we have distilled every possible
recommendation from the reviews. We have held meetings with all
the stakeholders and formulated problem statements identifying
the root cause of each issue. We have worked with each
responsible organization to develop detailed approaches,
metrics, and milestones.
Finally, to go beyond box-checking, we developed metrics to
determine whether we are achieving the desired intent to
improve the overall health of the enterprise.
Additionally, we are visiting key locations to become more
familiar with unique mission and quality-of-life challenges as
well as to hold non-attributional discussions to gather
empirical data and learn what issues are most pressing.
Assessing the overall health will prove challenging and we
recognize it will take years of dedicated effort to restore the
risk margin that has been lost. We intend to provide leadership
with our best analysis and advice to help them guide these
efforts to completion.
Our team has embraced this challenge and they are proud to
have been entrusted with the role of ensuring issues are
addressed to provide the Nation with the safe, secure, and
effective strategic deterrent that is so critical to our
national security.
I will continue to report our progress on a regular basis.
You have my assurance we will remain vigilant and we will
maintain our honesty and integrity for as long as the Secretary
of Defense and this committee deem our services worthy and
necessary.
Thank you for your time and I do welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Brumer can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Dr. Brumer.
Admiral Benedict, now we turn to you.

STATEMENT OF VADM TERRY BENEDICT, USN, DIRECTOR, STRATEGIC
SYSTEMS PROGRAMS, UNITED STATES NAVY

Admiral Benedict. Chairwoman Hartzler, Ranking Member
Speier, distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations. I represent the men and women of
our Navy's Strategic Systems Programs or SSP. Your continue
support of our deterrence mission is appreciated, and I thank
you.
As the director of SSP, it is my responsibility to design,
develop, produce, support, and ensure the safety and the
security of our Navy's sea-based strategic deterrent
capability, the TRIDENT II (D5) Strategic Weapons System.
My written statement, which I respectfully request be
submitted for the record, addresses the Navy's top priorities
for maintaining a credible, effective, and safe sea-based
strategic deterrent.
The Department of Defense Nuclear Enterprise Review or NER
incorporated input on the nuclear forces as well as the
supporting infrastructure to build, maintain, and control these
assets.
The NER provided the Navy an unbiased look and ultimately
found that the nuclear enterprise is safe, secure, and
effective today. However, as we all know, it found evidence of
systemic problems that, if not addressed, could undermine the
safety, security, and effectiveness of elements of the nuclear
forces in the future.
The Navy has taken significant steps to implement
corrective action for the recommendations. The Navy will
continue to actively work with the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and with Congress to implement solutions across the
fleet to ensure safety and reliability. The Navy's investments
will include infrastructure sustainment and improvements in
personnel, training, and accountability.
Additionally, the Secretary of the Navy has nominated me to
be the regulator for oversight of the Navy nuclear deterrent
mission in order to sharpen our operational focus. As the
Navy's regulator, I report directly to the Chief of Naval
Operations on nuclear force readiness.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I am
pleased to answer your questions when appropriate.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Benedict can be found in
the Appendix on page 40.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Admiral.
General Weinstein.

STATEMENT OF MAJ GEN JACK WEINSTEIN, USAF, COMMANDER, 20TH AIR
FORCE, UNITED STATES AIR FORCE

General Weinstein. Chairwoman Hartzler, Ranking Member
Speier, and distinguished members of the committee, thank you
for allowing me to appear before you and represent the over
10,000 intercontinental ballistic missile professionals of 20th
Air Force.
Every day, across 33,600 square miles in Colorado, Montana,
Nebraska, North Dakota, and Wyoming, more than 900 airmen are
deployed to launch facilities and missile alert facilities to
provide our Nation a credible around-the-clock nuclear
deterrent, poised and ready when called upon by the President.
I am immensely proud of the fine Americans serving in the
ICBM mission as I know you are and I share in your view that we
must continue to provide them the training, professional
development, and resources they need to accomplish this
critical national mission.
The airmen of 20th Air Force are benefiting greatly from
improvements we have implemented based on the recommendations
of the Nuclear Enterprise Review and Air Force reviews.
The support we have received from Congress, the highest
levels of the Department of Defense, and senior leaders of the
United States Air Force has allowed us to address shortfalls
and reaffirm the Air Force's commitment to the nuclear mission
as the number one priority.
As commander of the operational ICBM force, I continue to
focus on the Nuclear Enterprise Review recommendation to
rebuild culture and improve morale. The actions we have taken
over the last 18 months are moving us in the right direction,
providing our airmen with the proper equipment and empowering
them to make decisions, developing each of them not just as
technical experts but as leaders.
As we fully implement resource and programmatic
improvements to the ICBM mission, we will continue to rebuild a
culture that is foundational to continuing and enduring
improvement.
We will remain attuned to our frontline airmen for their
feedback and to our commanders and enlisted leaders in the
missile fields to ensure we make informed decisions to execute
our mission exceptionally well and develop tomorrow's nuclear
leaders.
Madam Chairwoman, I want to thank you again for the
opportunity to appear before the committee to discuss 20th Air
Force and the ICBM mission. I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Weinstein can be found
in the Appendix on page 50.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, General.
And now last but not least, General Clark.

STATEMENT OF MAJ GEN RICHARD M. CLARK, USAF, COMMANDER, 8TH AIR
FORCE, UNITED STATES AIR FORCE

General Clark. Chairwoman Hartzler, Ranking Member Speier,
and distinguished members of the committee, thank you for
allowing me to appear before you today to represent the men and
women of the 8th Air Force.
Let me say first that the men and women are of the Mighty
8th are doing a fantastic job every day providing a safe,
secure, and effective nuclear force for our Nation while
assuring we are prepared to execute our conventional mission
any time, anywhere on the planet.
Over the last year, we implemented many changes based on
feedback from airmen carrying out the nuclear mission and we
are constantly assessing where we still need to improve.
The numerous changes we have instituted are completely in
line with the internal and external Nuclear Enterprise Reviews
conducted last year. With the support of the Secretary of the
Air Force and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force as well as
the leadership of the Secretary of Defense, we restored our
nuclear focus, are pursuing essential modernization efforts,
and are making key quality of life enhancements for our airmen.
We are funding 156 manpower positions across our 3 bases,
providing relief to our most understaffed specialties, and will
soon open a 34-person operations and maintenance detachment in
Anderson Air Force Base Guam to provide needed support to the
continuous bomber presence mission.
We recently conducted a headquarters force improvement
program and will begin addressing the findings in the coming
days and weeks. Our airmen have a voice and we are listening.
Maintaining readiness is a testament to our airmen's
dedication, commitment, and expertise. But we are operating 50-
year old aircraft and are now at the point where we can no
longer postpone upgrades.
Modernization efforts aimed at our existing B-2 and B-52
aircraft and associated weapons as well as the new long-range
strike bomber are critical to preserving our dominance against
next-generation capabilities.
Modernization is also a means of bridging the say-do gap
and showing our airmen that the mission they perform day in and
day out is important to their Nation. We realize these upgrades
come at a cost and we are working with our ICBM and Navy
partners to find areas of intelligent commonality.
Madam Chairwoman, I want to thank you again for the support
of your committee and for the opportunity to appear before you
to discuss 8th Air Force. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Clark can be found in
the Appendix on page 56.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, General.
Thank you, gentlemen, for your statements and your
comments.
I guess I want to just start with Dr. Brumer, my questions.
Over the last 9 years, 24 unclassified and classified reports
sanctioned by the Department have assessed, identified, and
proposed remedies to issues within our nuclear enterprise. Yet,
you still describe in your written testimony that the two most
recent reviews concluded that without interruption issues
relating to resourcing, personnel, organization, and culture
have the nuclear enterprise on a path to more frequent and
greater problems that we have previously witnessed. So what
additional unacceptable events need to occur in order for the
Department to wholeheartedly implement and sustain the
recommendations in the two most recent reports on the nuclear
enterprise?
Dr. Brumer. Thank you, Chairwoman. That is an extremely
important question. When we started this effort, we spent a
fair bit of time asking how do we ensure that this is not just
the latest in a series of attempts to fix the problem and, you
know, that we are not having these conversations again in a few
years.
Our assessment is that what has happened in the past, there
were a number of reviews, they made hundreds of
recommendations, and the services took those recommendations
seriously but implemented them with more of a box-checking
mentality. There is a set of things to do, I have done them, I
can now close them out rather than having an enduring focus on
the mission and follow-on assessments, you know, whether we are
having the intended effect. We are all committed to making sure
that doesn't happen this time. And that is very much at the
heart of what we are doing.
So there are recommendations from the reviews. We are
tracking to make sure that those [are] implemented. We are also
paying very close attention to whether we are achieving the
desired effect, whether we are having unintended consequences
that are creating new risks or whether new risks that we simply
haven't seen before are arising to make sure we are aware of
them before a review is required.
Mrs. Hartzler. I read your testimony as well as part of the
report and it seems like you have got a lot of the matrixes in
place for process as well as product and you have got a process
to monitor in place. But what have you seen so far of actually
recommendations that have been made that you can say have been
achieved? Can you give us some of the successes that have
occurred that you have monitored?
Dr. Brumer. Yes, absolutely. What I would say is at the
moment there is a comprehensive effort across the Department to
address all of the review's recommendations.
By far, the most important thing that has occurred has been
the involvement by the senior leadership in the Department
personally, the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the
Secretary of the Air Force, Secretary of the Navy, have been
very personally involved holding regular meetings to hold the
senior leadership accountable. That is without question what is
most different this time and that has been very much the engine
for a different atmosphere this time around.
There are a number of other recommendations that have
already been implemented, the Air Force elevating Global Strike
Command from a three-star to a four-star, as example, standing
up a senior leadership forum to have discussions. And maybe the
services want to talk more specifically about what is
happening, but there has been money spent, actions taken,
people held accountable. It has been significant.
That said, it is early in the process and we are continuing
to monitor the impact, but we expect this to take years before
we will be able to say that the risk margin has been regained.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much.
Major General Clark, this committee has been very
supportive of Air Force efforts to recapitalize the bomber
fleet with the new long-range strike bomber. Knowing that
operational fielding of the new bomber is still a decade away,
what is the Air Force's philosophy on how it will approach
which bomber fleet will be recapitalized first? And given the
Air Force's goal to procure 80 to 100 new bombers, will the
long-range strike bomber eventually replace all types of
bombers in a single peer fleet?
General Clark. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. We are
developing a bomber roadmap that will address the concerns that
you are discussing. And the bottom line to that is it is going
to take all three of these--all three of our current bombers in
our bomber fleet to get us to the point where we have the LRSB,
the long-range strike bomber in order.
So what it is going to require is modernization and
sustainment of the B-52 and the B-2 in particular for the
nuclear mission. And we do have plans in place, the President's
budget does address those. Now it is a matter of committing to
the roadmap that we develop to get us to that next step for the
LRSB.
Mrs. Hartzler. Once it comes online, will it replace
eventually all three with one?
General Clark. Yes, ma'am. Eventually, it will replace. It
will be the long-range strike bomber for us at a point.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. I will withhold my other
questions, give my colleagues and my ranking member a chance to
ask questions.
Ranking Member Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Madam Chair. Let me just ask each of
you briefly. I would like you to respond briefly to the
affordability issue. We don't have the willingness to tax
ourselves to properly support defense. So how would you--how do
we deal with this affordability issue?
Dr. Brumer. Thank you. I think the Deputy Secretary put it
the best this morning he said this is the number one priority.
We are going to have to fund it. That means either additional
funds will be required or there will be very difficult choices
made about mission risk in other important areas.
Admiral Benedict. Ma'am, I think there are two ways to
address affordability. One is to very carefully and diligently
scrutinize requirements and I will tell you in the Ohio
replacement program, we have spent the last number of years
ensuring that that scrub has been done.
The second aspect and it is one that we are working within
the Navy very closely with the Air Force is the issue of
commonality. As we look at the systems and we are both on
this--on the path to modernize the systems, where could we,
where should we strive for commonality between the SLBMs, the
submarine-launched ballistic missile, and the ICBMs, the land-
based. That is an effort that is being championed at the RDA
level, the Assistant Secretary level with the support of OSD
[Office of the Secretary of Defense] so, I think those two
aspects address affordability.
General Weinstein. We are working really closely with the
United States Navy as Admiral Benedict talked about when it
comes to commonality. We are fortunate that Admiral Haney, the
combatant commander holds stakeholder meetings.
The most recent ICBM stakeholder meeting where we talked
about sustainment issues in the force as well as modernization
issues in the force, we have Admiral Benedict to attend to the
stakeholder meetings on ICBM so we can address corporately what
resource needs we have in the future and what components using
commonality in a smart manner can you use for both the SLBM
force and the ICBM force.
And I believe by working together as a team you can look at
this commonality whether it is in the propulsion system,
whether it is in the guidance system, and I think by looking at
commonality is where you can find a common ground in order to
do what is best for the American taxpayer to provide a
capability that this Nation greatly needs.
Ms. Speier. Major General Clark, do you have anything to
add?
General Clark. Ma'am, I don't have anything really to add
other than what was already said.
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you.
General Weinstein, Congress was alerted to the cheating and
morale problems through press articles. We weren't informed by
any of the executives within the military. Why were we not
alerted to the problem initially? Did you not know about it
either?
General Weinstein. I knew completely about it and I will
tell you when I found out about it exactly and then who I
notified. And, we were hosting, it was early January, hosting
the Secretary of Defense, Secretary Hagel was there. I found
out on that day that there was a drug investigation ongoing and
that drug investigation, besides touching other Air Force
installations, touched crew members at one of my installations
at Malmstrom.
I told the Secretary of Defense immediately when I found
out and then we informed our senior leadership at that time. As
the operational----
Ms. Speier. How about the Congress?
General Weinstein. Well, as the operational commander, I
worked for the Commander of Global Strike Command of the
Commander of U.S. Strategic Command and those people were told
immediately that there was a problem.
Ms. Speier. That doesn't respond to Congress not being told
about it until they read about it in the paper. All right. One
of the recommendations was to guarantee one of the missileers
the top three choices for next assignment. Has the Air Force
been able to fulfill that promise?
General Weinstein. We are working diligently on that
promise.
Ms. Speier. Does that mean you are executing it or not?
General Weinstein. We are executing--let me first--if I--if
you please give me time--what we are executing is a change to
the way we do training and evaluation in the ICBM business, to
empower our airmen to give them proper training. And that was
one of the issues that the Secretary of the Air Force explained
immediately after visiting the bases.
Because of that, we have changed our crew force structure
from a 4-year crew tour into a ``3+3'' crew tour which is 3
years at an operational base where you are a deputy or a
missile combat crew commander and then over to being an
instructor, evaluator, or a flight commander.
By changing that 3+3 structure, we have seen a decrease in
the last two developmental teams and those are the teams that
get together to vector crew members after their first 3-year
assignment because based on the 3+3 structure, we require
additional crew members for that.
So, we have fallen below that 90 percent on two development
teams and we are going to work on that. The one data point that
I think is extremely important is we assign people to their
assignments based on two factors. Factor one is how well are
you doing in your current assignment because it is a merit-
based process. And number two is where are there openings in
the new career field because not every career field has an
opening at the same time every single year.
When we look at the top 50 percent of ICBM crew members
receiving their top three preferences one, two, or three, in
the last board, 100 percent got--of the top 50 percent, got one
of their three assignments. So, we are striving hard to make
sure we can meet the needs of the individual, at the same time
meet the needs of the service.
Ms. Speier. So, you are saying the top 50 percent, so the
bottom 50 percent didn't get their choices, is that what you
are saying?
General Weinstein. No. When I looked at the data for that
one, for the top three preferences overall, it is above 80
percent.
Ms. Speier. Okay.
General Weinstein. So, we are taking care of everyone in
the enterprise.
Ms. Speier. So, there is a huge morale problem, correct?
General Weinstein. No, ma'am, I disagree. There was----
Ms. Speier. But there has been a huge morale problem.
General Weinstein. There was a huge morale problem before
we started the changes.
Ms. Speier. Okay. Is there anything that requires this 24-
hour-on system? I mean, why not 12 hours?
General Weinstein. Over the years, we have looked at the
best way to man an operational force that requires to be on
alert 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. By looking at the 24-hour
schedule, that was the best schedule that supports the ability
to man the mission as well as to take care of the people.
One thing we have implemented which has been a great morale
booster is a change in the alert schedule. The previous alert
schedule had an individual that would go on alert, for example,
on a Monday. They would come back on a Tuesday and would have
to work again on Wednesday.
That doesn't work at a place like Malmstrom Air Force Base
which has the largest missile field and especially in the
winter people would be coming back at 3, 4, 5 o'clock at night.
We have introduced a schedule that we are calling ATOX
which is they are on alert on a Monday. They travel back on
Tuesday. They have Wednesday as a day off. And then on
Thursday, they can either pull alerts or go into training.
In February of this year, the Chief of Staff and the
Secretary of the Air Force brought all the four-stars and
directors from the Air Staff to Minot Air Force Base for a
nuclear oversight board and one of the many boards that we have
to make sure that we keep on track with all the changes.
And then in the launch control center, one of the four-
stars in the United States Air Force asked a crew member what
was the best part about her job. And she answered it was the
schedule. So, we have improved morale greatly by changing the
schedule which allows us to maintain the mission for Admiral
Haney at the same time taking care of the airmen.
Ms. Speier. All right. My understanding is that there used
to be an annual competition between the Navy and Air Force but
that has been discontinued. My understanding was that it used
to build team spirit and lift the morale and help the nuclear
enterprise officers to hone their skills throughout the year.
Is this something that is worthy of being reinstated?
General Weinstein. We have reinstated. Personally, I have
been a missileer for over 32 years and I don't recall a
competition combined with the United States Navy but we have
instituted--my boss, Lieutenant General Wilson, Global Strike
Challenge, that is a competition. We did one last year. We are
doing one this year.
We took a gap for a year or two based on sequestration and
not having the available funds. But we have instituted a
competition. That competition includes ICBM forces and as well
as bomber forces and it is a great camaraderie-builder as well
as improving the mission.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Representative.
We will go to another member of the subcommittee,
Representative Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and thank you for
hosting this hearing today.
And let me get back to my notes. The Nuclear Enterprise
Review, the NER, stated that prior reviews had taken place and
that many key recommendations from those reviews had only
marginal impact.
The NER also stated that expectations are high that this
time the response would be both sustained and effective. How
can you assure the subcommittee that the necessary focus will
remain on implementing the recommendations and how will you
keep sustained attention on the issues within each of your
respective services. And I would like to get a response to that
from all of the witnesses but starting from Major Clark and
then General Weinstein.
General Clark. Sir, I think the--as Dr. Brumer mentioned in
his opening statement----
Mr. Johnson. And I am sorry, Major General. I am sorry.
General Clark. Yes, sir, I understood. I have been called
Major before, too. That is okay.
Mr. Johnson. We will just keep it at General.
General Clark. Yes, sir. Well, thank you. I appreciate
that.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
General Clark. As Dr. Brumer mentioned in his statement I
think that the last time we went through this type of effort in
the enterprise it was somewhat of a box-check mentality. What
we see this time and what I see as a new commander is that this
really is a--it is a top-down effort because we are getting a
significant amount of support from the Secretary of Defense,
the Secretary of the Air Force, our Chief of Staff, Lieutenant
General Wilson, who is the Air Force Global Strike Commander,
top-down attention on the issues that we are facing.
But we are also getting bottom-up attention. And our airmen
are empowered this time to actually have a voice to help us to
determine where the areas that we need to look at, areas that
we need to improve upon. And when you have the top-down coupled
with the bottom-up approach, I think that breeds a recipe for
success for us. So, that is one major change that I think is
along the way.
And ultimately what I think happens here is we are going to
get a culture change. And it is something that is going to be
woven throughout the command because people believe it, people
own it. They understand the purpose and they are empowered to
do something about it. So, I think this time is different than
before because it is not just a box-check mentality.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you.
General Clark. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Johnson. General Weinstein.
General Weinstein. Thank you for the question. This review
is different than previous ones. I would like to talk about
what we did based on the cheating scandal at Malmstrom. We did
three separate investigations because of the cheating scandal
internal to the United States Air Force before the Secretary of
Defense did the Nuclear Enterprise Review.
The first thing we did was the commander directed an
investigation that looked at the leadership at Malmstrom. The
second item we did was a group that had an organizational
behavior specialist on it to find out how did we get that way
and that was the senior operational training and evaluation
group, had an ICBM person and a bomber person on it.
Just like Admiral Benedict talked about commonality, there
is commonality on how to solve problems. And my boss,
Lieutenant General Wilson, worked with the commander of SUBLANT
[Submarine Force Atlantic] and a fellow task force commander
Vice Admiral Mike Connor and developed a program called the
Force Improvement Program that General Clark just talked about.
The Force Improvement Program then went out and talked to
the airmen. And we broke it up into many different
subspecialties. We broke it up into operations, maintenance,
support, helicopters, and operations. We received numerous
items, over 350 recommendations. Those were 350 recommendations
that came from the airmen.
The only two people that were allowed to say no to one of
those recommendations were myself and General Wilson. We spent
3 days at Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana to review all
those items. From those items, we came up with how we are going
to improve the culture and the commitment in the ICBM force.
When you look at the Nuclear Enterprise Review, there is 90
percent congruence between what the Nuclear Enterprise Review
came and then what occurred during the Force Improvement
Program. And then, as we have talked about before, it is
leadership commitment; myself, General Clark, Vice Admiral
Benedict, we attend meetings with the Deputy Secretary of
Defense and the SECDEF [Secretary of Defense].
The Secretary of Air Force has visited our bases more than
any other bases so it is the leadership commitment and it is
the commitment from the airmen and the leaders that are making
a difference this time.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Madam Chair, if I could hear from Admiral Benedict on this
also. Thank you.
Admiral Benedict. Congressman, thank you. Sir, I will
reiterate what my Air Force counterpart has said. I think,
first and foremost, it is the attention by senior leadership.
Going back to 2007 when Secretary Schlesinger and Admiral
Donald conducted internal reviews of the Navy's position, we
have implemented 100 percent of those findings.
We continually assess ourselves every 2 years. We knew that
we had issues with infrastructure and personnel before the
SECDEF reviews last summer. But the senior commitment not only
in attention to detail but also financially has allowed us to
move those two areas at a much more rapid pace to ensure that
we are fully in support of this mission.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. And with that, I will yield back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, gentlemen.
Now, we will go to Representative Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. I want to thank you, Madam Chairman. As you
know, I represent Montana, the sole Congressman from the great
State that has Malmstrom. And thank you, sir. And I am also a
former SEAL [Sea, Air, Land forces] commander and I have
concerns as I have been through multiple hearings about one, is
there is this wave that would think that the triad is no longer
relevant given that the bombers face enormous challenges, that
our diminishing submarine force and disruptive technology,
which makes them more difficult in that mission.
And there are some that would suggest that the land-based
ICBMs are no longer required. Given that disruptive technology
can have a severe and overnight effect with our submarine
force, our Air Force still is challenged with aging aircraft,
it leads to the missile base.
And do you share that opinion that without the missile base
we are putting our country's deterrence at great risk?
General Weinstein. I think the ICBM force like the bomber
force and the sea-launched ballistic missile force are
absolutely critical to the defense of our Nation. I think
sometimes we need to look at the problems through the eyes of
our adversary. And if you look at some of our other nations--
and if you look at other nations, other nations are investing
in a new ICBM, whether it is a mobile ICBM or replacing all
their other ICBMs. And other nations are trying to develop
capability.
I think the ICBM force provides a unique capability. It is
an on-alert force 24 hours a day, 7 days a week that is used
every single day to protect this Nation. It is used every
single day in a deterrent role. And I think this is not the
Cold War. This isn't a Cold War force.
But if we look at the world environment today, it is more
dangerous than the Cold War and more unpredictable, and the
ICBM force is as valid today as it was in 1960s.
Mr. Zinke. And Admiral, I got in the Navy in 1984. And my
assessment today is there are more threats, more asymmetrical
threats than when I first came in. Do you also share the view
that today we face a heightened threat as opposed to the Cold
War?
Admiral Benedict. Yes, sir, I do. And, in fact, that has
been the topic of much discussion as we have gone through the
requirement scrub that I alluded to earlier as we have gone
through the design phase of the Ohio replacement.
That platform will be in the water through approximately
2084. And so, as we try and project out the threats through
that timeframe, the major focus of the requirements scrub was
to ensure that we had technical margin to ensure that while we
can't predict the future, we can certainly ensure that we don't
find ourselves surprised in the future. And so, I would agree
with you wholeheartedly, sir.
Mr. Zinke. And Major General Clark, as the last part of the
triad, the aging B-52s, could you explain what the process is
and how long you expect those aircraft to stay in service?
General Clark. Sir, we expect the B-52 to be in service for
up to 25 more years. And through a series of sustainment and
modernization programs that we have intact, we have a good plan
to keep it viable.
But I would like to address another point that you made
about its relevance right now. The bomber fleet is the most
flexible and the most visible part of the triad. That is what
the bomber fleet offers. And I think from a flexibility
standpoint, there is not a lot of argument there. It has
certainly--delivers a wide array of weapons effects.
It can do it in a wide array of timespan as well. But as
far as the visibility, I just want to point one example to you.
About 2 weeks ago, we had B-52s in the United Kingdom
participating in an exercise in the Baltics. And as the B-52s
were flying in the Baltic region, one of our B-52s was
intercepted by a Russian fighter. And that Russian fighter
pulled in to an observation position to monitor the B-52's
activity. Our Swedish allies rejoined and the Russian fighter
left. And what that shows is that the B-52 is still relevant
because it is visible.
Our allies see it. Our adversaries see it and it is in a
deterrent role every day, so I strongly disagree with any
notion that it is no longer relevant to our force.
Mr. Zinke. We used to have B-52s in Glasgow, Montana, and
you are welcome back anytime. And with that, Madam Chairman, I
yield the rest of my time.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and I thank the
witnesses for being here, for your service to our country. This
is for any one of you. The changes per the Nuclear Enterprise
Review, how are they going to be institutionalized?
I am worried long-term after Deputy Secretary Work is gone,
I am worried about continued leadership and culture focus
because obviously, we know there is a new heightened awareness
now that the problems and a new zeal for resolving them, but
that can wane and atrophy over time, so what are your thoughts
about that?
And I would open that up to any one of you.
Admiral Benedict. Thank you, sir. One of the benefits that
I enjoy within the Navy is that my mission is performed by
professional submariners who basically take their platform to
sea.
And so the fundamental professional aspects of attention to
detail as you take a submarine and prepare to dive and then
execute your mission underwater with the preparation to
resurface, again drives a very strong culture of self-
assessment in a different light.
So I reap the benefits of that philosophy, that culture
bleeding over to and supporting the Strategic Weapons System
which is the sole purpose of an SSBN [ballistic missile nuclear
submarine]. So from that aspect, I think we are strongly rooted
in the overall culture of the submarine force.
Going all the way back to 2007, one of the main objectives
coming out of those two investigations was to develop within
SSP a culture of self-assessment, and that is what instituted
the biannual reviews that I conduct on myself and then those
are reviewed as part of the larger Navy biannual assessment.
So we don't let it spike and wane. We are taking a constant
strain on a biannual basis to ensure that that culture remains
strong and growing in the right direction.
Mr. Rogers. General Weinstein, not everybody has the luxury
of an 8-year assignment like Admiral Benedict which would help
with long-term institutionalization and focus. What are your
thoughts about how you are going to see that--this vigor remain
present?
General Weinstein. Thank you, sir. And it is a--it was an
honor to host you and Congressman Cooper to Minot in the
winter.
Mr. Rogers. That is right. In December, let's tell
everybody.
General Weinstein. In December. As I mentioned earlier, the
Force Improvement Program, which was the grassroots effort to
get the lower ranking individuals in the organization and get
their inputs. The key is leadership at the higher levels and we
have talked about that, but to me it is the lower levels that
believe in what we are doing is right.
I had a captain in my office a few months ago and the
captain looked at me and said, ``General, you don't have to
tell me''--this is before we made all the changes--``General,
you don't have to tell me my job is important. I know it is
important. Just let me do it.''
And I was having dinner with some airmen at Minot Air Force
Base and the senior airman looked at me and goes, ``Sir, morale
is my problem not your problem.'' A culture to change requires
people at the lower levels to believe in what you are doing.
And what I am seeing across the entire ICBM force is they
believe in what we are doing and they are grabbing onto it
themselves.
So the concern--and my crew members have had the same
concern about when leadership leaves. They don't want to see
this go the way of other reviews. But what is different this
time is we listened to them at the very beginning on what their
problems were and they can see concrete examples of what we are
doing to fix it.
When we told them they needed new crew vehicles to go to
the field, within a matter of 4 months they all had new crew
vehicles to go to the field. When we told the cops that they
have an extremely important job and they need to be in the
proper uniform, we got them the camouflage pattern that is in
Afghanistan and every one of my deployed airmen has those when
they go out to the missile field. They are seeing concrete
items. And the one item----
Mr. Rogers. They are seeing, they build that sense of
enthusiasm because they see it from you. They see that you let
them know what they do matters. I know Admiral Benedict does
that.
He is going to do it for a number of years, but you are
going to move on to the next assignment pretty soon. And I am
just worried about whoever follows in your shoes that they let
that missileer know what you do is really doggone important,
that B-52 pilot, so that is what I worry about. How is that
going to be continued after your move on to your next
assignment?
General Weinstein. Sir, I think it is the trust in the
senior leadership of the secretary and chief for putting the
right people in command of my organization. Just like putting
General Rand in command of Global Strike Command is the right
for the United States Air Force for the first four-star. It is
senior leaders picking the right commanders and then it is
empowering and trusting your airmen, that they can see that
they have a voice and they have an impact.
Mr. Rogers. But they get that from the top. That is the
thing. And I agree about the flag officer. I think that is a
good move. It shows commitment by the Secretary of the Air
Force, the Secretary of Defense.
But this has to be continued. And that is what I worry
about long-term. I yield back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to follow
up on a question that Representative Speier had, bringing up
the incident of the cheating. And was wondering if Admiral and
General Weinstein, if you could explain about some of the
changes that you are doing with testing and with evaluation of
the airmen and the sailors.
General Weinstein. I appreciate the question. What we have
done is we have completely restructured the way we have done
training and evaluation in the ICBM force. The way we used to
do training--training was evaluation, so a crew member would
take 47 tests per year and every test was a certification.
Every time they went into the missile procedure trainer,
our simulator, they were being evaluated. Well, that is not the
right way to want to motivate a force. It is not the right way
to train a force.
We also, opposed to the aviation community, the less alerts
you pulled the better crew member you were, which makes no
sense. In the flying side, the more flight hours you have the
better aviator you are.
That is why we have come up with the 3+3 construct which is
the first 3 years you are a deputy missile combat crew
commander then you are a missile combat crew commander, and the
most important piece is being in the missile field.
We have changed the way we do training. They have two
trainer rides a month. One they select themselves to hone their
skills. They take one closed-book test, it is called boldface
for those most important things per year--excuse me per month
and then we have gone to the aviation side which is instead of
a 12-month evaluation we are in an 18-month evaluation.
Another critical item we have done is we put leaders in the
field to lead from the front. In our business, the only person
that pulled alerts other than crew members were a squadron
commander. We now have wing commanders, vice wing commanders,
and group commanders, all pulling alerts so we have senior
people, so we have completely restructured the way we have done
training and put missile combat crew commanders in charge of
training. And that whole concept of empowering our best and
brightest lieutenants to lead is the way we have structured the
entire force.
Mrs. Hartzler. No doubt that is an impact to the morale.
Admiral.
Admiral Benedict. Yes, ma'am. So in my discussions with
Admiral Richardson who is head of Naval Nuclear Propulsion, the
cheating scandal that occurred down in Charleston, and he spent
an inordinate amount of personal professional time in
personally understanding what happened down there.
I think first and foremost, I can say with confidence that
that is not a systemic problem down there. That was a group
of--a very small cloistered group of individuals who chose to
cheat.
And in fact, it was the culture of self-assessment and
honor, integrity, that allowed another instructor to identify
that to the system that there was this small group of
individuals. Admiral Richardson has chosen not just to address
that problem but to look at the very nature of what would cause
that, so he has gone through and looked at the rotation from
sea duty to shore duty, to understand what was driving that
behavior.
He spent an excessive amount of time understanding the very
nature of cheating, he has gone to I know the University of
Notre Dame and talked to experts around the Nation trying to
understand what drives people to break the ethics and integrity
thresholds.
And he has put in place, I think a strong measure that
ensures that the aspects of coming off of arduous sea duty into
instructive duty down in his prototypes does not drive--is not
the causal factor for those young men and women to cheat.
So I think that we have looked at not just the symptom, but
I think Admiral Richardson to his credit has gone to the root
cause to find the motivational factors and has taken concrete
steps to ensure that he gets to that problem.
Mrs. Hartzler. That is very encouraging. Sequestration over
the past 2 years has obviously harmed efforts to organize,
train, equip, modernize, and maintain readiness of our nuclear
forces. This year both the House and the Senate have passed
authorization bills that meet the President's requested funding
level by increasing the amount of authorized OCO [overseas
contingency operations] funds.
In your professional judgment, and this is for all of you,
do you foresee any difficulties because of the mechanism by
which funding is provided to the Department by Congress in
implementing the recommendations of the Nuclear Enterprise
Review?
Dr. Brumer.
Dr. Brumer. Thank you. It is an important question. At the
core of all of these discussions, and it has come up today and
it comes up a lot in the Pentagon, is that this is an effort
that requires enduring, sustained attention.
And so last year in the Future Years Defense Program, the
Department added $8 billion to address the recommendations of
the reviews that will be reconsidered this year to see whether
that was sufficient, whether there are additional ways to gain
efficiency. But it is something that is going to require
sustained attention; and the fiscal uncertainty associated with
sequestration has, you know, it puts that at risk.
Additionally, I will note that when I talk to the forces in
the field, they are very aware of the things that are happening
out here. They have been very encouraged by the activities in
the Pentagon and hear these discussions as well as the
additional funds that are coming, but that is a question that
comes up a lot and somewhat undermines the message, the
question of, you know, will this be sustainable given the
fiscal uncertainty the Department of Defense faces.
Mrs. Hartzler. Admiral.
Admiral Benedict. Yes, ma'am. I would agree with Dr.
Brumer. As I stated earlier, I have 69 more years of
requirements to support the Strategic Weapons System, and as I
think we have all stated here at the table, stability of and
continuity of both personnel and resources is paramount to
being able to execute that effectively.
So while we truly appreciate the support of Congress, OCO
funds is somewhat counter-culture to that stable platform that
I think we would all desire.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you.
General Weinstein.
General Weinstein. I completely agree with Admiral
Benedict. It is really the consistency of funding; you know, as
the operational commander, we need capability. And for the ICBM
force, in the budget is a new payload transporter, which is the
big white truck that brings the weapon as well as other
capability out to the missile field.
A new helicopter is absolutely critical to our ability to
secure the force. And if you don't have consistency of funding
for our acquisition airmen that are trying to buy this new
capability that we need, the lack of consistency is really
concerning because to my airmen, they will view this lack of
consistency of funding as stepping back from the improvements
to the Nuclear Enterprise Review because where the rubber meets
the road is they want the new truck or they want to see the new
helicopter and if we don't have consistency, that will
undermine the improvements to the enterprise.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay.
General Clark.
General Clark. Ma'am, I agree with what everyone else said.
It does have an impact on culture. And when we have airmen
flying bombers that their grandfathers flew and then they see
that the LRSB, which is critical to our future and the long
range standoff munition, another critical piece, when they see
those at risk because of the inconsistency and the uncertainty
it does have an impact on morale.
And it makes them question just how important the mission
really is. So we can do all we can do as leaders, but like
General Weinstein said, where the rubber hits the road is what
our country really puts forward for them to do their mission.
Mrs. Hartzler. Ranking Member Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You had referenced, I think, it was you, General Weinstein,
that you had some 350 recommendations from the airmen. Would
you make that list available to us so we can review them?
General Weinstein. Yes, I will.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 85.]
Ms. Speier. Okay. I just want to read--I want to ask you
one question. Evidently, there are some court-martials underway
right now that I am curious what the results have been. Let's
see, there are four court-martials for drug use, rape, assault,
sexual assault on an unconscious person, and larceny. And then
at Malmstrom, from there two missileers that are being court-
martialed for using and selling bath salts, a synthetic
substance that can render users psychotic.
And at Warren three airmen have received--have recently
been or are due to be court-martialed for drunk driving, using
and selling pot, and indecent filming of the private areas of
another person without consent. Are those cases ongoing right
now?
General Weinstein. Some of those I am familiar with, others
I am not. I can provide the committee information you need on
ongoing military justice cases in my command.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 85.]
Ms. Speier. All right, if you would do so, I am curious
when this conduct was going on and to you, Admiral Benedict as
well to the extent that you have--there is this belief that you
all have that morale is much better. And we want to believe
that as well, but the extent that this kind of conduct is--was
going on by missileers is very troubling I think to all of us.
There was one reference made that--I just want to read this
to you. After 2 years at F.E. Warren [Air Force Base], so you
could--one of the missileers said he ``could complete a launch
exercise in less than a minute, between scenes of Mad Men or
bites of a burger. Once missileers learn their checklists by
rote, many of them have hours of idle time on their hands. Some
binge-watch TV or read, a few study for advanced degrees.
Inside the capsules little has changed since the Cold War, from
the constant vibrations and foot odor to the 8-inch floppy
disks in the consoles. `It is absolutely all the same whether
it is Christmas Day or the Fourth of July. . . You are in a
constant state of jetlag. You are up [at] 1 a.m. under
fluorescent lights. After a year and a half I was never fully
awake or fully asleep. You reach this zombie state.'
``Sleep deprivation is known to induce hallucinations and
impaired judgment. The CO
2
levels in the silos don't
always meet OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health
Administration] standards either. The combined effect may make
missileers groggy and even impulsive and aggressive.''
So that gets to that whole issue of 24-hour sets of duty
and the impact that that has in creating fatigue. I could just
tell you, I am one of those Members that flies from San
Francisco to Washington every week. I am always on the wrong
time zone and my body is always fatigued. Now, my
responsibilities aren't as serious as those of the missileers
but I feel it, so I am curious. I know sometimes there is this
sense that we have got to be tough.
In medical school and upon graduating and being residents,
24 hours, 36 hours in an emergency room was like a rite of
passage, until we realized that people were dying because of
it. I am just curious whether you have seriously looked at
whether these issues are real and whether they should be
adjusted.
General Weinstein. First of all, if you are referencing a
recent article that was published, I find it interesting that
it is one individual that makes a comment and we don't discuss
with other members of that F.E. Warren Air Force Base. Let me
go into some facts.
Some of the facts are that is why we have 350-plus
recommendations on what we need to do to fix. One of the
comments you made about the, I will say dirty capsules, we have
program now where we are doing deep cleaning of launch control
centers for the first time since we have had launch control
centers.
So when you walk into one of my launch control centers at
any of the bases that have been deep cleaned, you do not smell
anything other than a clean capsule. I discussed how we changed
the crew force from going from an alert travel day to going
right back to work. We have completely structured that.
We have restructured training. And when I talked about the
3+3 schedule, so some of the concerns from that one individual,
all those problems are problems that do not exist in the force
because we have attacked those problems.
Also, we are hiring at all the bases physiologists that can
help people when it comes to what is the proper diet you need
to be on as well as the proper sleep schedule and that whole
piece. So from that comment, that is not what I am seeing in
the force.
I am seeing a force that sees the changes we are making.
The changes that they requested based on being the airmen and
pulling the alerts, the changes in training and evaluation, the
new vehicles, the new crew schedule, upgrades to the launch
control center that is in work--that is why consistency of
funding is important to get rid of the 8-inch floppy disks that
you referenced--so there has been a massive change in how we
treat our airmen. There has been a massive change in how we are
sustaining the weapon system, and some of those comments from
previous people that were in the ICBM field are no longer
valid.
Ms. Speier. All right. Well, we would appreciate those 350
recommendations, thank you.
General Clark. Ma'am, can I add a point to General
Weinstein?
Ms. Speier. Certainly.
General Clark. I would just like to say in regards to the
24-hours in a launch control center, you can talk to General
Tibbets or any other bomber pilot and you will find people
flying sorties anywhere from 18 to 44 hours in a space a third
as big as a launch control center in a seat, very confined
quarters and it really is just--it is a part of what we do. It
is a part of how we do business.
But we prepare ourselves to do that just as the missileers
do. So granted it is tough duty, but it is something that I
think isn't out of the ordinary in the nuclear business and it
is something that our airmen are prepared to do.
Ms. Speier. Major General, I recognize that and I could
just substitute the chief of academics at a medical school
saying exactly the same thing. And it wasn't until there were
deaths caused by emergency room interns and residents that were
sleep deprived that we started to change that process. I think
you should look at it. And I will leave it at that. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Representative Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. For each one of you, I would like
to ask which one of the NER recommendations poses the most
significant challenge to implement and explain the factors that
make implementation of that recommendation challenging.
Starting with you again, General Clark.
General Clark. Sir, I think some of the recommendations
that are associated with resources and garnering more resources
to implement are the most challenging for us, because there is,
as we talked about before, a bit of uncertainty as to what
resources we are going to have to do these things.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Other than resources.
General Clark. Okay.
Mr. Johnson. I thought you were going to go there.
General Clark. Yes, sir. Well, then I guess my next answer
would be the cultural change because culture is hard to move.
It is hard to move the ship and to make it stick. And I think
that is the challenge for us as leaders as well as our airmen
to really own this mission.
We have to empower our airmen. We have to trust them and we
have to give them that sense of purpose so that they really do
take the culture and make it theirs. And that is something that
is going to take some time. It is going to take some effort,
but I think we are on the right path.
General Weinstein. Thank you, sir. I agree with General
Clark, you know, the first two items as I look at the NER
recommendations really is the resource challenges, consistency
of budget is extremely important.
That is the one piece and I won't--we have already talked
about that. And then just like----
Mr. Johnson. Which did not lead to the morale problems.
General Weinstein. No, it did not lead to the morale
problems. But when you look at some of the--that is why to me,
culture and I appreciated the question from Congressman Rogers
that the culture piece is really important.
When you look at what the changes we made in the ICBM
force, those changes are really geared in really two main
areas. Area one has to do with improvements in the force. And I
will talk about things that you can buy--new vehicles, cleaning
capsules, making sure they have the right mattresses, making
sure they have the right gear for security forces, make sure
they have the right weapons and the right scopes.
The bigger issue to me that is the--where I am getting a
lot of bang for the buck has to do with the changing of the
culture. In the ICBM force, which really impacted the culture
piece, was we didn't empower our young officers.
We took authority away from them. And when you take
authority away from someone that wants to do a job, that is the
worst thing for morale. By empowering our young airmen and our
young officers to do the job, I think that is the most
foundational thing that we are doing in order to improve the
culture in the ICBM force.
So when you look at the challenges, the challenges are
continuing that culture change by trusting our airmen, giving
them the right resources, giving the right training, and then
when you do that, and you trust them and then if they make a
mistake, there are two types of mistakes people will make. You
will make an error of omission or error of commission. If you
make an error of omission, you handle that one way, an error of
commission you handle another way.
So I think by really focusing on the culture changes is
what is why if you were to visit one of my bases versus
visiting them over a year ago, you would actually see a pep in
people's step. You would see people that like the mission more,
all because we are changing the culture by trusting them.
Mr. Johnson. All right.
General Weinstein. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Admiral.
Admiral Benedict. Sir, as I said, we are focused on two
things--the infrastructure and personnel. So I would say that
our greatest challenge right now is hiring and not just hiring
but hiring and training personnel to do the mission of
strategic deterrence whether it is in the shipyards, repairing
the nuclear platforms, the submarines or whether it is in my
strategic weapons facilities, hiring and training people to do
the maintenance on the weapons and on the delivery system.
So we are on track with doing that. But that is a two-faced
effort--one is to hire them, the second one is to train and
certify them to do the mission.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Dr. Brumer.
Dr. Brumer. Thank you, Congressman. Particular
recommendations I think are mostly straightforward, you know,
the resource challenges are real, the culture challenges are
real. A lot of the recommendations come down to trying to
strike a balance, a balance between empowering your airmen and
ensuring adherence to rigorous standards, balances within
culture.
Those are challenging. And the only way to achieve a
balance, and it is one of the reasons I think that we have had
difficulty in the past, we have gone too far one way, the
reviews tell us to go the other way, and we go too far the
other way, is sustained attention and recalibration over time
and that is difficult.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, gentlemen.
The gentleman from Montana, Mr. Zinke.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Getting back to when an incident occurs in a nuclear
facility, the chain of command and whether to notify Congress
or not. I assume the incident over cheating, was there an OPREP
[operations report] that was released over it?
General Weinstein. I would have to verify, but I would
assume there is, sir.
Mr. Zinke. And generally on the OPREP I will assume the
addressees are Secretary of Defense.
General Weinstein. For the Air Force we provide it to the
Air Force Operation Center, we provide it to National Military
Command Center as well as Strategic Command.
Mr. Zinke. And then that would be--the chain of command
would be ultimately the Commander in Chief, I would assume?
General Weinstein. I am not sure at what level it gets to.
Mr. Zinke. But as far as informing Congress, I would assume
it would go up to the Secretary of the Air Force or Secretary
of Defense and they would have the responsibility. And lastly,
I recently visited Malmstrom and the morale is good, you know,
I think the--went in the hunting season, I visited during the
hunting season; the hunting season is, you know, makes morale
go up.
But one of the issues was the Humvees because it was
pointed out that you are out there, the weather in Montana
during the winter is bad, the distances are long, and in my
experience the Humvees are not the best of vehicles going
across the roads of Montana in the winter.
Are you aware of the problem with the Humvees and are
trying to look at different vehicles that would be better in
the weather, because I understand they have a lot of accidents
up there and safety is an issue?
General Weinstein. Yes, we agree that the Humvee is not the
best vehicle. While it provides armor, up in Montana as well as
North Dakota and Wyoming, it is not the best vehicle for the
roads.
We are working really closely with our major command--Air
Force Global Strike Command, because we know that we need to
provide the defenders, security force members with the proper
vehicle for what they are doing.
And I even had a discussion this week with the director of
logistics at Global Strike Command on this very topic to
replace the Humvees. My goal would be to replace the Humvees
across the fleet to a vehicle that is better suited for the
environment.
You know, Humvees don't have anti-lock brakes which makes
it problematic driving on the roads as well as we need a
vehicle in the missile field that can--when it idles at minus
40 below can keep the airmen warm. And the Humvee does not do
that. So we are looking at what is the best alternative to
replace the security force vehicles with vehicles that our
airmen need.
Mr. Zinke. Certainly, if Congress can be helpful and
expedite in that, so we don't go through another winter, even
if it is a short-term flexibility, you know? Just let us know
and we would I am sure be glad to help them do whatever we can.
General Weinstein. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Zinke. And Madam Chairman, I yield back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, gentlemen. Now the chairman of
the Strategic Forces Subcommittee, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Curious, Admiral Benedict and General Weinstein, could you
compare--you could compare and contrast for me the nuclear
oversight between the Navy and Air Force? You talked about,
Admiral Benedict, being a nuclear regulator. Do you all have a
regulator, Admiral Weinstein?
General Weinstein. No, sir. We have--Admiral Benedict
brought that up at a stakeholders meeting we had with Admiral
Haney, and the United States Air Force is looking at it. I can
talk briefly about the way the United States Air Force does it.
On a roughly quarterly basis, we have something called the
nuclear oversight board. That nuclear oversight board is
chaired by the Secretary and Chief of Staff of the United
States Air Force, with all the four-stars going into issues
that are nuclear.
At a level below that, there is another organization that
is chaired by the Air Force A-10, another position that the Air
Force will be upgrading to a three-star position. That position
goes through and reviews all the internal Air Force issues as
well as issues that are going to be brought forward for the
Nuclear Enterprise Review.
So bottom line is that senior levels of the United States
Air Force chair a meeting as well as the Air Force A-10 chairs
a meeting to look at items.
The other one--if I could say one more thing also. Internal
to Air Force Global Strike Command we stood up something called
the senior working group. That senior working group is--it is
tri-chaired actually between the vice commander of Global
Strike Command, myself, and General Clark.
And we go through periodically all the recommendations and
as the operational commanders, we can put pressure on the force
in order to make sure our airmen get redux, so there are about
three different layers of oversight that we are providing the
nuclear enterprise.
Admiral Benedict. Sir, I think as you know with--I am the
single accountable flag officer within the United States Navy.
So on the acquisition side, I am the only direct reporting
program manager on the acquisition aspects of the Strategic
Weapons System and in that I report to Mr. Stackley, the
Assistant Secretary of the Navy.
I am an Echelon II commander on the operational side and in
that I am responsible for all the deployed assets. I report
directly to the CNO [Chief of Naval Operations]. I am also the
project officer for the Polaris sales agreement and in that I
am the one authorized to sell internationally to the United
Kingdom. And then most recently the Secretary of the Navy has
designated me the regulator for all nine Echelon IIs who have
any role in supporting the Navy's nuclear deterrent mission.
So that allows me to integrate across all those functions
and report directly to either the secretary for international,
Mr. Stackley for acquisition, or directly for the CNO for any
operational aspects.
All of that comes together with us on a--about an every 6-
week meeting of what is the called the Navy Nuclear Weapons
Oversight Council which is chaired by the director of the Navy
staff who reports directly to the CNO, and that group, which is
all the N codes, all the three-stars within the OPNAV [Office
of the CNO] staff, have total transparency into all aspects of
the Navy's mission here.
Mr. Rogers. Yes. Thank you. General Weinstein, we had a
briefing, I think it was a week ago, Admiral Benedict was in
that where General Harencak talked about the need for
helicopters for security purposes.
We just found out the appropriators have cut those. What
does that mean for you and your mission, your ability to do
your mission?
General Weinstein. I appreciate the question. You know, the
current helicopters that we use in the missile field are 1960,
1970 Hueys. They don't have based on the DOD [Department of
Defense] requirements for payload lifting capacity and range.
So it is a--we know operationally, we need a new
helicopter. We don't have a helicopter that can move the
security forces at the speed we need to get to the missile
field. So any delay in a new helicopter from an operational
consideration is really damaging to the security we have of the
weapon system.
Mr. Rogers. General Clark, the B-52s, awesome, but you are
right--they are really old. But you did testify a little
earlier, you think they have got--or you all expect a life of
25 to 30 more years. Is that accurate?
General Clark. Sir, that is accurate.
Mr. Rogers. I talked with a new flag officer that we have
got at Global Strike Command this week and told him about my
interest in seeing a re-engining of the B-52s. And he explained
to me the job leader General Wilson has been working on that.
What are your thoughts about the viability of re-engining
the B-52s with these new modern fuel efficient engines?
General Clark. Sir, my personal opinion is that it is
critical. If we are going to fly this airplane for another 25
years, there is going to be a point that these engines will--
they will need to be replaced, I believe.
It doesn't just impact us though from a business case, I
mean it is fuel efficiency, as you mentioned. It is also
maintainability; the maintenance on these engines is getting
more expensive every year. Spare parts are becoming more scarce
as we go, and they are only going to get--that situation is
only going to get worse over the coming decades.
But there is also an operational case. If we put these new
engines on, it increases our range. It increases our
opportunity for loiter capability. It increases the payload
that the aircraft can carry, it increases the altitudes that it
can climb to.
It does everything that--or it enhances everything that we
need a bomber to do, really. So I think that this is something
that we should take a serious look at and try and take action
on.
Mr. Rogers. We are. Thank you very much. Thank you, all,
for your service.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you to each of you for coming today. Thank you for
all my colleagues who are participating today. Clearly, there
have been several challenges over the last few years that have
been identified in our most important mission that we have for
a strong nuclear deterrent in our country.
But I am encouraged by what we have heard today and
encouraged by the systems that have been set up to make sure
and monitor, Dr. Brumer, what is occurring and the
recommendations, but also the positive steps and the leadership
that is already being shown to address these issues and the
improvements that we have already seen in a short amount of
time.
So I am very encouraged and feel like we are on the right
track and we will get there under your leadership with the
support here of Members of Congress. We are committed to
working with you on that. And I would be remiss before we close
the hearing not to introduce the new commander of Whiteman Air
Force Base, General Paul Tibbets who is there as well. Do you
want to wave here?
And I have to say as far as the competition goes, you have
talked about the Global Strike Challenge, I have to mention
since--that we did win the Fairchild award, Trophy. And we did
very well in that, so very, very proud of that. Thank you all
for being here and this briefing is now closed.
[Whereupon, at 2:24 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 25, 2015

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 25, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 25, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 25, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER

Admiral Benedict.

E7, attached to Naval Ordnances Testing Unit in Port
Canaveral, FL stands accused of sexually assaulting another E7's
spouse. This case is being prosecuted by civilian courts.

E5, attached to Strategic Weapons Facility, Atlantic in
Kings Bay, GA, stands accused of eight counts of child molestation and
is in custody of civilian authorities. The command is processing the
accused for an administrative separation from the Navy.

E3, attached to Strategic Weapons Facility, Pacific in
Bangor, WA, is accused of violating Article 107 (false official
statement) of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) and three
specifications of Article 112a (two wrongful uses of a controlled
substance and, an introduction of a controlled substance onto an
installation used by the armed forces). Charges were referred to a
Special Court-Martial on 2 June 2015 and arraignment is docketed for 17
August 2015 with a proposed trial date of 30 September 2015.

E3, attached to Strategic Weapons Facility, Pacific in
Bangor, WA, was accused of violating Article 90 (assaulting or
willfully disobeying superior commissioned officer) of the UCMJ. This
issue was handled at Non-Judicial punishment.

E3, attached to Strategic Weapons Facility, Pacific in
Bangor, WA, was accused of violating Article 91 (insubordinate conduct
toward warrant officer, noncommissioned officer, or petty officer) of
the UCMJ. This issue was handled at Non-Judicial punishment.

E4, attached to Strategic Weapons Facility, Atlantic in
Kings Bay, GA, was accused of violating Article 92 (failure to obey
order or regulation) of the UCMJ. This issue was handled at Non-
Judicial punishment.

E4, attached to Strategic Weapons Facility, Atlantic in
Kings Bay, GA, was accused of violating Article 92 (failure to obey
order or regulation) of the UCMJ. This issue was handled at Non-
Judicial punishment.   [See page 20.]
General Weinstein. I appreciate your desire to review the list of
recommendations from our Airmen gathered during Air Force Global Strike
Command's Force Improvement Program. The attached document reflects raw
inputs from the field; as such, several are redundant as indicated by
an asterisk. This list has more the 400 entries; the number of unique
recommendations is approximately 350 as we discussed during my
testimony.   [See page 20.]
[The document referred to can be found in the Appendix on page 69.]
General Weinstein. The following table shows the number of courts-
martial of Twentieth Air Force Airmen that went to a verdict in each of
the full calendar years following the activation of Air Force Global
Strike Command on August 7, 2009. Also included is the rate of courts-
martial per 1,000 Airmen compared with the Air Force rate per thousand
(RPT).

Year       20 AF Courts-Martial      20 AF RPT      Air Force RPT

2010            15                      2.0             2.4
2011            38                      4.9             2.4
2012            34                      4.4             2.2
2013            28                      3.6             2.3
2014            17                      2.2             1.8

As of 21 July 2015, 9 courts-martial went to a verdict in Twentieth
Air Force with a 1.2 RPT year-to-date. The Air Force RPT is 1.8 year-
to-date. Since 25 June 2014, recent courts-martial include the cases of
3 officers and 10 enlisted that went to a verdict. As of 21 July 2015,
court-martial proceedings are on-going in the case of 1 officer and 4
enlisted.   [See page 20.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

June 25, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. HARTZLER

Mrs. Hartzler. Describe your access to senior leaders within the
services and OSD to monitor implementation of the NER recommendations.
Dr. Brumer. My level of access to senior leadership has been
excellent; all Services and DOD Components understand the high priority
of the nuclear mission and are quick to respond to requests for
information and briefings. I also have access to Deputy Secretary of
Defense Work on a regular basis and am frequently contacted to provide
updates on the progress of recommendation implementation. I greatly
appreciate the cooperation we have received from the Services and we
work hard to be judicious in our data requests to ensure good use of
everyone's time.
Mrs. Hartzler. Describe the sufficiency of access and information
you receive from the services to monitor the progress of the
recommendations.
Dr. Brumer. The Services and DOD Components have provided and
continue to provide a wealth of information to support metrics and
analysis behind each of the recommendations. This data enables us to
assess proposed approaches for implementation and to understand the
impact of the recommendations on the core issues by comparing the
baseline conditions to changes in metrics over time.
Mrs. Hartzler. What processes have been set in place to track the
implementation of the recommendations?
Dr. Brumer. Last February, the Secretary of Defense directed OSD
CAPE to track and assess the implementation of the Nuclear Enterprise
Review recommendations and established the Nuclear Deterrent Enterprise
Review Group (NDERG) to hold senior leadership accountable. Deputy
Secretary of Defense Work continues to chair regular meetings of the
NDERG at which CAPE provides updates and metrics on progress made
toward implementing the recommendations and addressing the underlying
issues. This is supported by a three-star level Senior Oversight Group
to vet issues and resolve conflicts. Additionally, my team holds bi-
weekly working group level meetings attended by representatives from
the Services, USSTRATCOM, Joint Staff, and OSD to update actions on
each recommendation and evaluate progress through milestones and
metrics.
Mrs. Hartzler. What are the metrics being used to track progress on
recommendations, and how do they measure the health of the the nuclear
enterprise?
Dr. Brumer. My team is tracking hundreds of unique metrics,
including both process and outcome metrics. Process metrics help to
determine whether a particular task is completed, whereas outcome
metrics assess whether the cumulative effects of the tasks are
achieving the desired intent of the recommendations and improving the
overall health of the Enterprise. The goal of the outcome metrics is to
go beyond box checking and assess the progress made to address the
underlying issues. For those aspects of enterprise health that cannot
be easily measured, such as morale, we are utilizing other tools like
climate surveys and site visits to understand the intangibles, test
hypotheses, and hear from the forces in the field on what they're
seeing.
Mrs. Hartzler. What are the Department's end state goal and
objectives for regaining healthiness within the nuclear enterprise and
when does the Department estimate that those goals and objectives will
be achieved?
Dr. Brumer. The reviews stated the nuclear enterprise has been
sustained through shortfalls in manning, equipment, documentation, and
guidance through the extraordinary effort and sacrifice on the part of
our Sailors, Airmen, and Marines. The end state goal and objective for
the Department is to regain the margin that has been eroded to ensure
that this unsustainable level of effort and sacrifice is no longer
necessary. The nuclear enterprise cannot be fixed overnight; these
issues have been decades in the making and will require years of
sustained attention to be resolved. While we do hope to see significant
improvement in climate and similar metrics in the near future, the
materiel recapitalization of the nuclear triad will not be complete
until the mid-2030s.
Mrs. Hartzler. What steps are being taken to institutionalize the
desired oversight mechanisms within the Department to ensure the future
safety, security, reliability, and vitality remains sufficient within
the nuclear enterprise?
Dr. Brumer. In addition to the Nuclear Deterrent Enterprise Review
Group, chaired by the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Services have
taken steps to ensure greater oversight of the nuclear mission within
their organizations. The Air Force has elevated Global Strike Command
to a four-star billet and has elevated the Air Force Assistant Chief of
Staff for Strategic Deterrence and Nuclear Integration to a three-star
billet, pending Congressional approval. The Navy has codified the role
of the three-star Director, Strategic Systems Programs as the
regulatory lead for the Navy's Nuclear Deterrence Mission, responsible
for providing guidance to its nuclear force and monitoring and
assessing the mission.
Mrs. Hartzler. In regards to the personnel reliability program
(PRP), one of the recommendations stated that the ``commanders and
supervisors, not the PRP monitor and medical community,'' should be
responsible for fitness-for-duty determinations. However, wouldn't the
medical community best able to determine fitness for duty, especially
in connection with health and/or mental health issues? And how will the
Department ensure consistent standards?
Dr. Brumer. CAPE's role in the Nuclear Enterprise Review has been
to track, monitor, and independently assess the implementation of the
recommendations, conduct analysis to determine if actions are having
the desired effect, and assess the health of the Nuclear Enterprise.
The Services would best be able to address their specific approaches to
determining fitness-for-duty, within the prescribed regulations.
Fitness for duty is a whole-person concept, not just a physical health
matter or a bureaucratic compliance function. However, we will continue
to monitor the medical community's involvement in the PRP process and
remain vigilant to the risk that changes to PRP processes may have
unintended consequences.
Mrs. Hartzler. How will you know when culture and morale problems
within the DOD Nuclear Enterprise have improved to an acceptable
standard?
Admiral Benedict. Department leaders are committed to improving the
morale of the force by changing the culture of micromanagement,
enhancing training, and closing the gap between what leaders say and
what they do. Former Secretary Hagel wanted to ensure that pride and
professionalism in these areas are reinforced. The actions we are
taking will involve changes in the organization, policies and culture.
Other fixes will require an increase in resources allocated to the
nuclear mission. The reviews had high praise for the dedication and
professionalism of the nuclear workforce. The main concern regarding
our service members is their morale and quality of life, not their
proficiency. Navy Leadership will continue to monitor established
morale and assessment tools coupled with increased site visits to
monitor this area.
Mrs. Hartzler. What is being done to reduce the number of
inspections and/or coordinate inspections in order to minimize mission
interruption and curtail the ``inspection is the mission'' mindset?
Admiral Benedict. Navy launched a ``Reduce Administrative
Distractions (RAD)'' program to streamline or eliminate administrative
processes, instructions and training that add little return on
investment. RAD is about putting ``Warfighting First;'' eliminating
distractions that inhibit effectiveness and efficiency in our fleet. It
is not a ``one time push'' but a level of effort--a new normal where
everyone is sensitive to eliminating distractions to reduce
frustrations and strengthen effectiveness and efficiency. The first
topics that the RAD initiative focused on were the ones that Sailors
stated were the highest priority. It's going on now--involvement is
encouraged from the top down. The highest levels of Navy leadership are
driving this through strategic communication.
Additionally, the Office of the Secretary of Defense updated the
Personnel Reliability Program (PRP) regulations to remove
administrative burden, prevent inspectors from questioning medical
judgments, revise rules regarding who must be on PRP and make PRP truly
a commander's program to ensure reliability without imposing
bureaucratic red tape that harms the mission. We will make an
announcement on the updated program shortly. The Joint Staff has also
updated the inspection guidance to reduce the periodicity and
consolidate redundant inspections.
Mrs. Hartzler. Do you believe that this year's budget, and the
future year's defense plan, provide adequate funds to implement the
NER's recommendations? Are there any particular concerns the Department
has with any FY16 budget congressional marks on NER initiatives?
Admiral Benedict. In addition to addressing delays in long-term
SSBN maintenance, PB16 restores and maintains acceptable margin within
the force by:

Adding over 100 people (mix of civilian and military) to
improve sustainment and training of the ballistic missile submarine
force.

Increasing funding to strategic weapons facility
infrastructure sustainment and recapitalization to ensure long term
health of these critical facilities.

Increasing funding to fund R&D and operational
engineering support to shore up the industrial base and accelerate
efforts for a Trident follow-on to the already life-extended Trident II
D5 missile.

Increasing the authority of the Director, Strategic
Systems and Programs (SSP) who will become the Navy Nuclear Deterrent
Mission (NNDM) Regulator, the central lead for oversight, in order to
sharpen our operational focus. SSP will report directly to the Chief of
Naval Operations on nuclear force readiness.

Executing a ``Reduce Administrative Distractions''
program to streamline or eliminate administrative processes,
instructions and training that add little return on investment.
Mrs. Hartzler. What recommendations within the NER does your
service disagree with, or require more study of, before implementation
or rejection?
Admiral Benedict. The Navy will work with OSD and Congress to
implement recommendations across the fleet to ensure safety and
reliability. Navy added $464 million in PB16 ($2.18 billion FYDP) to
restore and maintain acceptable margin within the force. Navy is
working with OSD to respond to the broad spectrum of recommendations
while ensuring the Navy's response addresses Navy specific issues.
Mrs. Hartzler. How will you know when culture and morale problems
within the DOD Nuclear Enterprise have improved to an acceptable
standard?
General Weinstein. Culture change within an institution takes time.
This issue has my daily, personal attention and is a priority with my
senior staff. As such, we continue to assess the morale of our Airmen
and adjust as necessary. I, as well as my command chief master
sergeant, visit remote work centers across our 33,600 square mile area
of responsibility, conduct online chats with Airmen and review judicial
data with my staff judge advocate; these are but a few forums that help
me and my leadership team better understand our culture. We continue to
place emphasis on continuous improvement and feedback.
Fortunately, our Airmen in 20 AF are willing to give critical
feedback, even to me, through direct interaction, through surveys such
as the Air Force Combined Mishap Reduction System and using feedback
tools in Air Force Global Strike Command's Force Improvement Program.
I'm pleased to report our fielded force appreciates the changes we're
making; these talented, dedicated Airmen are the foundation upon which
we'll continue to make improvements.
Mrs. Hartzler. What is being done to reduce the number of
inspections and/or coordinate inspections in order to minimize mission
interruption and curtail the ``inspection is the mission'' mindset?
General Weinstein. Twentieth Air Force, along with Air Force Global
Strike Command, has implemented the new Air Force Inspection System
(AFIS) as outlined in Air Force Instruction 90-201, The Air Force
Inspection System. This program operates under the philosophy that
inspections are an inherent function of command, where inspection
preparation is directly aligned with mission readiness. Wing personnel
conduct the majority of AFIS activities to evaluate issues of interest
to the local wing commander. Meanwhile, the Inspector General team at
Air Force Global Strike Command provides oversight and continuous
mentoring as the process matures.
The Air Force will continue to administer Nuclear Surety
Inspections at regular intervals in accordance with Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction 3263.05, Nuclear Weapons Technical
Inspections.
Mrs. Hartzler. Do you believe that this year's budget, and the
future year's defense plan, provide adequate funds to implement the
NER's recommendations? Are there any particular concerns the Department
has with any FY16 budget congressional marks on NER initiatives?
General Weinstein. The President's FY16 budget and FYDP submission
supports our ability to implement NER recommendations.
As of 3 August 2015, not all of the defense committees fully funded
the President's Budget Request of $506M for the UH-1N replacement. The
current helicopters employed in the missile field do not meet DOD
requirements for speed, range, and payload lifting capacity to move
security forces to the missile field in response to a contingency. No
amount of further modifications to the UH-1N can completely bridge
these capability shortfalls. From an operational perspective, any delay
in the new helicopter could endanger the security of the weapon system.
Mrs. Hartzler. What recommendations within the NER does your
service disagree with, or require more study of, before implementation
or rejection?
General Weinstein. Prior to the Nuclear Enterprise Review, Air
Force Global Strike Command conducted three studies to look at issues
within the command. These reviews--the Commander Directed Investigation
(CDI), Study of Operations Training and Evaluation (SOTE) and the AFGSC
Force Improvement Program (FIP)--generated approximately 350
recommendations from our front-line Airmen. After consideration of each
recommendation, we began implementation or further study on the vast
majority, to include restructuring the operational missile squadrons,
defining a career path for missile officers and increasing professional
development opportunities for all Airmen.
Upon release of the NER, we identified over 90 percent congruence
between the NER and these three AFGSC studies. As the commander of the
operational ICBM force, I'm confident these varied teams of experts
pinpointed our shortfalls and formed the basis for our continuous
improvement efforts.
Mrs. Hartzler. How will you know when culture and morale problems
within the DOD Nuclear Enterprise have improved to an acceptable
standard?
General Clark. The bomber Force Improvement Program (FIP) has
become a philosophy of continuous improvement within Eighth Air Force
and Air Force Global Strike Command. We are continuously assessing the
state of our organization and health of our personnel. Even though we
are continuously assessing, the dynamic and nebulous nature of warfare
makes it impossible for us to establish a goal that, once reached, will
allow us to relax and stop our forward progress. We are constantly
seeking to improve, constantly setting the bar higher, never being
satisfied with the status-quo. If we stop improving we are in danger of
back-sliding. Therefore, we will carry on our FIP and continue
soliciting feedback from our Airmen to continue improving the culture
and morale of Eighth Air Force.
Mrs. Hartzler. What is being done to reduce the number of
inspections and/or coordinate inspections in order to minimize mission
interruption and curtail the ``inspection is the mission'' mindset?
General Clark. Both Eighth Air Force and Air Force Global Strike
Command are working hard to reduce the number of inspections and lessen
the burden on the Airmen. Currently many IG changes are being
implemented helping to streamline processes. Primarily, we are lining
up inspections with the AF Inspection System (AFIS), putting the
responsibility on the wings to self-report and we follow up. The AFIS
provides a mechanism for senior Air Force leaders to direct a targeted,
more detailed and thorough inspection of specific programs,
organizations, or issues (AFI 90-201, para 1.4.3).
Mrs. Hartzler. Do you believe that this year's budget, and the
future year's defense plan, provide adequate funds to implement the
NER's recommendations? Are there any particular concerns the Department
has with any FY16 budget congressional marks on NER initiatives?
General Clark. This question is difficult to answer from a NAF
standpoint. For this question, an excerpt for the 3.5.14 SASC SF--
Nuclear Forces Hearing must be referenced. ``And we need, therefore, we
have to have a funding hump in the next decade to make sure that we get
our funding up to the right amount, and that could take around $35
billion a year, which at $35 billion a year will represent about five
percent of our defense budget. So it's not impossible for us to reach
that, and if we could get to the point where we've modernized and in
the right way, we'll be on the right path. Now, of the new spending,
only two percent of--of this amount is for the weapons modernization
itself. That's relatively inexpensive. And it's a small price to pay
for the nation's ultimate insurance policy, and for an arsenal that has
maintained great power and peace, really, for 70 years.''
Mrs. Hartzler. What recommendations within the NER does your
service disagree with, or require more study of, before implementation
or rejection?
General Clark. Eighth Air Force has no issues with the reports;
however the recommendations were not implemented verbatim. Some of the
recommendations were tailored to AFGSC and 8AF, but staying in the
spirit and intent of the recommendation.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. As a follow-up to my question during the hearing,
please provide our committee with information regarding recent or on-
going court-martial cases. How does the number of court-martials in the
20th Air Force compare with the rest of the Air Force? Is it higher or
lower than the average for the Air Force?
General Weinstein. The following table shows the number of courts-
martial of Twentieth Air Force Airmen that went to a verdict in each of
the full calendar years following the activation of Air Force Global
Strike Command on August 7, 2009. Also included is the rate of courts-
martial per 1,000 Airmen compared with the Air Force rate per thousand
(RPT).

Year       20 AF Courts-Martial      20 AF RPT      Air Force RPT

2010            15                      2.0             2.4
2011            38                      4.9             2.4
2012            34                      4.4             2.2
2013            28                      3.6             2.3
2014            17                      2.2             1.8

As of 21 July 2015, 9 courts-martial went to a verdict in Twentieth
Air Force with a 1.2 RPT year-to-date. The Air Force RPT is 1.8 year-
to-date. Since 25 June 2014, recent courts-martial include the cases of
3 officers and 10 enlisted that went to a verdict. As of 21 July 2015,
court-martial proceedings are on-going in the case of 1 officer and 4
enlisted.
Ms. Speier. Please provide the committee with the studies that led
to keeping a 24-hour shift in missile silos. Please also provide the
committee with any studies or reviews of whether there is a problem of
sleep-deprivation. Have there been any independent reviews on the
question of whether there is a problem of sleep-deprivation?
General Weinstein. Thank you for the opportunity to clarify our
discussion on work shifts for our alert force. Two-officer crews serve
24-hour shifts in each of the 45 Launch Control Centers; it is highly
unlikely either officer would experience sleep-deprivation. Thanks to
built-in safeguards in the Minuteman weapon system, and the deliberate
scheduling of required tasks while on alert, one of the two officers
may sleep in a sound-proof bed area within the LCC while the other
monitors the weapon system. In short, we allow rest periods and only
under rare circumstances do officers on crew not have the opportunity
to rest.
Ms. Speier. Please provide the committee with a copy of the RAND
report ``Identifying Key Workplaces Stressors Affecting the Twentieth
Air Force.'' Have the morale issues identified in this report been
addressed in the NER recommendations or other on-going corrective
actions?
General Weinstein. We've provided an electronic copy per your
request.
RAND highlighted several morale issues in this report, specifically
among our missile field chefs. One of the first decisions I made after
assuming command of Twentieth Air Force was to move these chefs from
our operations groups to our mission support groups (our experts in
food service), giving these groups a vested interest in assuring ICBM
combat capability across our 33,600 square mile AOR. With this move we
addressed a prime concern among our Airmen.
In these groups, missile chefs now work with and for Airmen from
the Services career field; this enables them to receive mentoring from
experienced Services leaders and exposes them to other Services
specialties, thus preparing them for promotion and advancement in their
career field.
Regarding other morale issues highlighted by RAND, we've addressed
these through Air Force Global Strike Command's Force Improvement
Program (FIP) which pre-dated the NER by several months, but reflects
the NER's recommendations to change the culture of micromanagement and
boost morale through incentives and career opportunities.
[The RAND report referred to is retained in the committee files and
can be viewed upon request or accessed online at http://
cradmin.clerk.house.gov/repository/AS/AS06/20150625/103680/HHRG-114-
AS06-Wstate-WeinsteinUSAFJ-20150625-SD001.
pdf.]
