- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-126]DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE UPDATE ON THE FINANCIAL IMPROVEMENT AND AUDIT READINESS PLAN

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-126]

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE UPDATE ON

THE FINANCIAL IMPROVEMENT AND

AUDIT READINESS PLAN

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

JUNE 15, 2016

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-793                        WASHINGTON : 2017

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado                   Georgia
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
PAUL COOK, California                MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               PETE AGUILAR, California
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Jack Schuler, Professional Staff Member
Katy Quinn, Professional Staff Member
Britton Burkett, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Aguilera, Hon. Ricardo A., Assistant Secretary of the Air Force,
Financial Management and Comptroller...........................     8
McCord, Hon. Mike, Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and
Chief Financial Officer, Department of Defense.................     2
Rabern, Hon. Susan J., Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Financial
Management and Comptroller.....................................     6
Speer, Hon. Robert M., Assistant Secretary of the Army, Financial
Management and Comptroller.....................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

McCord, Hon. Mike, joint with Hon. Robert M. Speer, Hon.
Susan J. Rabern, and Hon. Ricardo A. Aguilera..............    37

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Conaway..................................................    63
Mr. Gibson...................................................    63

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE UPDATE ON THE FINANCIAL IMPROVEMENT AND AUDIT
READINESS PLAN

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, June 15, 2016.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. Today, the
committee meets to receive an update on the Department of
Defense's Financial Improvement and Audit Readiness [FIAR]
plan. This issue has been a high priority for this committee
for some time, and as the September 2017 deadline approaches,
we need to understand how much progress has been made and what
obstacles lie ahead.
The Department of Defense [DOD] is the largest single
entity of the Federal Government, and it is charged, in my
view, with its foremost responsibility. Taxpayers deserve to
know that their money is being spent with appropriate checks
and controls. That public confidence is essential as the men
and women of DOD work to safeguard our Nation.
The processes which enable annual audits also enable better
decisionmaking by the Department and by this committee, which
will be of growing importance in this dynamic complex threat
environment.
The fiscal year 2010 NDAA [National Defense Authorization
Act] codified the requirement that the Department be fully
audit ready by September 2017. In 2011, this committee's Panel
on Defense Financial Management and Auditability Reform, led by
Mr. Conaway, made a number of findings and recommendations that
have been incorporated, and in some cases, executed by the
Office of the Comptroller. Many significant challenges have
been identified, and undoubtedly, more will be uncovered. The
chances of success are greatest when the Department, the
services, and other DOD organizations resolve with this
committee to overcome those obstacles, whatever they may be.
We look forward to discussing the progress made by the
Department in executing the plan, how successes have allowed
the plan to move forward, and where lessons learned from prior
missteps have altered that plan. The committee remains
dedicated to keeping the Department on its course toward fiscal
responsibility in being good stewards of the taxpayer dollars.
I yield to the distinguished ranking member.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with everything
you said. I will submit my statement for the record and just be
brief and say that it is enormously important that we get to
the September goal of next year and have the full ability to
audit the Department of Defense.
We have worked on this committee a great deal on
acquisition reform, which is all part of how do we spend our
money more wisely, but the greater transparency that we have
with how the Department of Defense spends all of its money, the
more, you know, efficiently we are going to spend that money
and the better we can understand how to conduct oversight
properly, and the time has come for us to achieve that goal. I
thank Mr. Conaway for his leadership on this issue, and I look
forward to your testimony. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. We are pleased to welcome the
Under Secretary of Defense Honorable Mike McCord, as well as
Honorable Robert Speer, Assistant Secretary of the Army,
Honorable Susan Rabern, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, and
Honorable Ricardo Aguilera, Assistant Secretary of the Air
Force, all for financial management and comptrollers of their
individual departments.
Without objection, any written statements you would like to
submit will be made part of the record.
And, Mr. McCord, you are recognized for any comments you
would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE McCORD, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
(COMPTROLLER) AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

Secretary McCord. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to update you on DOD's
audit readiness. I appreciate your support for our efforts, and
I especially want to commend the contributions of Congressman
Conaway. He led your committee's panel on all the oversight, as
you mentioned, which played a key role in focusing the
Department's efforts and continues to keep us on the right
path.
Inside the Department, achieving auditability is an
important part of Secretary Carter's reform agenda. You might
remember, when he testified before this committee in March, he
laid out his plan to ensure we are ready for the future as well
as ready today.
There was really four major parts that I talked about when
we described his strategy. First, it is connecting the
Department to the full spectrum of American technological
innovation. That is probably the most noted. Second is force
for the future initiatives to find new ways to attract and
retain the best people. Third is innovation in the way we think
operationally, including planning and wargaming. And then
fourth is reforming how we do business, which is where audit
effort and acquisition reform come in on our top priority.
Mr. Chairman, I especially want to recognize your
leadership on acquisition reform. The Department greatly
appreciates the ability to work with you on that complex issue.
While they are important subjects, and we tend to talk about
them and the Secretary tends to talk about them one at a time
in individual speeches often because they are so important,
these efforts are all connected to the Secretary and,
therefore, they are connected to us. These are our top
management priorities, but even as we focus on the five
strategic challenges, I think the members of this committee
know well that the Secretary has described.
With me today, as you said, are my colleagues, the
assistant secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force who have
been heading up the military departments' efforts to get this
audit ready, and I would like to thank them for their
leadership. My office has been the focal point for the overall
policy and for defense agency audits, but my colleagues here
and their chief management officers in the services have done
the heavy lifting that has gotten the Army, Navy, Air Force,
and Marines mobilized for this long endeavor.
This audit effort has been a team effort even beyond those
that are sitting at this table today. I also want to highlight
the contributions from the DOD Inspector General [IG], GAO
[Government Accountability Office], and OMB [Office of
Management and Budget]. While obviously we respect the
independence of the IG and the fact that GAO works for you, not
for the executive branch, we have been working together to
achieve a common goal, and we have been benefiting from their
advice. I would also like to recognize the DCMO [Deputy Chief
Management Officer] organization inside the DOD who are key
partners with us on this effort.
Our focus on the audit has yielded substantial and
measurable results over the last couple of years. For the first
time ever, the military services audited their annual budgets
for fiscal year 2015, combined with the successful recurring
audits of other parts of the Department that we have had for
several years. About 90 percent of our fiscal year 2015 budget
was audited. Those audits did not produce a clean opinion the
first time out for the services, but still, we learned a great
deal from our initial effort, and we will be back at it for
fiscal year 2016, back at it for fiscal year 2017. We are
putting the contracts in place now to enable us to audit our
full financial statements in fiscal year 2018, as planned,
according to the common goal that we have.
For those of you who don't work with these terms regularly,
I just want to clarify briefly that a financial audit is
different from a program audit. There are hundreds of audits
done by inspector generals usually in DOD in any one year. A
financial audit examines our financial and business processes,
and a successful audit confirms that the information on the
financial statements is clearly and fairly presented.
A financial statement audit does not necessarily tell you
that those funds were spent wisely. That is part of what--you
know, the joint responsibility that we both have that is
separate from the audit itself. The absence of a clean opinion
does not equal waste, fraud, and abuse, nor does having a clean
opinion prevent there being waste, fraud, or abuse. The lack of
an audit opinion means that your systems and controls don't
meet audit standards. We are working hard to change that, and a
substantial progress has been made, especially in the last 5
years.
Fixing the audit findings that we do have continues to be
our biggest priority. My written statement, as well as the
report that we provide to this committee twice a year, the FIAR
plan report, gives you more detail in the nature of the
challenges in how we are addressing the specifics. The good
news is that we now have, because of the audits that these
services have done, have the baseline of auditor findings that
provides an independent assessment of where the problems are as
opposed to our own assessments of where the problems are, and
helps us focus our efforts.
Preparing our huge global enterprise for its first full
audit is a challenging task. Our department, as the chairman
noted, is not just another Federal agency. In terms of the
scope of our resources, our responsibilities, and complexity,
we are more like an economy. Indeed, each of my colleagues here
individually is responsible for the financial management of
annual resources that exceed the GDP [gross domestic product]
of about 100 of the member nations of the IMF [International
Monetary Fund].
While this is a major management challenge, we have a sound
plan on the audit. We are sticking to it. We are making
progress and we are fully committed to getting it done. I thank
the members of this committee for your leadership and support.
I am proud of the progress we have, and I am confident the
Department is on the right track to achieve a positive opinion.
[The joint prepared statement of Secretary McCord,
Secretary Speer, Secretary Rabern, and Secretary Aguilera can
be found in the Appendix on page 37.]
The Chairman. Great. Mr. Speer.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT M. SPEER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY, FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND COMPTROLLER

Secretary Speer. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member Smith,
and distinguished members of this committee, I thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the Army
status, efforts, and accomplishments towards achieving
auditable financial statements.
In addition, I want to convey to you that Secretary of the
Army Fanning, Chief of Staff Milley, and the Under Secretary
and Chief Management Officer Murphy, and I are committed to
improving the Army's financial management and meeting the
requirements to be audit ready by September 2017.
It is good to be here this week as we celebrate the Army
and the Army financial management corps' 241st birthday. These
birthdays recognize the contributions and longstanding
outstanding traditions and customs and excellence of both.
Unfortunately, our history does not include being audit ready.
It is not yet in our DNA.
However, we are changing and building a culture of
accountability and understanding audit. It is not easy to
derive the significant change, yet despite the operational and
fiscal challenges the Army faces, our soldiers and civilians
remain dedicated to improving the business processes and using
our resources efficiently and effectively as we generate
readiness.
The current fiscal environment and operational demands
present a unique challenge for audit readiness. However, this
environment also affords us the opportunity to evaluate
technology, organizations, and training, as well as our
business processes. We see the value to being auditable. Such
information of accountable stewardship have never been more
important than they are today.
The Army's financial improvement plan for achieving our
audit readiness milestones includes an iterative external
audits and examinations by independent public accounting firm,
or an IPA, to inform and focus our Army's audit efforts. These
audits and exams provide us feedback on areas requiring
additional corrective actions and focus our efforts to improve
progress towards a financial statement audit.
The independent public accounting firms completed an audit
in 2015 on our scheduled budgetary activities. Although we
received a disclaimer, the accounting firm was able to complete
the audit and provide the Army valuable feedback. In response,
the Army has developed corrective action plans and we are in
the midst of remediating and implementing those
recommendations. We also are repeating a similar audit in 2016.
Clearly, important to achieving success is leadership
involvement. As such, your Under Secretary of the Army chairs
our enterprise audit committee. He increased the frequencies of
these meetings from quarterly to monthly. During these
meetings, we monitor the progress of those corrective action
plans and we hold leaders accountable for where they are
attaining and meeting milestones. We also hold senior
executives responsible and accountable for achieving their
audit readiness milestones with inclusion of financial
improvement metrics in their annual performance assessments.
Audits have indicated we need to improve and enforce our
systems of access controls. The Army continues to achieve
success with our enterprise resource planning system. The
General Fund Enterprise Business System, known as GFEBS, is our
core business and accounting system. GFEBS enables the Army's
audit readiness progress while simultaneously modernizing and
improving the Army's business processes.
The Global Combat Support System-Army and Logistics
Modernization Program, our retail and wholesale supply systems
respectively, effectively complement the auditable features
achieved in GFEBS. The future delivery of the Integrated Pay
Personnel System-Army, will be important to sustaining the
audit, but more importantly, they also provide effective total
human resource and pay operations.
Finally, our dedicated team of professionals is our most
important and valuable resource to achieving audit readiness.
Under a program Congress approved, we are implementing a DOD-
based certification program. Our committed management workforce
has improved their skills with nearly 90 percent having
achieved certification.
In summary, we continue to improve across all business
areas. Our annual exams have expanded in size and scope, while
providing valuable insights to remediation while we develop a
culture of auditability. The strong commitment of leaders and
dedicated workforce is the Army's greatest asset and will
enable us to achieve our goals. I sincerely look forward to
continuing our work with members of this committee, GAO, and
DOD to ensure that we continue to achieve success and reach our
goal of financial audit readiness. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Rabern.

STATEMENT OF HON. SUSAN J. RABERN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY, FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND COMPTROLLER

Secretary Rabern. Chairman Thornberry, Ranking Member
Smith, distinguished members of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity today to discuss the Department of Navy's
progress towards auditability. After years of preparation, we
eagerly enter the audit environment, along with Army and Air
Force, as private sector accountants began an engagement on
Navy's fiscal year 2015 schedule of budgetary activity.
The disclaimer we received at the end of our inaugural
audit was not unexpected, given other government agencies'
experience. Our Navy team endured the rigors of a first year
audit, learned a great deal, and our department-wide team is
aggressively tackling the deficiencies the auditors identified.
We are on course navigating toward an audit of all Department
of Navy financial statements in fiscal year 2018.
I would like to begin by noting our successes. Navy
commands produced, on time, over 95 percent of the
documentation requested by the auditors. Given the global
magnitude of that effort, their careful preparation, teamwork,
and dedication to task were clearly demonstrated.
We have an aggressive enterprise-wide approach to
correcting deficiencies. A flag officer or senior executive has
been appointed to remediate each finding. I personally monitor
progress demanding sustainable corrective action while
preparing for full audit in 2018.
Characteristically, the Marine Corps is aggressively moving
out ahead. The Marine Corps has been under audit for several
cycles now and has made great progress in improving its
business environment, strengthening its accountability through
increased compliance with accounting standards. The Marines
have provided many lessons learned for the other services to
follow. We expect them to stay on present course asserting
auditability on all four financial statements at the end of
2016, a year ahead of the congressional mandate to do so.
While I remain optimistic, I don't want to minimize the
challenges we are facing. The auditors found significant
internal control weaknesses in our systems, business processes,
and in the statement compilation process. These findings make
it absolutely imperative that we immediately strengthen
internal control environments in every one of our business
systems. The first year audit identified 220 major
deficiencies, 82 percent of them related to IT [information
technology] system weaknesses. Simply stated, we have too many
systems and most of them were not originally configured to
conform to auditability standards.
To overcome these challenges, we are taking several
actions. First, we will continue to downsize our current suite
of systems, eliminating redundant capabilities. During the
implementation of Navy ERP [enterprise resource planning],
almost 100 business systems were eliminated. We now plan to
reduce the number of general fund Department of Navy accounting
systems from three to two while eliminating all other non-
auditable legacy systems, avoiding maintenance costs, and
streamlining IT controls.
Second, during our audit readiness preparations, we
discovered that we could not guarantee the integrity of the
data resident in many of our systems. Auditors identified
ineffective controls over access and security and noted that we
often fail to ensure proper separation of duties among users.
The audit highlighted these weaknesses and systems managers are
now strengthening those controls in earnest ensuring and
documenting compliance.
Third, we are putting procedures in place that will
identify and document every accounting adjustment made
throughout the year, requiring all Navy organizations to record
and retain documentation supporting every adjustment. At the
same time, we are identifying the root causes of these
adjustments with the goal to eliminate them at every step and
every business process.
Fourth, we are working with our primary service provider,
the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, to strengthen
controls governing their compilation of our departmental
financial statements. DFAS has undergone an independent
assessment of the controls for which they are responsible and
they are addressing deficiencies which contribute to statement
inaccuracies, including unsupported accounting adjustments
created in their processes. Our collaboration is demonstrating
the need for a well-documented business partnership in which
roles and responsibilities are clearly understood and adhered
to on a daily basis.
Finally, we have confirmed what we have long suspected.
Absolute uncompromising protection of business and financial
data generated by classified programs challenges the efficiency
of the audit process. For the first year audit, DOD
classification authorities restricted the number of data
elements that were shared with IG audit teams. This restriction
increased sample sizes resulting in a larger volume of
documentation that Navy organizations were required to produce
eliminating the auditor's ability to analyze transaction data.
We are revisiting this issue with urgency, mindful that the
solution must ensure protection of these very important
programs which serve as the cornerstone of our national
security. Beyond our near-term emphasis on the 2015 SBA
[Schedule of Budgetary Activity] audit results, we have
identified actions necessary for the audit of all our financial
statements in fiscal year 2018, and we are aggressively
tackling them as an enterprise. Our approach is consistent with
DOD guidance, emphasizing a line-by-line survey of each
statement with a focus on beginning balances.
Over and above the implementation of effective tools that
will allow Navy to sustain the gains already made, I believe
that the greatest positive contribution to come from the first
year audit has been within the Department of Navy culture.
Audit deficiencies now receive the highest level of visibility
and attention, including Secretary Mabus, the Chief of Naval
Operations, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps. Audit is
now a talking point at every level of the Department from
senior flag officers and civilians to the most junior personnel
and an integral part of the Department-wide managers' internal
control program.
As we attend to the detailed work that will ultimately
result in a clean opinion, we remind ourselves not to lose
sight of the real objective. Complying with audit standards
will result in greater accountability for the public funds
appropriated for the Navy and Marine Corps critical
contribution to the defense of this Nation. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Aguilera.

STATEMENT OF HON. RICARDO A. AGUILERA, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE AIR FORCE, FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND COMPTROLLER

Secretary Aguilera. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Smith, members of the
committee, thanks for the opportunity to address this issue
with the committee. I want to share our progress and challenges
towards achieving the audit readiness mandate.
We have a strong support from across the enterprise. We are
continuing to imbed auditability in our way of doing business.
We have a governing structure that is actively engaged in
monitoring our progress and assessing roadblocks and the
challenges when they arrive.
The 2015 Schedule of Budgetary Activity audit has re-
enforced that we are on the right track regarding our approach
to balancing our checkbook, reconciling our universe of
transactions, and implementing information technology controls.
We are actively applying the lessons learned from the 2015 SBA
audit as we prepare for the full financial statement audit.
Overall, we are pleased with our progress. We have received
positive feedback from our auditors. We are focused on the
critical tasks that remain to get us to full auditability, and
we are addressing the following key challenges at this stage.
Number one, reconciling our universe of transactions. Many
of our transactions rest in legacy systems. For the SBA audit,
we have reconciled 45 of those systems and we are adding an
additional 28 systems that need to be reconciled for the full
financial statement audit. These reconciliations are heavily
logistics related and require more effort than our financial
systems and represent one-third of our system's efforts.
Two, institutionalizing our IT controlled discipline.
Seventy-three percent of our IT notice of findings and
recommendations in the SBA audit were related to compliance
with existing internal controls. These findings represent a
significant change to our management efforts, and we are
addressing that through training and field support.
Additionally, we are applying lessons learned from our SBA
notice of findings and recommendations to all of our systems to
prepare for the full financial statement audit.
Three, to complete our asset valuation activities. The
FASAB [Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board] and OSD
[Office of the Secretary of Defense] have issued valuation
policies that we need. The new policies align with our military
equipment methodology and we are well underway with that
valuation effort. Our teams are working with both existence and
completeness and evaluation of real property among other things
and should complete their work in the fall.
Four, we want to accelerate the progress that we are making
in our Air Force working capital funds area. The bottom line is
that the Air Force working capital funds effort started later
than our general funds effort, but we have established a solid
team led by our Air Force Materiel Command and are quickly
closing the gap with our progress on the general fund side.
DFAS has helped us by establishing a dedicated team to
support the working capital fund effort, and we are leveraging
the lessons learned from the general fund to accelerate our
progress. We fully expect that working capital fund to be on
par with the general fund by the end of this fiscal year.
And five, we are going to continue with the rollout of the
Defense Enterprise Accounting and Management System, or DEAMS.
We recently reported to the Congress that DEAMS is in a
critical change status. Ironically, it is precisely the audit
control attributes of this enterprise resource planning, or ERP
system, that have created the challenges for our users. We
opted to retain the front-end audit controls that made this
Oracle commercial solution successful in the private sector,
but this has required a significant focus of change management
as we shift our audit controls from the end of the financial
process to the beginning.
We are beginning to see success from this approach as our
user community has developed new ways to embed auditability in
their daily work. We actively include these lessons in the
critical change plan that is currently being developed.
So in summary, the Air Force is fully committed to being
audit ready in September of 2017. We expect there to be
challenges over the next year of preparation, and based on the
history of other Federal agencies, we expect the timeline to
achieve an unmodified opinion of our financial statement to
take many years. However, the process of preparing for an audit
has led to significant improvements in our financial
operations, and we fully expect that trend to continue.
Again, thank you for your leadership and your support on
this issue.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. McCord, Mr. Smith and I have all acknowledged the
persistent leadership of Mr. Conaway on this area, and I wanted
to yield my question time to him.
Mr. Conaway. Well, thank you, Chairman, and I want to thank
the chairman as well. Full committee slot hearings are finite,
and I appreciate him dedicating one to this issue. I also want
to thank, collectively, your teams and all those hundreds and
hundreds of folks behind you that do this heavy lift. It is
hard, it is complicated, and there is just a lot of it, and I
appreciate that.
One thing that does concern me is on the future horizon is
a change in administration, which everyone knows is going to
happen. A couple aspects of that. One, how do we make sure the
new team coming in is properly briefed and understands exactly
where we are, and if they--and also, through the Senate,
confirm how important this issue is to keep it going, keep it
on track, and then also comments that--what are the risks of
the existing political leadership going on autopilot over the
last 4 months of the administration and not finishing strong,
and then properly resourced the overall efforts, given these
budget strains and the strength in the Department of Defense
budgets, can you talk to us a little bit about the resourcing
of this?
And then in the Senate NDAA, there is a section 811 that
would make structural changes, with respect to many of the
organizations, putting them under a new system. My personal
view is that would complicate an already difficult
circumstance, so any comments you have on that as well.
So if we could just go down the line and speak to us about
the change in leadership and the risks to keeping this momentum
going.
Secretary McCord. Thank you, Mr. Conaway. We have already
had a couple of meetings of--led by the deputy secretary on
transition. It is too early for us to actually communicate with
the two candidates, under the law, but as soon as that is
possible, starting probably in August, we will be providing
information, on an equal basis, to either side that wants it,
and then obviously at a higher level in November once there is
a President-elect. So we are going to be ready for that.
We are focused, first and foremost, per the Secretary and
the deputy, on our day jobs of executing the mission today, but
we are very focused also that we are going to be ready to do a
solid transition.
I will tell you that when I came in with the previous team,
the transition was pretty much about the budget, because when
you arrive as the comptroller, there is a budget that has been
left to the 80 percent mark, say, and the new administration
has to come make their priorities and finish it off and submit
it. So that dominated the transition materials that we received
that, years ago, there was very little on this subject. And we
are going to do a much better job of making sure that the new
team is aware of this issue, which has moved a good bit in the
8 years since then.
Obviously, we can't speak to what the new folks, what the
new team, what priority they might place on this issue or
whether they might come in and decide that our strategy doesn't
make sense to them. We have followed the same strategy for
years and we have benefited from the support of this committee
and the Senate Armed Services Committee. To be able to follow
one strategy for a number of years, I think, is a key element
of why we have made progress, but it is not a given that the
new team will decide that what we are doing makes sense. We
will certainly try and present them all the facts and make our
case as to why they should continue to implement the strategy
that we have laid out.
With respect to resources, obviously, that is something we
can talk about. Constrained resources are a strain on a number
of subjects, as is the mandate to reduce headquarters personnel
by 25 percent. All of us and all of our teams are headquarters
people, by definition, it is a headquarters function that we
do, and so we are trying to deal with the budget uncertainty of
the current climate and do this at the same time.
Final point, and I would be happy to expand on this, maybe
not to use all of your time later. The administration is
concerned, the Department is concerned, the Secretary is
concerned as the statement of administration policy on the
Senate bill says with the enormous scope of both the management
changes, many of which we see as unhelpful in the Senate bill,
coming, especially in the acquisition realm, a year after that
were already significant changes in last year's NDAA on this
subject.
One of particular concern to me, the Senate bill moves DFAS
out from under the CFO [chief financial officer], disrupts what
I see as an end-to-end financial management process that I
think should be under the CFO, but that is only one of the many
changes which we think are excessive in the Senate bill. And
the Secretary will be happy to communicate, as again the SAP
[Statement of Administration Policy] does, some of the concerns
we have about the many changes being thrown at us right as
there is a transition of administrations under the Senate bill.
Secretary Speer. I would like to take that also and--first
of all, I would like to take this opportunity too, Congressman
Conaway, you came and sat down with us in our group in terms of
leadership a couple of years ago. And I think we saw the
interest over here, and I think the interest here and the push
here will keep leadership focused. I can't speak to the
incoming political leadership that we will come into, but the
culture and how we are--I said it is not in our DNA, but we are
starting to build that. We are starting to build it within our
leadership, the understanding of the value of the audit, the
understanding that the resources produce outcomes. And tying
the resources to the outcomes is what we are also trying to do
through the audit, if we can better show better data for
decisionmaking, so we are doing that.
But I will point out the Corps of Engineers went about this
back in early 2000. They achieved a successful audit now for
about 8 years in a row now. I stole their leader. He is sitting
behind me here. Mr. Wes Miller was a leader who led and guided
that. I brought him in. So when I walk out the door, that type
of leadership remains. They understand what it takes to get to
audit. They understand the importance of the control, the
environment, and what the education and training of a dedicated
workforce is.
So I think that will be significantly important to the
sustainment of it and bringing it to that, but also
understanding that the value of good, solid, timely, and
accurate information is what part of the--is being brought
right now to the senior executives as well as the generals
within that part.
I think the current involvement of the current political
leadership, as Secretary McCord mentioned, in the fall,
Secretary Work is going to pull us back together and ensure
where we are, that we are still on track before we head into
the end of the year, and I think that drive will keep us
focused through this part. And then the folks who are behind us
will also do so. And I look forward for the continued
involvement of this committee and yourself to also come back on
over and meet with folks to identify the value of what their
stewardship provides to outcomes.
Secretary Rabern. With regard to the three parts of your
question, first, with regard to the transition. I really have
taken a very strong stand about embedding the change within the
careerists in the civilian side and the active duty. They will
be those who carry through not only this transition but others
in the future.
I learned my lesson about this when I was the assistant
director and chief financial officer of the FBI [Federal Bureau
of Investigation]. It was about embedding into the DNA and
those who would carry on the lessons learned, the business
practices, the changes, and I do believe we have done that. I
went through the same challenge as the chief financial officer
of the U.S. Customs Service when it was integrated into the
Department of Homeland Security. Again, it was about embedding
into, as my colleague from Army likes to say, the DNA. And once
you have that embedded, it becomes just a part of the fiber of
the organization, and I do believe we are doing that.
With regard to resources, I would echo Mr. McCord's
comments about the headquarters reduction, so I won't belabor
that, I would just echo it very strongly. We are part of the
headquarters reductions and we have a team in place that is
actively doing very important and very positive business.
With regard to resources, the other thing I would say is we
need stability. We need stability with regard to resourcing,
especially as the OPTEMPO [operational tempo] with the fleet
has been so demanding and has taken a toll. So it is a very
careful balance of our resources with regard to the emphasis we
place on audit and the very expensive audit requirements that
our IT system changes require and the maintenance of the fleet
so that it can fight the fight.
With regard to structural changes, I would again echo Mr.
McCord and say that I believe any structural changes at this
point would be very disruptive. We now have in place the
systems, the people, the processes. It has taken us years to
get to that point, and I do believe that structural changes at
this point would be adverse to our progress. Thank you.
Secretary Aguilera. And, sir, again, let me echo my thanks
for your leadership in this issue and working with this
committee. We look forward to doing that as we continue to get
through audit readiness.
The three parts to your question substantially have been
answered. I would echo the comments that have been put forward
by my colleagues. I would offer with you--with the Air Force
the commitment that I see is, as a former auditor, what I would
think is almost irreversible. I am really pleased when I go
into senior level decisionmaking meetings on the audit, and I
am sitting side by side with my counterparts in the personnel
arena, in the civil engineering community, and the logistics
community and to see their commitment in getting all of their
areas, all of their portfolios ready for audit as well. So in
terms of momentum, I feel as though in the Air Force, it is
almost irreversible and baked into the DNA, as Mr. Speer said.
So in terms of transition, I would echo my comments--my
colleagues with in particular. Resources, again, I believe
headquarters reductions have allowed us to move--have not been
favorable to us but have impeded us in the SBA audit, but we
would look toward stability. We want to see more stability--
signals with more stability in the future. And any structural
changes that the NDAA on the Senate side might be proposing
again, I would echo. We have all of the equipment we believe
that we need and anything more than that would be disruptive to
our efforts.
Mr. Conaway. Well, thank you for your answers, and I
appreciate that. One quick anecdote. About a year and a half
ago, I was aboard the USS Texas and taking a tour of that
submarine. I was doing a mini town hall meeting in the galley,
and a young seaman out of nowhere asked me, said: Congressman,
how is that audit thing working?
And I don't know if you guys planted him there, planted
that question or what, but it gave me some comfort that the
importance of this is working its way down through the uniform
service piece of this, and I appreciate the hard work. There
are a lot of trials and tribulations between here and where we
all want to get to, and I appreciate what your team has gotten
us to this point.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your indulgence, and
I would yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate you
all being here. I know this is difficult, time consuming, but
important, and so you have really represented that.
I wonder, particularly Secretary Rabern, if you could speak
a little bit more, you talked about the procedures documenting
the root causes. Can you go from your perspective in having
been on this and other lateral moves, I think, what you see as
the root causes? You did talk about, you know, the DNA,
basically the culture of the organization. What more can you
tell us about those root causes and how you are getting at
that?
Secretary Rabern. I would be delighted to do that. From my
point of view, regardless of the organization where I have had
the honor to serve, it is about recognizing the operational
mission of the organization and that that is what is driving
the people who work there.
So when I was at the FBI, we were tackling some very
difficult issues. Suffice it to say, audit was not the number
one thought on every FBI agent's mind every day. So it was
about teaching them, using their own language, what we were
trying to do so that we would be able to identify areas of
redundancy and find ways to get them additional resources by
eliminating those bad practices.
One of the things that I have learned, as I have come back
now to the Department of Navy, is that first it is about the
mindset. So again, it goes to speaking to people in their own
language. Once you do that, as my colleagues have indicated, it
really becomes part of their DNA. So if you are talking to a
nuclear submariner and you speak to that nuclear submariner
about an operational inspection, and you talk about the audit
in those terms, they have an aha moment, and they tackle it in
exactly the same way that they would tackle that zero defect
mindset at sea.
So much of what I would say is the answer to your question
is, the root cause is that we are warfighting organizations. We
are not accustomed to this. The systems that were developed
years and decades ago by very well-intentioned people were not
developed with the audit in mind.
The other thing that I would add has to do with the
creation of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. The
migration of talent to DFAS has allowed them to perform the
functions that they provide as our support service, but at the
same time, it was a loss of talent from the Department of Navy.
So in an environment where it is a competition for talent,
you know, it is a buyer's market, so we are all, my colleagues,
the IGs, the private sector firms are competing for the same
talent. So the initiatives that may be on some of your minds to
help us with that kind of direct hiring authority and those
kinds of things would be very welcome.
So that is just the tip of the iceberg, from my point of
view, as to the root causes. And if I haven't answered your
question, I would be glad to provide more information.
Mrs. Davis. You know, I know that you are looking to find
the best people to fill positions, and you need authorities to
do that, especially to be able to hire perhaps on a fast track,
if you will, when you see people who have the talent to be able
to progress towards or to enter into a separate area. And that
may raise questions as well because you are saying as you are
talking to people in the language that they understand this, in
fact, when you are trying to get somebody even from a different
discipline, in some cases, how does that work and how have you
found that to be helpful?
Secretary Rabern. I will tell you, frankly, that much of it
has to do with the sense of providing an important service to
the security of our Nation. So if we are talking about
recruiting young people, I found this in every organization
where I had the honor to serve, they want to serve this
mission. They want to serve. But they also are--especially the
generation that is coming up just graduating from college, they
have a different sort of mentality about moving from job to job
to job. So we have to open our minds to allowing them to grow
in that process, be willing to hire them, train them, track
them, and bring them back by appealing to that sense of service
to a higher cause.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah. I appreciate that because I think what I
am learning and I think what you have all shared is that really
wasn't the way people performed in the past, particularly in
leadership positions. So I think that we would like to give you
that opportunity, those authorities so--to understand that
better and to get at what sort of has held a lot of people back
in the past, maybe women, young people, and people of color
perhaps as well. And I think that is critically important, so I
appreciate your dealing with that.
I am going to go ahead and, I think, turn it just back to
the chairman. I wondered if there is any other, you know,
guidance that you have implemented regarding actions to resolve
financial weaknesses within your services. What else have you
all found in terms of the accurate reporting? What is it--is
there something else that you can address within this area
where you have gotten guidance and been able to use that or not
use that perhaps in the past?
Secretary Speer. I can take parts of that. One is there is
no real quick fix to the material weaknesses and the weaknesses
that we found. You have got to make it in something that is
sustainable. And so quite often in the past, we tried to do a
checkbook mentality, you know, check the block, fix it, and
move on, but it wasn't really fixed.
So you have got to go to the root causes you talked about
and see why either a control is not working, who, you know, and
looking more holistic end to end. And quite often, what we did
is we turned to the resource manager, the comptroller and said,
it is your responsibility, but we didn't bring in, as my
colleague said, what the mission and the outcomes were supposed
to be along the way, and that is really where the material
weakness is embedded.
So you have got to fix the control environment, you have
got to train and make sure people are properly--to do their
job, and then you have got to hold them accountable. And then
you have got to make sure they get the proper feedback and the
mechanisms that--within the tools.
Going back to early 2000s, the tools weren't in place, the
systems weren't in place, so they didn't allow their internal
controls. And so between the systems, the improvement in
internal controls with people knowing and understanding their
job and being properly trained across the board, we are
removing the material weaknesses they tie around the total
process, not just financial management. You know, human
resources, logistics, running of installations all feed into
the financial statements, and quite often, the material
weakness is embedded in the outcome of how people perform their
mission, and they weren't even doing it how they had defined
how they are supposed to do it.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah.
Secretary Speer. And so we think now we have tied those two
together and people better understand that the resources we
give them is to those outcomes, and that as long as they are
trained properly with the proper tools and given the ability to
do it, they will execute properly.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you.
I am going to turn it back to the chairman at this point.
Thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Franks.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I am especially mindful of the fact that this
effort to move toward a more auditable services posture is in
large measure due to your leadership, and I think this gives a
lot of us great credibility. But I especially want to point out
that there is probably no one on this dais that has the
knowledge and the understanding of just the entire audit
philosophy and mechanism in general than one Mike Conaway. He
is far ahead of all of us. And I think that the effort that we
are involved in here is going to give many of us trying to
advocate for a stronger military budget a lot more fire power,
and I really appreciate all that is being done here.
And I suppose many of us here recognize the profound impact
this sequester has had on the military, and I hope that this
process that we are involved in right now will really help us
in the debate going forward to turn back some of that, in my
judgment, unwise policy.
So with that, I just have some, again, very simple
questions, and I will address Mr. McCord.
Mr. McCord, how long has--I should just say how has the
plan changed over time as you have executed? What has
significantly changed since 2005 or since 2009, respectively?
Secretary McCord. Thank you, Mr. Franks. The main change
that really my predecessor Bob Hale made in 2009 was to focus,
first and foremost, on the budgetary side, which is the
information that people use to manage most. The thought process
was that this would get it into people's heads quicker that
this is information--that doing this audit effort will help you
manage better. And I think there is a key psychological part
there, and the Marine Corps I think has demonstrated that they
got this first and foremost ahead of everyone else maybe, is
that when you stop thinking of audit as something like eating
your vegetables that you are doing only because someone told
you it is good for you, but you don't quite get it yourself
that you want to do it, then you approach it mentally as a
chore as opposed to getting the buy-in that, oh, this is
actually going to help me run my organization better. That is
the big breakthrough, I think, that the Marine Corps made in
being the first service out there.
And I think that having the budget be the first--the annual
budget that we get from Congress be the first thing we focus on
auditing enabled that mental lead that people connect the audit
effort with goodness for themselves, goodness for their
organization, and being able to be on top of their own
resources better.
Subsequent to that time, we really haven't changed the plan
significantly very much. When I succeeded Mr. Hale, my thought
was to keep, you know, the plan, as long as I saw that it was
working. I still believe that it is. The main new information
now, of course, is that each of my colleagues here in each of
the military departments has had a--each of the services has
had an independent audit now. So we have somebody else, an
independent company, independent audit firm telling them what
you need to work on, and so, of course, we are reacting to that
now.
And Dr. Rabern mentioned the large number that the Navy
had, for example, but many of those were the same thing
repeated a bunch of times. So it wasn't as bad as it sounds
that there was 200 different problems, but there were many
cases of the same problem. So the focus now, naturally, shifts
to as you go from years of planning to get this done and
preparing to get this done to actually being in and having the
independent firms tell you where you are weak. That is
necessarily going to focus us on the specific things that the
independent firms have now said, you need to fix this the next
time I come back, because in general it will be the same firm
that comes back the next year. Obviously, they are going to be
looking to see if you corrected the deficiency that they
identified the first time.
Mr. Franks. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I have already made
the point that I think this is a significant moment and that
your leadership and that of Mike Conaway will be a legacy both
for the military and for each of you. And so I would just ask
the last question, just a quick thought. If there is anyone
there on the panel that would suggest if there is one thing
Congress and this committee could do to assist you in the
endeavor to ensure success, what would that be?
Secretary McCord. I would say that--I think I may repeat a
comment I made briefly earlier that I think the ability to work
with this committee and your partners in the Senate to follow
pretty much the same plan for a couple of years in a row now, 4
or 5 years, has really helped us a lot, and that that is
something that I would request, that unless you--obviously, in
your judgment, if you think that we are not going in the right
direction, then of course we need to talk about changing the
plan, but if you think we are, to let us continue to kind of
move in the direction that we are, I think that has been of
enormous help to us
Budget instability, obviously we all want that to be fixed,
and that is something that requires the entire body, you know,
to get together to figure out how to deal with sequester. That
is an enormous drain on the time and mental energy of
leadership, not just in the FM community but the Secretary, the
deputy. You know, that is a larger problem that weighs on us
and is a big distractor, but----
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all of
you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
echo the words of my colleague, the appreciation for the
leadership of the chairman and Mike Conaway on this. This is a
vital, vital project that you are embarked on, and I want to
thank you all for your tireless efforts.
And this isn't just about, you know, spreadsheets and the
mundane parts of accounting here. This directly impacts the
readiness of our soldiers, and we are fighting a fight here to
try to ensure that our men and women have the resources they
need.
You know, we are facing a readiness crisis. We have had
cuts to our defense, and many of us here in this room have been
advocating for more dollars to be invested to address the
threats in the world. But time and time again we are facing
challenges here by people saying: Well, the DOD can't have an
audit, so they don't--you know, if they can't audit, then why
should we give any more money? And so this is putting men and
women's lives at risk, and it is imperative that we get this
done certainly by next September, but sooner better.
And I enjoyed hearing your testimony. I appreciate
especially, Dr. Rabern, your getting prescriptive and telling
what you are doing after the results, the steps. Some of them I
jotted down here. You have decreased the number of systems by
100, the accounting systems. That makes sense. If they are
not--everybody is operating on a different accounting system
and they are not talking, they can't guarantee the security. We
need documentation for every adjustment, makes sense,
unsupported documentation.
I wanted to ask about the classified problem. It just seems
offhand that you could have auditors who are specifically of
the classified level to do that portion. Is it as simple as
that or what do we need to do to address the classified
problem?
Secretary Rabern. I will describe as generically as I can
for obvious reasons. Some of it has to do with what I refer to
in terms of the competition for talent. So to have people who,
first of all, are able to obtain the level of security
clearance that is required is very time consuming. So there is
very few things more disheartening than having one or two
people who are allowed access to these programs for one of
either the IG or the independent audit firm, then leave to take
another job. So that is one component.
The other component has to do with ensuring the protection
for the information within those systems, and I probably should
not elaborate beyond that. I would be happy to come by and talk
with you in greater detail about that. It is something that has
brought the financial community and intelligence communities to
a point where now, I think, we are starting to have the
discussions that will allow us to protect the integrity of the
data but also provide meaningful information so that the
auditors can conclude that the opinion is well earned.
Mrs. Hartzler. Well, keep up the great work.
Secretary Rabern. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Mr. Speer, I didn't hear in your testimony,
but I was involved in a couple of other things as you were
talking here, so maybe I missed it, but did you get as
prescriptive as Dr. Rabern did, listing specifically what needs
to be done to be able to do an audit and what you are working
on? Could you outline five of those things that you
specifically are working on again?
Secretary Speer. Yeah, absolutely. And I am sorry if I get
passionate about it too, because it is more than five.
Along the same lines, we had 290 corrective actions that we
are working right now.
Mrs. Hartzler. Ninety?
Secretary Speer. Two hundred ninety.
Mrs. Hartzler. Two hundred ninety.
Secretary Speer. Two hundred ninety findings that were from
the auditors, of which were shared between us and DFAS, and we
are working those corrective actions already. We have got a
good portion of those already underway or already corrected.
Many of them were very similar across, as Mike McCord said, to
where you will find them in one system, but they are iterative
across all systems. And we needed to fix, for instance, access
control, the similar access control in one system.
We had similarly--when we fielded our general fund
enterprise, business system had over 200 systems. We are down
to 70. We got actually down to 60, but a couple grew back. And
the way they grow back is you have minor micro-applications
being applied. So those are examples of definitive type things.
The other piece of it is just training. Part of the aspect
of getting at it is that we found folks are not necessarily
intentionally doing the wrong thing and that there is not
standardized across. So as the auditors identify those, they
weren't necessarily notice of findings, but we found that, for
instance, our commands needed additional training in some of
the aspects that they do, so we are focusing training towards
those as we go through.
I would like to also go back to what we found in terms of
all. I think each of us saw this problem, and you got to it in
terms of the sensitive activity of classified data. It is not
only the training on that and the access from the auditors, but
it is also the case to where as we reduce the number of
systems--the good part of having bad systems was nobody could
see and couldn't aggregate the sensitive activity that was
going on in there, was we start reducing and make very
transparent type systems in the audits. That is one of the
things in terms of keeping the data classified we are having to
do.
So one of the things that the Army will be asking for help
for in continuing the support of some of our additional systems
called GFEB [General Fund Enterprise Business System] sensitive
activities that we are fielding is very necessary to sustain
the audit. And so we have added people to classified programs
to be able to do manual sorts through the data, and that is
very important and it has enabled us to get through.
So you know, not only at reducing the number of systems,
training, getting up the corrective action plans, understanding
how to aggregate the data so the auditors can get that was one
of the challenges we all got to called the universe of
transactions.
And then lastly, the reconciliation of the way that the
manual processes are. What we found is that everybody focused a
lot on the system that didn't look at the manual controls, and
a lot of the manual controls were some of the things from
lessons learned that we found that individuals were non-
standardized and were not keeping sustained across the
commands. So we have got a heavy effort right now going through
under our optimization effort to standardize those business
processes across it so we can better align the training and
make sure for policy. We then update the policy to make sure
folks understand what is expected of them across those and that
leaders then make sure that it will be done properly within
their business areas.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Gibson.
Mr. Gibson. Thanks, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate the
panelists.
This certainly is a very important hearing, and you know,
we have heard time and again how important this is to the
integrity of all of our efforts, this reform. And I want to
associate myself with the remarks of Mr. Conaway.
Years ago, I spent 3 years on the faculty at West Point,
and among the issue areas that was studied and brought
highlight to the cadets were the vulnerabilities, the
challenges of transition. So, you know, I appreciated the
remarks that you made on that.
So much effort has been put into this in recent years, and
it really needs to be successful, and knowing that we have this
period of vulnerability or challenge and the fact that
leadership is putting effort against that is encouraging.
Towards that end, you know, assuming we get there in 2017,
what has been done to SOPs [standard operating procedures] and
software systems to ensure that we stay there once we get
there? So, you know, what comes to mind is, you know,
oftentimes when you bring a new endeavor forward and you are
working on something online, you will have to fill out a series
of boxes and submit, and you submit and it is missing two
categories. It stops you. You didn't even get accepted. You
have to go back and you get a red box that says you haven't
done this.
So, you know, assuming we get there, what have we done to
our code, our software system so that, you know, even down at
the battalion task force level, although I--you know, I know
that that is generally not the problem but, you know, as we
work at our financial officers across the DOD, as they enter in
data that, you know, they will get stopped and have to, you
know, provide full view of things before they go forward.
I guess we can start with the DOD and go to the services. I
am really just interested, assuming we get there, what have we
done to SOPs and software systems that once we get to a full
audit, that as we bring on new--it is often the case in the
services that you change jobs about every year or two. What
have we done in the superstructure to make sure that we don't
get off track going forward?
Secretary McCord. I guess at our level, Mr. Gibson, we
primarily approach that as management practices to make sure we
stay on track. I probably have to get you for the record a more
specific software answer. I am not a software expert myself.
But the primary focus that we have is on making sure that
procedures, are both holding managers accountable and their
performance ratings and those systems that we set up are going
to sustain the effort. But I couldn't--I would have to get back
to you for the record on software-specific coding.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 63.]
Secretary Rabern. I have a couple of what I consider to be
really good examples, one for Marine Corps and one for Navy. As
you peel back the layers of these processes as you have
described, it is amazing what you find. Just recently, the
Marine Corps realized that they had coded an automated system
for separations that was, for lack of a better word, foolproof.
So as you described, stop you here, you can't go further until
you do it right.
And what we discovered, as we respond to audit, is they had
reinserted a human being into the process which was then adding
errors. So they have modified the SOPs. No longer is a human
being allowed to interfere with the hard coding in those
systems. That is one example.
For the Navy, we have learned, as a result of the findings
of our first year audit, that we had hundreds exam--hundreds of
instances of a supply system, so every ship had developed their
own version of a system. So right now we have a flag officer
reporting to me every other week on the progress to get to one
system where the coding will not allow any other changes to be
made.
So that is kind of where we are at. And again, I would say
I applaud the efforts of the independent audit firms in helping
us find these things, and holding people accountable for fixing
them is what is going to get us there.
Mr. Gibson. Well, thank you. That is exactly the kind of
response I was looking for.
Mr. McCord, what I would recommend is--and I have got scars
in my past, in my body to--I mean, it would probably be
worthwhile to sort of capture these points across the services
because so much effort has been put into getting--and I
certainly--Mr. McCord, I certainly understand your point. You
are not going to micromanage this. You are going to manage
practices and people. But, you know, the services are really
learning some hard lessons in this to make sure that we stay on
track, and I think it would be worthwhile to have a repository
of best practices so that we can socialize that across all the
services.
Secretary McCord. Your point is well taken, Mr. Gibson.
Secretary Speer. Can I add one thing to that, because I
mean, we were jumping on that earlier. But first of all, we are
deficient in it. One of the findings from the auditors was the
documentation was insufficient. We thought that in the European
environment we had fixed a lot of it and found that there is
still the human in the loop and that we had not properly
documented and/or where documented, there were more than one
instance, and it wasn't standard.
So when you--part of what we are trying to do right now is
make a repository through knowledge management as part of our
effort right now of ongoing. One of our corrective actions is
to provide where those SOPs and where those standard business
practices are.
And so we have got, as one of the efforts to be done,
within the next 6 months to do so. We have found that there are
best practices amongst the different commands, and we are using
that to streamline and identify where those best practices are.
That is part--again, I point to Mr. Wes Miller. He had done
that at the Corps of Engineers. And so we are trying to do
that.
And it is not all automated, though. What you find is that
a lot of the SOPs over time, they exist, but folks have gotten
away from using either those, you know, tactics, techniques,
and procedures and SOPs, and getting back now out of a deployed
environment. They have gone to what had worked for them in a
deployed environment, and now we are trying to identify those
and make sure the policies direct them to it.
Mr. Gibson. Absolutely. I thank all the panelists.
And, Chairman, thank you for your indulgence. My time has
expired.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. McCord, I have got a few questions. But if the other
three of you have something to add, I don't mean to exclude
you.
So is there any doubt, Mr. McCord, that DOD will be ready
to meet the statutory deadline of being audit ready by
September 30, 2017?
Secretary McCord. We are pretty confident that we are on
the path to get there. Obviously, on that date, there will,
absent some very unusual series of events, be different people
holding these jobs who will actually be the ones to make the
assertions at that time.
As I alluded to briefly before, we will be--the contracting
to hire the independent firms to make that deadline has to take
place near the end of our watch this year. And so I think the
confluence of timing will work pretty well.
The deputy secretary is going to get us together again in
the fall about the time that we will be able to transition--
pardon the use of the word there--to move from talking to both
candidates to talking to the President-elect will be about the
timeframe when we will need to make those decisions. So we
might be able to have a little overlap with the next team to
say, here is what we see, we think we are ready to go. We will
want to push the button and go on contract in the fall of 2016
to start the process for the fall of 2017. We might be able to
have enough interaction to have an informed decision that the
next team will have some ability to comment on; otherwise, we
will just make the best decision, of course, that we are able
to, based on our information, this fall on our watch.
The Chairman. Okay. I think Dr. Rabern said that as they
analyze the weaknesses so far, 82 percent of the problems
related to IT weaknesses, at least I wrote that down. So that
leads me to have a question. Are we going to get a bill or a
budget request from DOD or any of the services to have a big IT
purchase or upgrade in order to comply with that deadline?
Secretary McCord. I would say, in general, no. There will
be specific examples. There have been and there may continue to
be. We are working now on an omnibus program, and there may be
examples where we ask for a specific amount to fix a particular
thing. But as Dr. Rabern alluded to, changing systems at this
point is not in the cards, not--of any of us to do, kind of a
fundamental throw this out start something new. That is not at
all what we think--we think that we have the systems that are
going to work for us, and there may be tweaks needed but not
fundamental change-outs.
Secretary Rabern. If I could just add----
The Chairman. Yes, ma'am.
Secretary Rabern [continuing]. To perhaps calm your fears.
Of the 220 findings, 149 will be remediated by the 30th of this
month. This goes to Mr. McCord's comment about the redundancy
of some of the findings. We are also being very harsh with our
systems owners. It is about eliminating systems. It is not
about anything other than that, unless we find ourselves with
no alternative. So we would only come back if we find ourselves
in that place.
And I would say I am very excited about the pace of
learning as folks in uniform and our civilians learn how to
respond rapidly to this new environment.
The Chairman. Well--and I don't know nearly as much about
this as Mr. Conaway or you all. What my memory is when we talk
about this before, is part of the problem was business systems
that didn't talk to each other have created part of the
difficulty in getting to an audit. So that is part of the
reason I ask, okay, are we on track to have this thing work
together or are there going to be big expenditures? But you
have made me feel better.
And I presume you all don't have a substantially different
answer for the Army or the Air Force?
Secretary Speer. I don't have a substantially different
answer, but we do need the funding that we requested to the
modernization of the systems we do have. For instance, our
integrated pay personnel system helps sustain the audit. It
helps eliminate hundreds of human resource systems to allow the
integrity of the data within that, but also improves the
ability to look at the total force and allows us to integrate
the personnel pay of our military folks into that.
We have a single and fully filled now General Fund
Enterprise Business System throughout the Army, and we won't be
asking for a new one. We do have funding that we requested for
the sensitive activities I mentioned earlier, which allows us
to protect the classified data that we didn't see. We didn't
realize that these transparent open systems back 8 years ago
would allow people to see what was going on in the classified
community. And so those are the limited types of things, but
not new financial systems is not coming down the pike.
The Chairman. Okay.
Anything different for the Air Force?
Secretary Aguilera. In the Air Force, there are no new
financial systems, but the critical change process that we are
undergoing right now for the Defense Enterprising Accounting
and Management System, DEAMS, we will able to give you a full
report at the end of July on what is required for that system
going forward.
The Chairman. In other words, it is possible you all may
have more budget requests?
Secretary Aguilera. Right now, it looks like probably
reorganizing within the budget for that. So perhaps a
reprogramming of some kind.
The Chairman. Okay.
Ma'am, do you have something else?
Secretary Rabern. I am sorry, I would be remiss if I did
not credit the Marine Corps. Because the Marine Corps has been
so far ahead of Navy, we have had lessons learned. And included
in that is the use of Marine Corps systems that have passed the
audit and having the Navy start using those systems. We have
some--at least one very good example of that and we are hoping
we will find others.
The Chairman. Okay. Can that extend to the other services,
do you think?
Secretary Rabern. Absolutely.
The Chairman. Are you all willing to look at a Marine Corps
system?
Secretary Speer. We did look at it. We looked at it before
we went to General Fund Enterprise Business System, and now we
have fully filled this system. It is more modern and capable
also. So part of the issue we all have is the feeder systems
that feed it from other non-financials. And we have got to get
rid of some of those interfaces that feed that are hard to
maintain. So that is part of what we are reducing within the
General Fund Enterprise Business System.
Our system is fully compliant, so I think GFEBS is the
right answer for us. And it is integrated with the rest of
already logistics modernization and our Global Combat Support
System which provides our other logistical support.
The Chairman. Okay. I am just saying it is okay to look
across to other services, though, when appropriate.
Mr. McCord, one of the questions as you all were talking
about having these independent agencies evaluate your systems
was, for me at least, do you believe DOD can internally rectify
all of the issues that they identified or are there situations
where an outside entity can help come correct some of the
weaknesses that have been identified?
Secretary McCord. I think that we are and need to be open
to outside input. And when I mentioned in my opening statement
that we have been meeting on--I have been meeting with Gene
Dodaro, the head of GAO, on a periodic basis, with OMB
officials present, with the inspector general present the last
time we met, many of these folks have experience from other
agencies that have seen things before that we haven't gotten to
that yet. And I found this with the OMB folks, for example,
that have useful insights for us.
In addition, some of the things--again, from having that
broad view, GAO has the same ability to inform us with things
that they have seen with advice. And we have tried to get them
to be more partners with us, recognizing that they do have to
stand apart from us at the same time a little bit.
We also have--I guess I lost my train of thought here. We
have to learn from what the independent auditors say. One of
the concerns that we have is that the scope of what we do may
make it hard to get audit firms on contract with us for the
scale of work that we have to do. As you know, there are the
so-called big four. Two of those firms really aren't doing
audits right now. They are doing the consulting side, which
makes it hard for them to then be independent auditors. And so
having sort of two of them in and two of them out constrains us
already.
The amount of work that we have, I mean, it would be
attractive work, I think, given the size of it, but it is
also--you know, there is limited number of people that can
handle the size of the work that we do, and that would be one
the concerns we have is sort of the capacity of independent
firms that have this outside expertise to work with us.
The Chairman. Okay. Again, my memory may be fuzzy, but I
recall that in some of our past discussions that there was
concern about the DOD agencies being able to get audit ready
and that some of their issues might even affect whether the
services were ready. Can you address that?
Secretary McCord. Yes. That is a fair observation. The
Fourth Estate, as we call the defense agencies in general, are
not as far ahead as my colleagues in the military departments
are. Some of them are. And that is not a blanket statement,
because there is about two dozen of them. Some of them have
been passing an audit for years. Defense Finance and Accounting
Service as an entity in and of itself has passed an audit, I
believe it is 14 or 15 times in a row now. But there are many
that have never done so and are not as far along as the
services. That is correct.
What we are--the strategy that we are following, and we
have described in our plan is we are basically, as you might
expect, taking the biggest and most important ones first, the
most material in audit terminology. So that would be the ones
that are businesslike, DISA [Defense Information Systems
Agency], DLA [Defense Logistics Agency], the ones that you
would probably expect. Two combatant commands: SOCOM [Special
Operations Command], because they are service-like and control
their own funds; TRANSCOM [Transportation Command], because
they are a businesslike entity; and then our health--Defense
Health Agency. So those are kind of the biggest ones that we
are focused on first and then we will move to smaller and
smaller ones as we go.
Ideally--and this gets back to the sort of auditor capacity
point I was making. Ideally, you might like to have just one
firm audit all of that, but because people have these
consulting relationships, some of them are sort of conflicted
out. They can't--it would be hard to find a firm that has no
consulting relationship with any of two dozen defense agencies.
That argues against bundling them all together, which would
make it easier contractually maybe to get a handle on them as
one entity. So that is kind of the tension that we have.
The inspector general, if I could speak for them on this
point, would prefer to have as, you know, one big contract or
maybe one contract just for all defense agencies. We don't
think we are going to be able to do it that way because of the
need to get independence and have people that haven't consulted
for SOCOM, say. So we can't have any package that includes
SOCOM, include--you know, no one would bid on it if it has done
any consulting. So that is the tension we have.
But we do recognize--you are correct, Mr. Chairman, that we
have some work to do on the Fourth Estate to catch up to where
the services are. All of them, as we said, have done an audit,
they are full budget this year, which only some of the defense
agencies could claim that.
The Chairman. And I think finally for me at this moment,
there have been press reports--and I don't mean to pick on
anybody in particular, but I think it was DLA had some--had
bought some things and, you know, lost track of how many it had
or disposed of various items. And, obviously, it is an enormous
enterprise.
I am trying to get to the question of what an audit gets
us. And so in the--just taking that hypothetical example, if
DLA is able to pass an audit, should it theoretically be
possible, then, that someone could go and keep track of what
they buy, where it is, how it is disposed of and--you know,
with any of the items for which they are responsible?
Secretary McCord. The way I would respond is, is one of the
most important benefits of audit is cleaning up the way you do
business to attempt to go into audit and attempt to get a clean
opinion. So it is almost--I will try a trite kind of phrase,
you know, that it is the journey as well as the destination. It
is what--cleaning up your operation----
The Chairman. It is the systems and processes necessary to
get to a clean audit, right?
Secretary McCord. Necessary even to show up for the audit
and especially necessary to pass the audit----
The Chairman. Yeah.
Secretary McCord [continuing]. Then provide that better
information about your organization. It doesn't mean that, for
example, there couldn't be fraud. Right? Someone could collude
to alter the records and steal a piece of equipment. That can
happen whether you are passing an audit or not. But it reduces
the chance of--having better controls means you are more likely
to catch any particular thing.
And, again, I think Susan Rabern could maybe comment from
the Marine Corps experience as the service that went first,
that that was where the light bulb went on, I think, first with
the Marines is the things that I have to do to get in the game
for audit and to pass an audit allow me to run my business
better, increase the chances that I will find ways to redirect
resources within my own organization from things that are lower
priorities or things where I can find efficiencies. It does
help you run the business better.
Dr. Rabern may want to give some example from the Marine
Corps particularly.
Secretary Rabern. I don't know whether I would emphasize
the Marine Corps examples because I feel I have some other
examples that might be better. So with apologies, the things
that come to mind really are my experience at the FBI. And I
would say that the work we have done is hard. It is labor
intensive. We have made amazing progress. But that said, there
is a lot of really hard work ahead of us.
And the thing that I worry most about has to do with
assets. So when you are talking about the Navy, it is about--it
is a capital intensive institution, as was the FBI. So when you
are asking people to count and cost things, that becomes very,
very difficult. And to your DLA example, these are massive
enterprises. And so having the IT systems that are ready,
sustainable, permanent, eliminating the bad business practices,
those are the things that are going to be the really--the next
very steep learning curve that we will have to climb.
The other thing I would add is, with regard to the other
agencies, to elaborate on Mr. McCord's comments, in addition to
the clean opinions that he cited for the Fourth Estate
entities, we have the issue of what is called the SSAE
[Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements] 16
reports. And this really goes to the nature of service being
provided to the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps.
So we have been working together on a very collaborative
way, first with DFAS as our ready partner. We have made
tremendous progress with them, and we are tackling those
similar kinds of things with the other elements of the Fourth
Estate.
The Chairman. Well, I will just comment, finally, I think
the way you started--Mr. McCord, the way you started out your
comments, it is important to say what an audit is and what it
is not, and what it--but what it enables managers to do, which
to me is the key thing. So that is part of the reason for that
question.
Mr. Conaway had another question. I yield to him.
Mr. Conaway. Real quickly. Mr. Speer, you mentioned that
one of the recommendations out of the 2012 audit panel was that
performance evaluation documents include specific items as to
what needs to be accomplished for the next year. And you
mentioned that you have baked that into the Army's evaluation
so that you understood if the other agencies, other services
have done the same thing with respect to their personnel. And
then on an annual basis, have we actually--obviously, you are
not going to say who, but have you actually disciplined anyone
who failed to meet the standard that was set in their--you
know, ahead of their evaluation?
So, Mr. Speer, any experience actually using the
evaluations to improve performance?
Secretary Speer. I can't definitively say what the outcomes
of any specific individual was. I just know that we are now
monitoring, there is incorporating in each of the senior
executive's performance plans. So it should be if they are not
maintaining and achieving that objective that is in their
performance plan, it will impact both in terms of their
feedback as well as their performance and their performance-
based evaluation where they receive monetary compensation or
otherwise for it. And we certainly can go back and see if there
is--you know, whether it is within some of those.
We talk about it. We certainly provide feedback on it to
individuals, and we provide feedback to individual commands. We
then go through, and as I said in the audit committees, monitor
and provide commands feedback as how the individual commands
are doing for feedback to those performance statements.
Mr. Conaway. Ms. Rabern. Dr. Rabern.
Secretary Rabern. Specifically answering your question have
we held anybody accountable? Yes, we have. Two examples I would
be happy to talk with you about privately. It is all about
sending the message that this is serious business; we mean it,
and those who aren't performing, we will find someone who can.
The time is of the essence. We have to have people who can do
this job. It is not fair to anyone to have someone in the job
who can't do it, and it is not fair to those around them. So
the answer to your question is yes, sir, we have.
Mr. Conaway. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Aguilera.
Secretary Aguilera. And I echo the comments. Yeah, our SES
[Senior Executive Service] corps also has those audit
requirements in their performance evaluations. I don't know of
any particular instance where we have had to discipline anyone.
I can get that for the record.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 63.]
Secretary Aguilera. But I would also like to comment on
the--and commend the Department for the FM certification
program to elevate the level of financial management and
expertise in the entire staff. And all of the services are
complying with that, and the Air Force is taking the lead on
that. And we are very proud of the achievements of our airmen
in that regard as well.
Mr. Conaway. I appreciate that.
Mr. McCord, you started down that path about the limited
resources with respect to audit firms and firms big enough to
do the job. In 2018, will there be another firm needed for the
overall DOD rollup or will that be able to do that with--in
other words, how are you going to do the consolidation, in
effect, of all these disparate agencies under one roof? Is that
a different firm?
Secretary McCord. You know, I get the challenge. I think
that would be helpful and we would desire it, but we can't
create the supply. Right? I mean, if the two firms--the two of
the big four firms that aren't in that business right now
choose not to, you know, to bid, then we will have to do it
another way. And one possibility is to have not--probably the
real-life possibility is to have the Government Accountability
Office do the audit. That is, you know, something we have
discussed a little bit, if we can't get a public firm to do it.
I don't think the Inspector General of the Department of
Defense has the capacity or would likely have the capacity to
do the entire thing themselves without--certainly, not with any
less IPA support than there is now.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And just briefly, you talked about the DHA [Defense Health
Agency] are along the list of those agency specific areas
within the Defense that have to be looked at, have to be
audited. And I wondered if you could--I mean, there has got to
be something that is actually unique from one to the other, I
would assume. And is that true that you are looking at some
different things?
We have obviously had a number of reports, commissions, et
cetera, looking at expenses within the DHA. And I am--and as we
consolidate that more or have DHA more as a focus as we look at
new ways of making sure that our men and women are covered and
their families, is that different?
Is that going to add--and even in terms of who you bring in
to take a look at those, knowing that we have many, many
private entities as well within health care? How do you see
that moving forward? Where will that fit?
And there is also a--you know, a concern about retention
for the services as we look at health care. Can you just very
briefly--and we can look at this again. I am just wondering how
that fits in, obviously, within the personnel committee in
trying to continue and work with you as you move forward in
that area.
Secretary McCord. Well, Ms. Davis, as you know, the
management of the health enterprise is on the table, I believe,
in both authorization bills.
Mrs. Davis. Right.
Secretary McCord. So we recognize that that is something
that may be coming. I don't see us right now altering our audit
strategy for DHA. But, you know, it is something we would take
a look at, depending on how this comes out at the end of the
year in the final NDAA. But, yes, I do----
We have, of course a number of years, we have had changes
in TRICARE that we requested that have been agreed sometimes in
part and sometimes not. But then there is a more fundamental
management change that is on the table this time. Again, I
don't see that, though, having us--it needs to be audited.
However it is run, however it is managed, it needs to be
audited. So I think that we are going to probably press ahead
basically unless we see, you know, the management changes would
require us to do something else. But at this time I think that
we would probably stick with the plan of having the DHA be one
of those corps defense agencies, along with DLA, DISA, that are
the first things that we need to get done.
In terms of having the whole Department be audited, you
know, you cannot overlook the big defense agencies. There is an
agency here or there that is so small and specialized, maybe
the folks--the system, the POW/MIA [prisoner of war/missing in
action] effort, that you could possibly pass an audit if they--
you know, they would be so small. But DHA is not one of those.
Mrs. Davis. Right.
Secretary McCord. So I think that we are going to probably
just continue to press, unless we see that the management
changes that might be--ensue out of the NDAA or otherwise would
cause us to revisit, but I don't anticipate that at this time.
Mrs. Davis. Okay. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And excuse me for
being late. I was in another committee having a markup on a
number of bills. But thank you for having this hearing.
And I hope I am not duplicating anything that may have been
asked or answered earlier. In fact, I know this is related--not
the same, but related to what Representative Conaway was just
asking you about. But this is for any one of you.
In your written statement, you identified that auditors
found noncompliance with IT controls to be an issue. You cite
that remediation actions have focused on the accreditation
processes for these systems, yet in reality, these are
typically one-time activities that have been valid for several
years. Your stated course of action does not address the human
aspect of this noncompliance.
So why are administrators throughout the enterprise not
removing users' access when they leave an organization? Are
administrators receiving additional training or losing their
privileges? This is a huge vulnerability that our adversaries
can and most likely have exploited.
Secretary Speer. I will take that one on first. Because,
you know, we had a false sense of security. We implemented a
brand new ERP across the Department of the Army and GFEBS in
the control mechanisms, and we had documented as to what folks
needed to do in terms of access controls. But, again, the human
in the loop wasn't enforcing it. So we brought folks together
and we found out what was wrong, and we are now identifying
both the further controls to ensure it is being done properly.
And we found not only had it not been done inside of that ERP,
the feeder systems.
So when we talked earlier about having multiple findings,
we had 290 findings in the Army. Of the findings, 32 percent of
our findings from the audit through an SBA dealt with systems.
So many of those were duplicates across. And so we have to go
through and now start putting in the regular checks to make
sure folks are, in fact, clearing people out when they out-
process.
Many of those are manual processes that individuals have to
make sure they are done. But some of those are just making
sure, again, that their standard processes are understood. They
are being held accountable for those, and that who has to hold
those folks accountable. And so we are putting a reemphasis
focus on those. So it is many of the control mechanisms that we
talk about that are being violated when the auditors came
through.
Secretary Rabern. I would just add four points. We are, in
fact, removing access in those cases where we find that it is
necessary and required.
I would just echo your concern about the exploitability of
this problem, and it is imperative that we get it fixed at a
return. We are standardizing our SOPs and requiring adherence
to those SOPs. And then the final point I would make is that in
every case, we are holding a flag officer or an SES career
civilian accountable for the correction.
Mr. Lamborn. And as a follow-up, although--I will wait--I
will stand back and wait.
Mr. Aguilera or Mr. McCord, do you have something to add?
Then I have a follow-up.
Secretary Aguilera. I would echo the comments. We are
pursuing a lot of the same policies.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
Secretary Aguilera. Not all of them have to do with--not
all of those notice of findings and recommendations have to do
with ghost employees that are still logging onto systems. Also
things like the person--a separation of duties, the person who
enters an obligation isn't the same person that approves the
obligations. So we are taking steps in those arenas as well.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
And, Mr. McCord, do you have anything to add?
Secretary McCord. No, not on this one.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. And then my follow-up question, then, is
did you find any of the departments more susceptible to this
kind of lack of compliance or not? Are you able to comment on
that? Or was it the same across the board?
Secretary McCord. The IT issues were pretty similar across
the three. It was a major finding in every case.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, witnesses, thank you for your testimony today, and
thank you for your service to the Nation.
The need to improve business and financial oversight and
transparency in the Department of Defense will help support
efficiencies in your operations and strengthen controls to
deter waste, fraud, and abuse. This is something that the
American people will hold us as their elected representatives
accountable for, and so we must hold you all accountable for
it.
And I know that the Department is committed to full
financial audit readiness by September 30, 2017. So over the
next 15 months, DOD will be preparing its financial statements
for a full audit. And what I would like to ask, and I hope that
this question has not been asked and answered--I am just
arriving at the hearing. I had prior business, so I apologize
for not being here to listen to all of the testimony and
questions and answers.
But if punitive actions are taken by Congress, do you
believe that this will help ensure the future preparation and
readiness of the Department of Defense for an audit or will it
hinder it? And I will ask each one of you that question.
Secretary McCord. Thank you for that question, Mr. Johnson.
When you say ``punitive actions,'' I guess the first thing that
comes to mind to me are the several versions of what has been
called Audit the Pentagon Act that have been introduced in the
House or the Senate over the last couple of Congresses. And
often the penalty or the stick in those bills is to take
funding away from a department or some part of a department
that doesn't have a clean opinion and give it maybe--and there
might be a carrot aspect where the money would flow to someone
who has a better audit performance.
And the fundamental concern I have about that is that each
of our military departments or each of our parts of the
department has a mission to perform, and taking funding away
from them because of their audit performance or lack of audit
performance doesn't change the fact that they still have a
mission to do. And on the flip side, to give money to--to make
up an example, to give money to DTRA [Defense Threat Reduction
Agency] because DTRA passed an audit over and above what they
request and what they need, to me, is not a good use of
taxpayer resources either.
I mean, I understand that money is an incentive in life,
but to--the biggest stick that has been out there in the
various iterations of this bill has been to take money or to
take milestone authority or other--to make acquisition
decisions harder is the other one. But, similarly, I mean, the
reason that we have these programs and the reason that we
request funding for particular agencies within the Department
is because they have a mission to perform, and I would sort of
hate to divorce the funding--you know, you should evaluate that
on the merits, whether you think what DTRA or some other part
of the agency is doing is needed or not needed based on
requirements, not based on as a regard for performance, as
important as it is, on the audit.
Mr. Johnson. I understand. Any of the other witnesses have
anything to add to that?
Secretary Speer. You know, I would add the same thing to
that. I think it is more holding accountable instead of
disincentivizing. Because I think some of the--I will call them
punitive measures or disincentives. It is like failing a class
and then saying, well, you don't go to class then. The people
who need the funding need to be able to fix and rectify some
things that some of the folks will be pulling the funding from
and completing the mission they need to.
I think we definitely need to hold a level of
accountability, but in terms of what this committee is doing to
us right now is, you know, identifying and then recognizing
those folks who do achieve and providing some sort of incentive
to do so and providing the value of what they need to do.
I think that some of the things we have seen in terms of
those--for instance, I can't do the work without DFAS. Taking
DFAS away from the Department of Defense would not help us.
Mr. Johnson. All right.
Secretary Speer. We need to share the responsibility for
those things, identify what is not being done, then rectify
those things.
Mr. Johnson. All right.
Doctor.
Secretary Rabern. I would echo my colleagues, but I would
add that these kinds of punitive actions would potentially
further degrade readiness at a time when our personnel tempo is
quite severe. And the last thing I would say is I believe it
would further--it would demoralize our workforce who have
worked so hard to get us to the point where we are now.
Mr. Johnson. All right.
Mr. Aguilera.
Secretary Aguilera. I would echo the comments already made.
It would damage readiness. And then, as I said before, as an
auditor I have been heartened by seeing the cooperation among
the different communities in the Air Force, civil engineers,
logisticians, engaged in our auditability. And so punitive
actions like that would actually retard the whole audit process
because they wouldn't have the manpower, they wouldn't have the
resources available to them to help us reach audit. So in the
end, it would actually set us back.
Mr. Johnson. All right. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. My understanding is there are no more
questions. So I want to thank you all for being here. I think
it is important to also express appreciation for the progress
that has been made so far.
It seems that we went a long time with fits and starts and
restarts on this audit issue, but now we are making progress.
And I think that is credit to the leadership of the departments
involved and especially to the people you all work with every
day. And I know you will understand, if we work to continue to
hold the Department's feet to the fire, that we meet the
statutory requirement and can ultimately have a successful
audit.
As we talked about, it is important for public confidence,
it is important for better decisionmaking, and then--so there
is a lot that stems from the controls and systems that are put
in place when you can have a successful audit.
So, again, thank you all for being here and answering our
questions. And we will look forward to further conversations on
this in the future.
The hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

June 15, 2016

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

June 15, 2016

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

June 15, 2016

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. CONAWAY

Secretary Aguilera. At the Air Force Senior Executive Service (SES)
level, Financial Improvement and Audit Readiness (FIAR) has been
incorporated into performance plans. We have performed a review of the
performance objectives for senior leaders and we are currently not
aware of any specific disciplinary actions taken as it relates to FIAR.
In response to audit findings and readiness activities, corrective
actions focus on developing and disseminating to the technical level
process and policy changes, and implementing the training to support
awareness and compliance with those changes.   [See page 27.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GIBSON
Secretary McCord. Mr. Gibson, you've highlighted one of our primary
vulnerabilities in the way we do business today, and also some of the
key elements of our strategy for sustainment of financial auditability.
The vulnerability comes from decentralizing most of the decisions on
exactly how business is done across our massive enterprise, often
differently for the same basic task and frequently using multiple
business systems that feed information into our financial systems.
Every one of these varied processes and systems should have a Standard
Operating Procedure (SOP) that's been tested for effectiveness. This
makes the audit more time consuming (and expensive) and creates the
need for much more manual intervention to adequately monitor
compliance. Simply stated, our approach in these matters is to simplify
and standardize processes. One element of this approach involves
reducing the number of legacy systems and standardizing both systems
and data, automating controls where possible. We have issued policies
enforcing upfront controls (such as system access control) and edit
checks in the systems along the way to strengthen data integrity,
eliminate need for manual corrections, and prevent inaccurate data from
processing. As a result, there will be fewer manual processes and work-
arounds required allowing us to sustain our remediation and
auditability. The best example of this is in the Procure-to-Pay process
where we are automating the interfaces between financial and
contracting systems, and minimizing the number of systems involved in
this process that supports spending streams of hundreds of billions of
dollars each year.   [See page 20.]

[all]
