- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-117] HEARING ON NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-117]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2017 INFORMATION

TECHNOLOGY AND CYBER PROGRAMS:

FOUNDATIONS FOR A SECURE WARFIGHTING NETWORK

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 22, 2016

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-077                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

JOE WILSON, South Carolina, Chairman

JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana               MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona, Vice Chair    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   PETE AGUILAR, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
Kevin Gates, Professional Staff Member
Lindsay Kavanaugh, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................     2
Wilson, Hon. Joe, a Representative from South Carolina, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities..............     1

WITNESSES

Halvorsen, Hon. Terry, Chief Information Officer, Department of
Defense........................................................     3
Levine, Hon. Peter, Deputy Chief Management Officer, Department
of Defense.....................................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Halvorsen, Hon. Terry........................................    26
Levine, Hon. Peter...........................................    35
Wilson, Hon. Joe.............................................    25

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Ashford..................................................    44
Mr. Lamborn..................................................    44
Mr. Langevin.................................................    43
Ms. Stefanik.................................................    44

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Kline....................................................    52
Mr. Lamborn..................................................    53
Mr. Langevin.................................................    51
Mr. Wilson...................................................    49

FISCAL YEAR 2017 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CYBER PROGRAMS: FOUNDATIONS
FOR A SECURE WARFIGHTING NETWORK

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, March 22, 2016.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:43 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Wilson
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE WILSON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
SOUTH CAROLINA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES

Mr. Wilson. I call this hearing of the Emerging Threats and
Capabilities Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee
to order. I am pleased to welcome everyone here today for this
hearing on the fiscal year 2017 budget request for information
technology [IT] and cyber programs.
Lately the Secretary has been highlighting the need for
increased innovation in the Department of Defense [DOD] through
public-private partnerships--and I was grateful that Secretary
Ashton Carter was here yesterday on this issue, so it is right
on point--as well as the importance of generating new
capabilities to offset growing advantages of future potential
adversaries.
I believe that information technology and cyber will both
serve as key enablers and, at the same time, present key
challenges for the Department as it tries to realize its
vision.
In this time of fiscal constraint, I also believe it is
equally important to enforce management rigor to make sure that
we are squeezing the most out of every defense dollar where it
makes sense. We need to learn from industry and use the kinds
of business analytics and business intelligence methods that
work so well in the commercial sphere. That also means using
commercial tools to the maximum extent, especially in areas
like business systems and cloud computing.
We need to find better ways to foster and maintain our own
human capital to support the acquisition and management of
information technology and cyber systems. In looking through
this most recent budget request, I want to make sure the
Department is emphasizing these two complementary tracks--
increased innovation, as well as increased management
discipline.
I would like to welcome my distinguished panel of witnesses
and appreciate their perspectives on all of these issues. This
panel includes the Honorable Terry Halvorsen, Chief Information
Officer [CIO], Department of Defense, the Honorable Peter
Levine, the Deputy Chief Management Officer [DCMO], Department
of Defense.
I would like now to turn to my friend and ranking member,
Mr. Jim Langevin from Rhode Island, for any comments he would
like to make.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson can be found in the
Appendix on page 25.]

STATEMENT OF JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM RHODE
ISLAND, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES

Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
convening this hearing. And I want to thank you to our
witnesses for testifying today on the President's fiscal year
2017 budget request for information technology and cyber
programs.
Last week, we heard about the cyber mission force build and
operations from Admiral Rogers, and today we will hear about
the infrastructure our warfighters operate within and defend
for the enterprise. Cyber Command [CYBERCOM] has advocated for
the ability to see the network in order to provide better
defense. The joint information environment, or JIE, is the
guiding effort for achieving this capability. And today I hope
to hear about the progress made under the JIE umbrella,
governance for this effort, and service contributions.
Another major undertaking I would like to discuss today is
implementing the Department's cloud strategy. The DOD's
migration to the cloud has slowed due to laborious
certification requirements and an acquisition system unable to
keep up with cloud services procurement. This also seems to
hinder any efficiency or cost savings that could otherwise be
achieved.
Finally, the DOD has been tasked with building and
maintaining the IT system for OPM's [Office of Personnel
Management's] new National Background Investigation Bureau.
While it makes sense the Department provide expertise on
building a secure system, I am concerned the DOD is assuming
all the risk by providing resources and assuming responsibility
for decisions made outside the Department.
As a long-term advocate for cybersecurity within this
subcommittee, I am glad we have taken the time to not only
discuss the build and operations, but also the infrastructure
our cyber warriors operate within every day over the last few
weeks.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today to discuss this important topic.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Langevin. And now welcome again
to our witnesses. Your written statements will be submitted for
the record, so we ask that you summarize your comments in 5
minutes or less, and then after that, each of the persons on
the subcommittee will go through a 5-minutes process and Kevin
Gates will make sure it is done correctly.
So we now begin with Mr. Halvorsen.

STATEMENT OF HON. TERRY HALVORSEN, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Halvorsen. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for this opportunity to testify before the subcommittee
today on the Department's information technology budget
request.
As the Department's CIO, I am the principal adviser to the
Secretary of Defense for information management, IT,
cybersecurity, communications, positioning, navigation, and
timing, spectrum management, senior leadership, nuclear command
control, and communications matters. Those latter
responsibilities are clearly unique to the DOD.
My imperative at the CIO in managing this broad and diverse
set of functions is to ensure that the Department has the
information and communications technology capabilities needed
to support the broad set of Department missions. This includes
supporting our deployed forces and cyber mission forces, as
well as business and warfighting support functions.
As Secretary Carter has stated, DOD must address strategic
challenges across all domains, not just air, land, and sea, but
increasingly in cyberspace. The Department's budget includes
funding to address these challenges, including IT and cyber
investments that are critical to the Department's warfighting,
intelligence, and business missions.
As the CIO, I am driving cultural, business, technical
improvements, and innovation into DOD's IT and cyber to better
support defense missions and operations. My written testimony
provides more detailed information on the Department's IT and
cyberspace budget and priorities.
I want to emphasize that these efforts require teamwork and
partnership within DOD, which includes DISA [Defense
Information Systems Agency], USD [Under Secretary of Defense]
AT&L [Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics] and Policy, U.S.
CYBERCOM, DCMO, and other partners.
External partnerships to DOD will also be critical, to
include Congress, industry, and our allies. I strongly believe
an expanded partnership with industry will be essential to
expanding and maintaining technology advantages, while
improving our fiscal accountability.
I thank you for your interest and support, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Halvorsen can be found in
the Appendix on page 26.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Halvorsen. We now proceed to Mr.
Levine.

STATEMENT OF HON. PETER LEVINE, DEPUTY CHIEF MANAGEMENT
OFFICER, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Levine. Thank you, Chairman Wilson, Ranking Member
Langevin, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Peter Levine, and I am the Deputy Chief Management
Officer of the Department of Defense. Two years ago, this
committee enacted legislation which will merge the offices of
the DCMO and CIO. However, that legislation does not take
effect until the beginning of the next administration, so until
that time, the CIO, Mr. Halvorsen, will remain the responsible
official within OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] for
IT, cybersecurity, and many of the other issues addressed in
your letter of invitation.
The DCMO's role, until such time as this merger takes
place, is limited to reviewing and approving of investments in
IT business systems. We do thank you in that regard for last
year's NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act], in which you
substantially streamlined and gave us more flexibility in the
way we do this. We intend to use this flexibility in several
ways.
First, we intend to change our focus from the discrete
review of each individual small investment and focus more on
portfolios, so we can be more forward-looking in our management
of business systems. Second, we plan to focus much more on
return on investment, so that we can ensure that when we invest
in business systems, we actually realize the benefits that we
should be able to get out of them, that we actually turn off
the legacy systems and reduce manning, where we can develop
more efficient and less manpower-intensive processes.
And finally, we are going to work to develop a streamlined
process for business systems where we can align our business
systems investment process, our CIO process, and our
acquisition process into a single process so that we don't have
to sequentially go through one after the other and put the
program manager through recurring hoops as we go forward.
We are firmly committed to working with you as we try to
make the business systems process more efficient and to improve
the Department's investment process and look forward to your
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Levine can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. And we will now proceed
with a 5-minute round. I want to commend Lindsay Kavanaugh and
Jim Langevin for achieving an extraordinary turnout today. So,
congratulations. You did good.
And I will begin with myself. And this is for both of you.
What do you see as the major budgetary challenges in this
year's President's budget request? Where are we accepting risk
based on current budget constraints?
Mr. Levine. I will give the gentle answer, which is not
enough money. And I will defer to Mr. Halvorsen as to the IT
budget specifically.
Mr. Halvorsen. I certainly echo Peter's first comment about
not enough money. I think in the IT area, we are taking some
risk in modernization. Some of it will slow. We are trying to
balance that and make sure that we don't take that risk in the
security side.
The other I think challenge that we are going to have in IT
may not be exactly in the budget, and it is going to be the
retention of the IT workforce. And frankly, that is going to
come down to an economic decision. I happened to be in the
valley [Silicon Valley] last week, and, you know, Google
announced they are raising the pay for cybersecurity by another
20 percent. That is going to keep impacting our ability to
attract talent.
If you ask me about the budget, what keeps me up more at
night, that is probably the answer, sir.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you very much. And, Mr. Halvorsen,
Chairman Mac Thornberry's most recent defense reform proposal
emphasizes prototyping experimentation. Can you tell us what
the Department is doing with regard to information technology
and cyber programs that highlight these approaches?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, thank you. I think a couple things that
we want to think about when we answer this question, much of
the innovation today being driven in the cyber and IT business
is coming from the commercial sector. We want to be closer tied
to the commercial sector, so thanks to some legislation last
year, I am able to now put people from DOD inside of business--
and we are doing that today--and also have business people on
my staff, which we are also doing today.
I think that partnership that we continue to strengthen is
a key to us getting the right innovation and getting it on
time.
Within the DOD, I want to focus our S&T [science and
technology] dollars around the areas the industry isn't going
to focus on, and that is going to be on the weapons systems and
top-level security systems, where there is not yet much play in
the commercial sector, and I think our budget reflects that
that is where our emphasis is and also reflects where we are
taking risk is around innovation dollars that we would have
that were inside the budget for commercial areas that we have
taken some risk and are not spending that much.
Mr. Wilson. And, again, I am impressed with the efforts by
Secretary Carter to work for public-private cooperation.
Additionally, Mr. Halvorsen, in the fiscal year 2017 budget
request, the Defense Information Systems Agency, the primary IT
provider for the Department, eliminated the S&T funding it had
to pursue innovation and technology demonstration. Please
explain the rationale for that decision and how this aligns
with the Secretary's emphasis on drawing in innovation from the
commercial sector.
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, we certainly reduced DISA's S&T
funding. They still have some R&D [research and development]
money. But in the area we reduced it is aligned exactly--I
think what we have said before--today, where we are going to
get our information, and particularly true for most of DISA's
activities, which are supporting our business functions, is
from industry and commercial.
So in a constrained budget, in my opinion, that was where
we chose to take some risk, because I think I can get that same
innovation affect by strengthening our relationships with
commercial industry.
Mr. Wilson. Additionally, Mr. Halvorsen, section 901 of the
fiscal year 2015 NDAA mandated that the chief information
officer begin to exercise authority, direction, and control
over the Information Assurances Directorate of the National
Security Agency.
Recently, this subcommittee was made aware of a DOD
proposal to place that authority, direction, and control back
with the Under Secretary for Intelligence. Do you support the
Department's proposal? What are the pros and cons of keeping
that authority with the chief information officer?
Mr. Halvorsen. I don't know that the Department has made a
formal proposal yet. I know that it is being discussed.
Candidly, I would have some concerns about moving it away from
the DOD CIO, but more importantly what we are doing is working
with the intel side of the Department to form a governance
structure that will allow both CIO and intel equities in the IA
[information assurances] money to be addressed.
Mr. Wilson. Well, with your background, we would all
appreciate any input at any time as we consider these issues.
I now yield to Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I want to
thank both of our witnesses for being here and what you are
doing in the IT and cyber sphere.
So one of the questions I had--and, Terry, you talked about
it just a minute ago in terms of, well, the private sector
increasing what they are paying their cybersecurity folks, and
it is going to be particularly challenging now for us to
compete to get that top-end talent.
I know in the NDAA last year, we gave more flexibility to
the Department to try to take advantage of that IT talent. You
know, for example, allowing potentially--as I envision it--to
see private sector to be able to detail for maybe a year or two
these high-end individuals that, you know, it would be
challenging for us to both afford, attract, and keep for a long
period of time.
But, you know, companies have an interest in patriotic duty
and want to help secure the Nation in cyberspace. So we made
some progress in that with the NDAA, giving some flexibility to
the Department. Can you tell me, do you need additional
authorities to further take advantage of that talent so that we
have the cyber workforce that is as robust as possible and our
networks are as secure and as robust as possible?
Mr. Halvorsen. First, I would thank you for the NDAA last
year. That is helping some of the work we are able to do, the
excepted workforce in cyber, being able to bring the people in
from industry like we are doing now. I do think we will need
some legislation that probably changes slightly the rule sets
about what we are allowed to do with the industry people.
I think exactly what you stated. We really want to be able
to bring them in and have them sit in a position for a year,
being able to execute some decisions within the Department, and
then go back to industry, just like I think there is a market
space today for us to have some of our civilian employees go to
industry, and industry would like to have them--and I think we
will need to tweak some of the legislation so that could happen
more often.
I think we share the vision. In the end, we want more of an
in and out, back and forth. And you could really see the career
path in cyber IT changing so that it is not an all-civilian or
all-government career path, but a much more combined career
path. And I think that would serve the Nation well.
Mr. Langevin. Good. I mean, that is exactly where I hope
that we are going to be and that is what we want to get to.
Please, I hope you will work with us and tell us how we can be
of help in terms of additional legislation and language that
you need to get to that point.
So as I mentioned in my opening statement, I find it
appropriate the Department of Defense is involved in building a
new IT system for OPM's new National Background Investigation
Bureau [NBIB] that will house sensitive personnel information.
However, I am concerned that the DOD has been given
guidance and deadlines that are not realistic and is assuming
all responsibility for performance, when the decision-making
authority may be shared.
So my questions are, can you describe the Department of
Defense's role in building and maintaining a new IT system?
Specifically, what is the amount requested for fiscal year
2017, as well as in the out years? Was additional money added
to the top line for DISA's role in this effort? Or is it coming
out of hide?
What are the resources that are being provided for this
effort? Is the current workforce sufficient to meet the demand
or will additional personnel be billeted? Will the Department
have sole decision-making authority in building and maintaining
the system? Or is it shared with OPM and other communities? And
what timelines have been established for delivering the system?
And, Mr. Levine, if I could--Levine, I am sorry--what role
will you have in doing business process re-engineering to
change the way NBIB does business so it fits the IT system, not
the other way around? And if you need me to repeat any part of
that, I will be glad to. Sorry it is such a long list.
Mr. Halvorsen. So, sir, what I would like to do, because I
do think that question deserves a lot of matter, is I will make
some comments on it, but I will also like to take that for the
record and get back to you with some of the specific answers.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 43.]
Mr. Langevin. Fair enough.
Mr. Halvorsen. For 2017, it is $95 million. There was a
top-line increase to DOD for doing some of this. We will get
you the exact numbers across the FYDP [Future Years Defense
Program]. And then I would be foolish if I said there is not
some concern on DOD's part about how this is going to work, and
what I would assure you is from a standpoint of the build, we
are going to get the requirements from the group that is
looking at how we are going to redo the whole investigation
process.
When I have those requirements--and that group starts next
week, and we have members on it--we will build a system that
supports those requirements that also ensures security. If at
any time I think that that is not happening, I will be the
first to let you know.
I am comfortable right now that we have worked out a
governance process with OPM and OMB [Office of Management and
Budget] that makes DOD the decision maker for all of the
technical decisions and the security decisions, but I am still
concerned and we will have to see how that goes forward. And I
will get you more detail on the rest of the question.
Mr. Langevin. I would appreciate it, whatever additional
detail you could provide. And I would just assure we stand
ready to support you in this effort as you make the transition.
And Mr. Levine?
Mr. Levine. With regard to the business process re-
engineering, we definitely have less of a role in that than we
would have if the entire mission had been transferred to the
Department of Defense. However, it was never going to be
entirely the Department of Defense in any case because as you
know the DNI [Director of National Intelligence] establishes
security clearance policy, so we are always going to have to
work with outside agencies and reconcile differences with
outside agencies.
We are undertaking with the Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence to re-engineer the DOD part of the process. We are
looking at continuous evaluation. We are looking at other
measures to streamline our organization and streamline our part
of the process. And we do still have a piece--significant
pieces of the process. It is the investigation piece that OPM
has, but not the entirety of the process.
As we do that, we will see places where we are going to
want help, we are going to want changes in the OPM piece of the
process, and we will have to work that through the interagency,
because we don't control it, but we will work it through the
interagency process.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Langevin. We now proceed to
Congressman Doug Lamborn of Colorado.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And I will get to the budget
implications of this in just a minute, but how active are we in
working with allies, NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization]
allies, Israel, et cetera, in combating cyber threats and cyber
attacks?
Mr. Halvorsen. Extremely active. A couple of the things
that we have done that I can talk about in this forum with the
Five Eye community,
we actually established last year a
CIO Five Eye group that meets physically every 6 months,
virtually every quarter. Our next meeting is in London, where
cybersecurity is certainly one of the big topics. We have had
visits to Israel, exchanging data. That continues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

``Five Eyes'' is an intelligence alliance involving
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United
States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I just came back from Korea and Japan, where that was a
major topic. I can tell you that the NATO partners, Korea,
Japan, Germany, have all adopted the DOD cybersecurity
scorecard as the basis for measuring how effective we are doing
cybersecurity basics across the board, which I think is a big
breakthrough.
So we can probably give you some more detail, and we will
take that for the record, but they are the major things that we
are doing to improve our information-sharing.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 44.]
Mr. Lamborn. Well, that is good to hear. And do you have
any recommendations in the budget on maybe making that even
stronger? Or, I mean, I know you have a good budget that you
are defending right now, but do you see any room for
improvement in that area in particular?
Mr. Halvorsen. You know, I do see room for improvement, but
I don't think right now that is a money issue for improvement.
I think it is more of getting all of us aligned to the right
principles and basics.
Today we have made good progress within NATO--and as I
said, Japan and Korea and Germany--there is some other work we
need to do with other partners.
I will be in Estonia in June working some of those issues.
And what I would like to do is when I come back from that, I
will have a better site picture, is maybe give you some more
answers on what I think we might need to do to go beyond some
of our traditional allies.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. I appreciate that. I would like to
follow up on this conversation at another time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn. We now proceed to
Congressman Jim Cooper of Tennessee.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, the Santa Claus
question. Both of you mentioned that you would like to have
more money. How much? And for what?
Mr. Levine. I would say that as the DCMO, my responsibility
is finding efficiencies. I am not actually looking for more
money. The Department is looking for more money. I am trying to
identify efficiencies within the Department where I can free up
money so that we can invest more in the long-range science and
technology programs and force structure and things that we need
to keep our force ready to go today and ready to go in the
future. That is where I need more money.
I would defer to Mr. Halvorsen as to specific IT
investments.
Mr. Halvorsen. I think to upgrade some of our legacy
systems. And I can get back to you with a number on that. And
to tie back with Peter, I think some investment in the legacy
systems--and particularly some of the larger both HR [human
resources] personnel and pay systems--those investments would
do two things for us.
One, we would certainly improve security. There are some
issues we need to fix there. Secondly, I think we could improve
efficiency, and after we made those investments, I actually
think the return on investment would be pretty good. But I will
come back to you with a number, sir.
[The information referred to was not available at the time
of printing.]
Mr. Cooper. Thank you. Now the Scrooge question. Pentagon
is the least auditable of all government agencies. It has been
a risk factor for the GAO [Government Accountability Office]
for 20 years, the number one risk factor. Will your IT work
help the Pentagon get audited faster?
Mr. Levine. The answer is yes. Improved business systems,
improved financial management systems definitely make an
impact. We are much closer today to being auditable than we
were 10 years ago. A significant part of that is because of the
ERP [Enterprise Resource Planning] investment. But there are
many, many hurdles we have to get over that are not IT, and IT
can't solve it by itself.
We have policy issues that we have been kicking down the
road 10 years that now that we are facing a 2017 deadline, we
are finally getting people to be serious about and say, hey,
yeah, we actually have to make those decisions, we have to
figure out how we are going to go about that.
So the DCMO co-chairs the governance board, the FIAR
[Financial Improvement and Audit Readiness] governance board,
which is responsible for trying to drive the Department toward
audit with the Comptroller, with Mike McCord. And since I
arrived at the Department about 10 months ago, we have been
trying--we have set the Department on a program of identifying
what our key interim milestones are that we need to hit in
order to become auditable.
We have identified a lot of things that should have been
addressed 5 years ago or 10 years ago, but we are trying to
chip away at them one at a time, and we think that the deadline
is extremely constructive in pushing us toward that objective.
The Department seems to have an infinite ability to kick
things down the stream and facing a deadline that is 2 years
away really helps focus the attention.
Mr. Cooper. Well, some people would say 2017 is next year,
not 2 years away.
Mr. Levine. It is October 1, 2017. I guess we can--a year
and a half is what that is, yes, sir.
Mr. Cooper. Doesn't sound like you are very optimistic
about meeting the deadline.
Mr. Levine. When I came before the Senate Armed Services
Committee for my nomination hearing about almost exactly a year
ago, I testified that I had never been confident the Department
was going to meet the deadline, and I couldn't change my
position just because I was testifying for confirmation.
So I can't change my story now. I am skeptical that we will
have done everything we need to do. But I am going to push as
hard as I possibly can to get us there.
Mr. Cooper. Okay, now the long-awaited question of the
ghost of Christmas past. The Joint Chiefs hack, there was
apparently somebody who signed on to an e-mail, like the
equivalent from the Nigerian prince or something. Has that
person been identified who opened that foolish e-mail? And
would it help if they were identified, if they not been
identified previously?
Mr. Levine. I will say that the people that opened the e-
mail have been identified, and we have looked at the reasons
why, and in some cases, we did some remediation. In other
cases, they had followed the right procedures, up to a point,
and we needed to do some more training. That has been put in
place to do that, but I would also say that was also one that
was caught very quickly.
We had very limited exposure--still would like to do
better--but the system and when you look at the volume of e-
mail traffic that comes into DOD, how many we get, and the
number of people that click, great improvement. We are
certainly holding people accountable to a higher standard now.
We have signed out the cyber accountability culture
document that was signed by DEPSECDEF [Deputy Secretary of
Defense]. Myself, Frank Kendall, and Mike Rogers have signed
out the accountability procedures document to make it down to
the individual and command level, so I think we have made
progress in that area.
I don't think identifying any more individuals at any more
level would be helpful right now.
Mr. Cooper. I see my time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Cooper. We now proceed to
Congresswoman Elise Stefanik, of New York.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
panelists for being here today. I have two questions. The first
one will be quite broad. The second one will be quite specific.
As you are well aware, the threats to the United States have
evolved dramatically in the last 10 years. State and non-state
adversaries have adapted to a new digital environment quite
well. And it is important that the United States invests in the
time, training, and infrastructure to counter the whole
spectrum of cyber threats.
So as we see in the news, cyber provocation against the DOD
infrastructure continues to increase, what is your assessment
of the DOD's ability to counter such intrusions today? And what
can I tell soldiers that I represent at Fort Drum in my
district what we are doing to ensure that they are protected?
And what have we learned about the enemy? And how has that
changed our approach? That is the first broad question.
Mr. Halvorsen. Again, I will make some comments on it, but
we will take that for the record, because I think it is a good
question and we owe you some better details on that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 44.]
Mr. Halvorsen. We certainly have improved training across
the board in the cyber spectrum. The cybersecurity culture
issue is one that is on top of the Secretary's desk. We meet
every month on the cybersecurity scorecard, and a part of that
gets to what is the training of the individuals. The networks
themselves are much better today. They are not exactly where we
want them. We have got three major efforts to improve that.
The first one is, you are probably aware that the Secretary
has directed that this year we move as much of DOD as
possible--the ones that are on Windows operating systems--to a
Windows 10 baseline. I cannot stress the criticality of us
getting that done.
Right now, when you try to look at the visibility of the
networks, while we are making improvements, you are doing that
across multiple operational systems, multiple baselines. It is
impossible to do, do well.
Getting to a single baseline for Windows--and that is about
80 percent to 85 percent of the DOD--will give us the ability
to have better visibility. Windows 10 is the first operating
system that really thought about security right from the
beginning and has in-built features that we will take advantage
of.
It will also allow us to go to the next step, which is how
do you then start taking and really using cloud computing
technology to improve your security? So we are positioned to do
that. We have got things we have to get done, and the first one
is to get the Windows 10 done.
The other big initiative is to complete the joint regional
security stacks. In its simplest forms, what that does is lower
our footprint. Today, we have got 1,000 points that you can
come in. When the joint regional security stacks are done, we
will have less than 100 points. That is a lot easier to defend,
and we can focus more on it.
It also stops us from doing our own self-denial attacks,
which are also--happen when you are trying to keep aligned over
1,000 different firewalls. We will reduce the firewalls, have
better overall security and visibility into the networks. That
is what we are doing at the big end.
Ms. Stefanik. Okay, so the specific questions are actual
follow-ups to your answer. When you reference the cybersecurity
scorecard process, what is the scorecard exactly? Can you get
into more specifics? Can this information and will this
information be shared with Congress? Are there plans to expand
scorecards beyond cybersecurity? And how does a negative
scorecard rating of a DOD component, what is the consequence of
that?
Mr. Halvorsen. Again, we will give you some more details in
writing, but here is what I can tell you. The scorecard is
looking at what we have defined right now as basic areas that
we should be measuring. One of them is, is everybody using a
secure token to access DOD systems.
The advantage of that is, is immediate. If you are using
the token, A, we know exactly who logged in, when they logged
in, where they are at, and it is a lot harder to fake that
access. So it is an immediate improvement.
Ms. Stefanik. Can that information be shared with Congress?
Mr. Halvorsen. Actually, I am happy to give it to you. We
have actually shared it with other committees, and I am happy
to send one over when I get back, the current scorecard.
Ms. Stefanik. And the results of the scorecards that are
shared?
Mr. Halvorsen. The results is right on it. It will show you
where we are at. We are not where we want to be in all of the
areas. We are measuring ourselves to extremely high standards.
One of the things that I just want to say upfront, when you
look at cyber, you could hit 80 percent and a lot of people
would think that would be good. In cyber, that is not good
enough.
So when you see that we are in yellow and, in some cases,
red, it is because we are trying to get above in almost every
category 95 percent to be green.
Ms. Stefanik. And the last question is, you talked about
the Department's plans to move to the Windows 10 operating
system with a mandate to so by a certain date. What is the cost
of that transition?
Mr. Halvorsen. I don't know the exact cost yet. We will get
that to you. But what I could tell you, the cost not to do that
would be in the billions.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 45.]
Ms. Stefanik. Great, I would look forward to getting more
of that in writing afterwards. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you, Congresswoman Stefanik. We now
proceed to Congressman Pete Aguilar of California.
Mr. Aguilar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Halvorsen, can
you talk to me broadly about in your testimony you talk about
cloud computing. Where will cloud computing be in 5 years and
in 10 years?
Mr. Halvorsen. In 5 years, I am hopeful that we will be in
an almost complete virtual cloud environment, and cloud defined
this way. We will have private clouds, which are completely
private within segments of DOD. We will have private clouds
that are just DOD, you know, inside it. And we will have
private clouds that are DOD and other parts of the Federal
Government. And then we will have hybrid public clouds.
Because of the size of DOD and the Federal Government, we
ought to be able to move into where we would have government
hybrid clouds hosted in commercial centers as opposed to some
of the things I talked about earlier, would be on premise, that
would give us the best combination of mission security and
value.
Mr. Aguilar. Is that what you mean when you talk about in
page 3 of your testimony mission partner environment, when you
are talking about commercially accessible, reconfigurable, and
secured data that can be shared with commanders?
Mr. Halvorsen. A little broader than that. The mission
partner environment would certainly use cloud technology, but
in that part of the testimony what I am really talking about is
how we would be able to support our COCOM [combatant command]
commanders as they partner with both traditional and non-
traditional allies to support whatever mission it is, to be
able to stand up virtual networks on the fly, to be able to do
that both at a secure level, at a speed level that we need, and
then to keep it fiscally responsible.
Mr. Aguilar. Can you talk a little bit about how you
envision that working and what our stakeholders and coalition
partners, what their role in that would be?
Mr. Halvorsen. So as we can move to cloud technology, one
of the things that we have got to recognize, we have got to
get--our MPE [mission partner environment] is going to have to
be commercial-based. We are not going to be able to do this at,
say, a U.S.-only based system. A, other pieces of our allies
couldn't afford that, and it is not what they are going to
agree to do.
So basing this on a commercial set of technology that also
uses commercial classified technology, would allow us to, in
the cloud, put together a virtual network that--let's say we
had a--this is a really good example, and I think it is in the
testimony--and we have done this--let's say we had a natural
disaster that had allies now--like the Chinese, the Cubans, us,
they are not traditional allies. We could actually stand up a
network, once we get some of the technologies in place, that
would allow data to be shared.
And let's say we want to share data with China, we want to
share data with Cuba, but not exactly the same data. We could
do that on a network with the right protections to protect the
data that we need using almost commercially available
technology today. There is a few pieces that have to be done,
but I am--no doubt they will be done by the end of this year.
Mr. Aguilar. Well, look forward to seeing that development
and our discussion about that moving forward. Thank you so
much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Aguilar. We now proceed
to Congressman Brad Ashford, all the way from Nebraska.
Mr. Ashford. It is a long trip every morning. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, being able to get here.
Congressman Langevin raised the issue that I am trying to
understand further. And your answers were good. I want to
further understand it, though, a little bit, because we talk a
lot about employee exchanges with the private sector and the
need for additional authorities to do that.
It seems to me it is a critical part of the plan going
forward and with the talent out there and the demands on the
budget and being able to bring people in. And you have,
Congressman Langevin, hit it 100 percent, and you did, as well,
in your answers.
What do we have to do in order to--I mean, it seems to me
that is something we should be able to move on. And what sort
of authorities would we need in order to do that?
Mr. Halvorsen. Again, I would like to come back on record--
here is what I would tell you I think the first area. Today
there are some statutes that actually prohibit us from giving
decision authority to those type of positions. While we
certainly want to protect them and make sure that the
government is in the end responsible for the decision, if I
have got somebody industry--so let's take cloud.
The best cloud engineers today are not in the government.
They are not. We have some really good ones, but the best ones
today are in industry. We ought to be able to get some of those
in. I ought to be able to assign one of them, say, okay, you
are the lead cloud engineer for this year that you are doing
this work with us, and give them the authority to make
decisions, and with some oversight, expend dollars.
Today, under the current authorities, that is hard to do. I
need to do some work to figure out what that should look like,
and I will come back to you by the summer, if that is good,
with some recommendations.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 44.]
Mr. Ashford. That is really all I have. That is extremely
helpful. It seems to me that there are areas where, as you
suggest, the private sector or the nongovernmental sector have
those expertise. So thank you, Mr. Chairman. That is all I
have.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you, Congressman Ashford. And due to
how important these issues are, we will proceed with a second
round.
And, Mr. Levine, DOD doesn't have a stellar track record in
deploying business IT systems. What recommendations would you
have to make to improve our abilities to deploy business
systems? And, secondly, how can we improve or shape the
workforce to better configure, deploy, and manage these
business systems?
Mr. Levine. First, we don't just not have a stellar record.
We have a horrendous record of deploying business systems. I
think that of all the things that we do badly, that is one of
the ones we do the worst.
So there are a number of things that we need to do on our
side of the river to do better. One of the things that we need
to do is to recognize the business systems themselves are not
going to solve our problems, that what we need to look at is
the processes that we are automating, so that if you try to
automate an old process without looking at it and figuring out
how it works, you are doomed to failure.
We have tried many times to buy an off-the-shelf system and
then said to the users of the system--well, have the users of
the system come in and tell us, well, that is not exactly the
data we want. We want this other data, because that is what we
have actually used, and we start tearing apart the guts of an
off-the-shelf system. And before you know it, we have spent
five times as much to re-engineer the system and to rebuild the
system as the cost of the system itself.
We have to control our own appetite, and that is something
that we are working on within the Department. In terms of what
you could do to help us--so one thing that I would say that you
could do to help us, that I hope you will think about, is as we
look at the process that we have to go through for business
systems, right now, as I said, we are going to try to work with
the acquisition community to re-engineer that, because we have
a system where we go through an investment review process, we
identify a potential solution, and it may be like a $20 million
fix to a problem where you do a tinker with an existing system.
We then have to throw it over the threshold, over the
transom to the acquisition community that may set up a program
office that in itself would cost $20 million, and they will
come to us with a solution which is, let's build a whole new
system from scratch. Well, that is crazy.
So we are going to try to re-engineer that within the
Department. There may be places where we come to you for
assistance in doing that re-engineering. And there is one place
in particular I would point to, which is right now for what I
presume are historic reasons, we have one set of thresholds for
what are called major defense acquisition programs [MDAPs].
We have another set of thresholds for what are called major
automated information systems [MAIS] programs. MDAPs and
MAIS's. The MAIS thresholds are way, way lower, an order of--I
don't know, a couple of orders of magnitude lower than the
thresholds for MDAPs, but we treat them as the same thing.
What that means is, that when we have an IT--a business
system investment, we trigger a process on the acquisition side
which is as big and as clumsy as the process we have on the
acquisition side when we are buying an aircraft carrier or a
fighter aircraft or something like that. And if you are buying
a business system, I am not sure that makes sense.
And so I think if you would look at where you treat MAIS
systems and MDAPs the same and whether you need to treat them
in the same way in legislation, I think that is something
constructive that could help us in streamlining our own
internal processes.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you for being so candid. And
additionally, too, hey, technology changes overnight, and so I
know it is an extraordinary challenge, but we appreciate both
of you on what you are doing. Also, I am grateful--Mr.
Halvorsen, I notice your association with Rotary International,
your service as a Paul Harris fellow. I am happy to be with
you.
So a question, Mr. Halvorsen. Spectrum is a vital resource
for the Department. However, it is also one that we are in
increasing competition with the commercial sector. What
challenges do you see over the next 10 years when it comes to
the DOD's use of spectrum? What recommendations would you make
to improve the responsiveness of the regulatory process to
including national security concerns and economic priorities?
Mr. Halvorsen. So I think today we are in a good spot, hard
work with spectrum. We did well with the last auction. And the
money is there to change where DOD can move and share spectrum.
What I worry about right now is that the private demand for
spectrum is going to exceed our ability to keep pace. And we
could, if we are not careful, put some national systems at
risk.
Some of this takes time. And in this business, I get that
time is really valuable and it is money, but there is a
physical limitation to how fast we can move the DOD systems
either into the ability to share spectrum or out of some
spectrum. And I worry--maybe because we are victims of our own
success--we have done very well, and the legislation that has
been written and the sharing has all worked to date.
But what I hear from industry right now is, well, we want
to go faster. And I don't know that we can go much faster today
on how we look at spectrum, make the decisions where we can get
out, and how we would share.
I would also tell you that while I think industry is
starting to look at making their own investments in helping us
share, they are just starting that.
And I think one of the things we need to look at is, I am
happy to be measured on how DOD is making investments to
share--and we ought to think about some measurements that we
would give industry to say, how are you doing in making the
investments to--your contributions to helping us get to that
state?
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you very much. And now Ranking
Member Jim Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, thanks to our
witnesses for being here.
So yesterday I had the opportunity to have a sit-down with
Deputy National Security Adviser Avril Haines and the Homeland
Security Adviser, Lisa Monaco, to discuss the Comprehensive
National Cybersecurity Initiative [CNCI]. And I have certainly
been an advocate for many of the proposals under the CNCI for
some time, and specifically the appointment of an individual at
the executive level to oversee Federal cybersecurity
enterprise.
And it is one of the problems that I think previously on
the .gov side they really don't have anybody in charge with
both policy and budgetary authority that can reach across
government and compel departments and agencies to do what they
need to do in cyber. Hence, you have things like the OPM breach
that happened.
And I think DOD, by the way, is doing a much better job in
terms of defending the .mil network. And all of that, as
difficult and challenging as it is, it is important. And they
are doing good work. But can you describe how DOD fits into the
overall CNAP [Cybersecurity National Action Plan], as it is
called? And more specifically, how DOD will interact with the
new individual, the Federal Chief Information Security Officer
who will be appointed to coordinate cybersecurity policies and
activities?
Mr. Halvorsen. Today, and even before the legislation, we
partner extensively with the Federal CIO, Tony Scott. I mean,
Tony when he came in brought some new ideas to the Federal
side. We are certainly supportive of that, and we will continue
to do so.
As the areas that the Federal Government is looking at are
applicable to DOD, we will play, and we will play hard, and we
will support those. We will continue to advise Tony and the new
individual that is appointed on where we think there are things
that DOD is doing that should be applied to the rest of the
Federal Government, and we will take those things that are
really working and apply them within DOD.
I think the establishment of an individual to do that is
key to success inside the rest of the Federal Government. And I
think there are some opportunities for us to really set that
tone.
One of them is, as we rebuild the NBIB and we look at the
lessons learned, I know Tony and I have agreed today that we
ought to take those lessons learned and apply them across the
Federal Government at any place that we see that that is
applicable, we will do that.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. What progress has DOD made on cloud
computing, specifically integration of capabilities provided by
essential service providers, and are there enough certified to
create a competitive field? And how are security concerns being
addressed?
Mr. Halvorsen. As for the progress, two things I think I
would like to point. We say a lot of times that DOD is behind
in cloud. So I wanted to really know if that was true. So I
have asked my staff and some outside to take a look at, how
does DOD compare in the use of cloud with other Fortune 50 or
peer competitors?
We are actually slightly ahead of most of the Fortune 50 in
the use of cloud. We are now embarking on doing more, but I
don't think DOD is behind. If you look particularly at the
financial industry, which has some very strong security
similarities to us, they have done exactly what we have done.
They take some of their public-facing stuff and they put it
into cloud. We have done that with good success.
The next two things that we are doing--and we have now
gotten certifications, enough of them, to start being
competitive--is to look at how we bring industry into on-
premise cloud offerings. We do that right now very limitedly
through the NGEN [Next Generation Enterprise Network] contract
that the Navy put in place, where actually HP [Hewlett-Packard]
is running Navy data centers, to include Navy data centers at
the secure level, on-prem [premises], for the Navy.
We are using that model, and we are going to expand that
across the rest of DOD.
I will have a couple RFIs [requests for information] out
here in the next month. We have a couple contracts that we are
going to let that will allow four commercial entities to come
in at the Level 4 level in certification, which is right below
the classified data. And we have some work being done to allow
more companies to partake in the classified space, too. So I
actually think we are making good progress. We have got to stay
on top of that.
I hope this summer, if the Windows 10 thing goes well, the
next announcement that we will make will be that DOD has
decided to go to a more complete cloud environment, similar
to--and I just used this as an example--this is not a
decision--but similar to what a Windows 365 cloud environment
would do. You have to get to that next phase to really take
full advantage of the cloud across the board.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. I just--I know my time is expired,
but I will say, I hope along with all of this we are paying
maximum attention to the security of the cloud. It does still
concern me that, you know, we have the crown jewels in some
ways all in one place. And my colleague, Jim Cooper, likes to
refer to the cloud as the acronym for Chinese Love Our Uploaded
Data. And so security can't be tight enough, as far as I am
concerned.
Mr. Halvorsen. So, Mr. Chairman, can I take one more
minute? We agree. And one of the reasons that we are where we
are with cloud, it is the same reason the financial industry is
where it is with cloud.
We do have some things we have to make sure, and security
is right. And one of them is, how do you achieve virtual
separation so that you don't get the effect of everything being
loaded in one spot and it can be exfiltrated? And if it does
get penetrated, how do you quickly shut that off and isolate
it? And we are spending a lot of time working with the industry
experts in how to do that.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Langevin, and thank you for your
expertise in acronyms. We now proceed to Congresswoman Elise
Stefanik, of New York.
Ms. Stefanik. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. My final question
relates to the personnel side of this issue. So one of the
challenges that I think we clearly face is ensuring that our
cyber, technical, and workforce capabilities can scale
economically. And a significant issue for the industry is the
clearance process.
Is there any thought being given to an approach for fast-
tracking clearance processing for critical skills position,
such as computer network operations programmers, to better
enable effective support as your mission requirements expand?
Mr. Levine. We have a problem with security clearances
across the Department of Defense and across the industry. And
the problem with prioritizing is how many competing priorities
we have. So, yes, that would be a priority, but I can't look
across the Department of Defense and say we don't have a dozen
other priorities that are at least equal to that. I mean, the
number of priorities we have is extraordinary.
The security clearance problem is a problem not only for IT
professionals, but also for contractors who are working on
weapons systems. It is a problem for the hiring process within
the Department of Defense.
That is why we are working to re-engineer our internal
processes and why we hope that we will be allowed to help re-
engineer some of the OPM processes, as well, as we go forward
with this. One of the things that we are very hopeful for is
continuous evaluation as a tool that will help speed things up
and lower the burdens.
But I have got to say, right now we are runnning continuous
evaluation as a pilot program, which means we are running it in
addition to all the other requirements. And we are hoping that
we can prove it out so it can be a substitute for some of the
requirements that we are going to expedite. We are not there
yet.
But it is a hard question, not just for this area, and I
don't think the Department can afford to solve it by carving
off one universe and treating them better, because the other
universes of people we need to get through the security
clearance process are also vital to our national security.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Halvorsen, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Halvorsen. No, I think Peter summed that up very well.
Ms. Stefanik. Okay, thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you, Congresswoman Stefanik, for your
insight, too. There being no further, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:38 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 22, 2016

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 22, 2016

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

March 22, 2016

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN

Mr. Halvorsen. The funds for NBIB in DISA's FY17 budget and out
year plans were a top line add. The FY17 President's Budget submission
requested $20M of O&M and $75M of RDT&E. The initial out year funding
profile is presented in the following table:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

No additional funds from outside of this line are expected to
be spent on DOD's effort to support the new IT system. In FY16, OPM
will reimburse DOD for initial pre-acquisition prototyping efforts and
legacy system support. Funding for these efforts is in the range of
$5M.
Forty additional FTEs were added to DISA for the Background
Investigations Information Technology (IT) System based on an analogous
estimate of the number of FTEs required to architect, design, acquire,
implement and sustain a new start IT system. The estimate was generated
using a review and analysis of historical programs with the closest
scopes and scales of capabilities, adjusted for the high level of
concurrency necessary for the rapid delivery of operational capability.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The organization structure, specific job descriptions/role, and
position grades have not yet been determined and will be confirmed by
July as we perform the pre-acquisition planning for the IT system.
The timeline for delivery of the IT system is in the planning
phase. A schedule will be developed as part of the pre-Acquisition
planning that is currently underway with an expectation to be approved
as part of an overall Acquisition Strategy in October 2017.
The DOD CIO is solely responsible for building and maintaining the
IT system based on NBIB requirements. The CIO is advised by the
Director of OPM and the Federal CIO as part of the NBIB IT Governance
Council.   [See page 7.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. ASHFORD
Mr. Halvorsen. The Department believes the NDAA FY17 House & Senate
provisions related to private industry exchanges and ITEP provide the
Department the flexibilities needed. We appreciate the support of
Congress on this matter.   [See page 14.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Halvorsen. The DOD CIO International engagement efforts have
grown exponentially in the last several years as cyber has emerged as a
domain. These objectives align with regional cooperation, information
sharing, and interoperability initiatives. Working closely with
OUSD(P), the Joint Staff, NSA, DISA, US STRATCOM, US CYBERCOM and
Regional Combatant Commands, and the interagency, DOD CIO has
established enduring and lasting relationships focused on increased
information sharing, promoting foreign disclosure and release, and
enhancing communication and collaboration with our allies and partners.
DOD CIO led efforts to continue key relationships with the Five Eye
(FVEY) partners through the establishment of coordination groups such
as the Defense CIO Forum, sharing information and developing
mitigations on key cyber issues such as access control, identity
management, supply chain security, and secure mobility. Successes in
other FVEY fora include information sharing at the classified and
unclassified level through the use of U.S. issued FVEY PKI
certificates, and exercising incident response information sharing. DOD
CIO continues the critical work of fostering objectives of regional
cooperation, information sharing, and interoperability across North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Allies, and Partners. Additional
key focus areas include:

Cybersecurity Posture of NATO: Align security initiatives
with NATO mission objectives; ensure that NATO information assets,
technologies and data are adequately protected and that NATO's CS
workforce is highly skilled and capable.

Secure Interoperability in Coalition Operations: Ensure
the secure interoperability of shared systems between and among the
U.S. DOD and coalition partners; identify shared systems and apply the
NIST RMF, including developing baselines. Continue development of the
Mission Partner Environment (MPE) and continue exercising federated
environments with partners.

Cyberspace Workforce Development: Engage in security
cooperation activities that assist coalition partners in developing
strategies and policies to build skilled and capable CS workforces. For
example recently extended training and exercise participation to
partners.

Cybersecurity Posture of Critical Infrastructure owned by
Partner Nations: Engage in activities that assist collation partners in
developing strong CS postures of their national critical infrastructure
on which DOD missions may depend, including identifying critical
systems and applying the security policies.

Asia Pacific Engagements: Longstanding regular senior
allied and partner nation consultations with DOD CIO counterparts in
Japan, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore to promote a wide range of
information exchange, sharing of best practices, and technical
discussions on improving interoperability.   [See page 8.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STEFANIK
Q1. What is your assessment of the DOD's ability to counter cyber
threats?
Mr. Halvorsen. The DOD continues to improve its ability to secure
its information systems and networks from adversarial activity. In
addition to initiating the Cybersecurity Scorecard, transitioning to
Windows 10, and implementing the Joint Regional Security Stacks, the
Department is also engaged in protecting our Internet-facing systems,
identifying key terrain, and integrating cybersecurity into our
evaluation of readiness. In order to ensure the protection of our
service members, civilians, contractors, and other DOD personnel, the
Department is also engaged in an effort to secure all of its systems
that store personally identifiable information. In combination with
other ongoing orders and directives, the Department will continue to
assess and engage in any areas where we can improve our cybersecurity.
[See page 11.]
Q2. What can she tell Fort Drum Soldiers what the Department is
doing to ensure that are protected?
Mr. Halvorsen. As noted above, the Department of Defense is engaged
in multiple enterprise-wide efforts to counter cyberspace adversaries.
The interconnected nature of DOD systems means that we aim to enhance
the cybersecurity of the Department as a whole. We recognize that the
security of information systems at one DOD component may rely on the
security of information systems at another. Cybersecurity orders,
directives, and policies apply across the Department, including the
information systems at Fort Drum. The Department will continue to
ensure the protection of their information, as well as the information
of all our other personnel.   [See page 11.]
Q3. What have we learned about the enemy?
Mr. Halvorsen. The DOD faces a number of cyberspace adversaries
ranging from malicious individuals, terrorist organizations, and
nation-states with a wide variety of skill levels, capabilities, and
resources. These adversaries aim to penetrate our information systems
and networks for a number of reasons, including to steal sensitive data
or to affect our ability to operate. We have learned that many of these
same actors also target a range of other organizations, including the
Federal Government, the Defense Industrial Base, and private sector
businesses.   [See page 11.]
Q4. How has that changed our approach?
Mr. Halvorsen. The Department actively understands the types of
cyber actors that target the DOD. The DOD Cyber Strategy released in
April 2015 is driving how the Department is adapting its cyber forces
to respond to ever-evolving threats. The strategy guides multiple
cybersecurity lines of effort across the Department, including the
development of 133 cyber mission force teams by 2018 to strengthen our
cyber defense and deterrence postures. The DOD also recognizes the
critical need to maintain and improve its proactive, progressive, and
coordinated approach for detecting and responding to cyber events and
incidents. The DOD's Cyber Incident Handling Program ensures an
integrated capability to continually improve the DOD's ability to
rapidly identify and respond to cyber incidents that adversely affect
the DOD Information Network. It does so in a way that is consistent,
repeatable, quality driven, measureable, and understood across DOD
organizations. Lastly, to protect the interests of national security,
cyber incidents must be coordinated among and across DOD organizations
and sources outside the Department, including law enforcement, the
intelligence community, and critical infrastructure partners. For
example, the DOD interfaces with the Department of Homeland Security on
major cyber vulnerabilities via the Cyber Collaboration, Assessment,
and Response inter-agency sessions led by the National Cybersecurity
and Communications Integration Center. The Department also works
closely with the Defense Industrial Base to enhance their cybersecurity
capabilities by sharing unclassified and classified information on
cyber threats.   [See page 11.]
Mr. Halvorsen. DOD Components maintain ``software assurance'' (SA)
on licenses for the Microsoft Windows operating system. In addition to
the product support and client access licenses that SA provides, SA
also includes the right to upgrade to the latest software versions at
no additional cost. Therefore, it is expected that DOD Components will
be able to upgrade to the Windows 10 operating system with little or no
additional expenditures for the operating system software.   [See page
12.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 22, 2016

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. What is the Defense Department strategy for increasing
use of mobility tools, as well as increasing mobile security? What does
the DOD intend to do with regard to Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) and
BYOD policy?
Mr. Halvorsen. DOD is already integrating mobility tools in several
areas including developing Geospatial Intelligence logistics, and
targeting applications. In addition, DOD is establishing Wi-Fi networks
to improve coverage and performance. These investments enable improved
mobility capabilities for deployment across DOD's enterprise.
DOD is increasing mobile security by migrating to Secure Hash
Algorithm 2 (SHA-2), developing a mobile credentialing solution that
derives certificates from a DOD user's Common Access Card (CAC), and
streamlining the security approval process for devices and software.
Following nationally recognized practices enhances security, commercial
mobile products must be validated in accordance with National
Information Assurance Partnership (NIAP) Protection Profiles (PP) for
all parts of the mobile ecosystem (e.g., mobile devices, mobile device
management (MDM), mobile apps, wireless infrastructure). Commercial
mobile products that process classified information must be approved by
the NSA's Commercial Solutions for Classified (CSfC) program.
DOD is continuing to evaluate different private sector proposals to
determine if they satisfy Federal security and legal requirements.
Initially, a low risk approach of a BYOD implementation would make the
most sense for low threat unclassified environments where there would
be minimal impact if a data compromise did occur, such as training and
student environments. The Department of Navy is currently piloting
BYOD. DOD will evaluate lessons learned to determine adoption across
the Department.
Mr. Wilson. What activities does the Department have underway to
improve the agility of its spectrum-dependent systems? Do you see
commensurate activity in the commercial sector?
Mr. Halvorsen. The complex spectrum environment and evolving
threats that warfighters face compel DOD to constantly evaluate a broad
array of technology advancements to meet mission requirements. The
Department continues to foster efforts, throughout the Military
Departments, DARPA, and OSD, that improve agility for DOD's spectrum-
dependent systems, which also help military users share better with
other spectrum users.
The Department's continued investment in its Electromagnetic
Spectrum Strategy is geared toward addressing these needs. The
Department's leadership in other efforts such as the National Advanced
Spectrum and Communications Test Network, under the auspices of the
Commerce Department, its own new Spectrum Access Research and
Development Program, as well as the collaborative effort via the
National Spectrum Consortium are enabling complementary initiatives to
identify and foster development of innovative technologies and
techniques for greater agility and flexibility of DOD capabilities, but
also improve spectrum sharing and access.
With regard to commensurate activity in the commercial sector, DOD
believes that industry is starting to look at making investments to
help in their own ability to share with DOD, but they are just at the
beginning of that process. As expected of DOD, industry would also need
to be held accountable for their own investments in spectrum sharing
technologies and how they are contributing toward improved spectrum
access. The Department is hopeful that with balanced investment and
commitment by agencies and the commercial sector, these efforts will
bear lasting results in enabling flexible access to all users in all
spectrum bands.
Mr. Wilson. What suggestions do you have to improve coordination
and deconfliction for sharing spectrum bands with commercial entities?
Mr. Halvorsen. It is important to recognize the existing spectrum
management and governance mechanisms through the national regulators,
i.e., NTIA and the FCC regulatory processes, continue to effectively
facilitate shared use of spectrum among Federal users as well as
sharing between Federal and non-Federal users (i.e., including
commercial entities). Streamlined coordination and deconfliction
processes are critical for successful sharing once a national policy
decision is made to implement sharing in a band, noting that sharing
requirements differ depending on the band and use scenarios.
Technology, sound engineering, balanced policy and regulation, and
enforcement are keys tenets that enable successful sharing. Automated
coordination and deconfliction capabilities play a critical role, among
other necessary tools (e.g., direct human coordination for continued or
iterative risk and tradeoff evaluation) for sharing spectrum bands with
commercial entities. Continued investment and improvements to
automation capabilities would contribute to improved coordination and
deconfliction.
Mr. Wilson. You stated in your testimony that DOD shares the same
concerns with security in a commercial cloud environment as the
financial industry and that the challenge with off-premise commercial
cloud is ``how do you achieve virtual separation in the cloud so that
you don't get the effect of everything loaded in the one spot where it
can be removed, and if it does get infiltrated, how do we immediately
shut that off and isolate it?'' How have you worked with the leading
commercial cloud providers to better understand the security mechanisms
they use to achieve virtual isolation or physical separation in their
commercial offerings?
Mr. Halvorsen. DOD CIO continues to collaborate with industry
through the on-going updates to the DOD Cloud Computing Security
Requirements Guide and cybersecurity assessments in support of DOD and
FedRAMP provisional authorizations.
Identifying and understanding the threats in a multi-tenant cloud
environment remain an on-going challenge. Virtual separations rely on
the vendor's software to protect one customer from both malicious
attacks and unintentional impacts from other customers. While some
vendors have been willing to share information on their mechanism
supporting virtual separation, other vendors have been reluctant to
share detailed information as it represents the vendor's sensitive
intellectual property. Even when the details are shared, fully
evaluating these solutions is a significant challenge as each vendor
implements their own, proprietary solutions.
In addition to the software itself, weaknesses in the software's
configuration and on-going management can also create vulnerabilities.
When evaluating multi-tenant cloud services, the Department closely
evaluates the vendor's processes for configuration and operations
management. All of these factors are taken into account when issuing a
provisional authorization at a particular impact-level. Through the
Cloud Computing Security Requirements Guide, the Department has
implemented a risk management approach that allows Components to match
the security and cost of specific cloud services to their specific
cybersecurity needs.
Mr. Wilson. We understand that the Marine Corps has implemented a
successful ``Comply-to-Connect'' program that has helped it increase
its compliance during network inspection reviews. a. How are those
lessons being applied throughout the Department? b. Are requirements
for this Marine Corps system reflected in enterprise requirements for
network security? c. Are those requirements being integrated into
existing programs, like the Host Based Security System, or planned
future network defense tools?
Mr. Halvorsen. Comply-to-Connect (C2C) is a framework addressing
several key functions: network access control, deliberate and secure
orchestration with other cybersecurity tools (such as vulnerability
scanners, software patching tools, and trouble-ticket generation tools)
and continuous reporting for the purpose of managing risk. C2C
satisfies the asset management/asset detection problem and increases
the efficiency by which technical personnel are able to make decisions
as to whether an asset has `complied' with the local enclave/network's
security policy to initially connect and remained connect to the
network. C2C closes the asset management/asset detection gap in the
Department's Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) Program.
The US Marine Corps has successfully implemented C2C as part of a
three-year regional effort covering 3,000 end-points at Camp Lejeune
NC. During that period, the effort enabled USMC to meet the objectives
of DOD Command Cyber Readiness Inspections (CCRI) with a 90% compliance
rate when Marine Corps White Teams conducted a `no notice' pre-CCRI
inspection; and, 93% compliance rate during regularly scheduled
inspections executed by DISA. The Marine Corps has successfully enabled
the orchestration features of the C2C tools to automate the on-boarding
process of new assets ``out of the box,'' to scan and remediate
vulnerabilities upon discovery, harden the asset through integration
with the Host Based Security System, and register systems into the
network security information and event management tool (SIEM). These
major muscle movements, in most cases, were executed with minimal touch
labor.
The Marine Corps has recently formally validated C2C as a Service-
wide requirement and will implement a wider-pilot across Marine Corps
assets in the National Capitol Region in FY16. Eventually, the Marine
Corps will implement C2C globally on all Service assets. Comply-to-
Connect is endorsed by the Enterprise Cybersecurity Computer Network
Defense Senior Steering Group (ESSG). The ESSG is tracking C2C
implementation across several Combatant Command, Service and Agency
components. The ESSG has directed the development of a Comply-to-
Connect concept of operations with a guideline to standardize
implementation across component C2C implementations. Department
discussions consider C2C as an enhancement to overall cybersecurity
across DOD enclaves and networks. The full scope of C2C capabilities
have not yet been decomposed into an operational set of requirements.
C2C requirements will be considered as part of the Next Generation End
Point security strategy and future network defense tools as the
Department moves toward assisted automation.
Mr. Wilson. What do you see as the major challenges to improving
the management of the Department of Defense? Do you have the business
intelligence and business analytics capabilities to provide the same
type of support to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary that any CEO in
the private sector would have access to?
Mr. Levine. The major challenges to improving management of the
Department of Defense are threefold. First, the Department is working
toward getting the employees at all levels from senior management to
worker to understand that there remain ample opportunities for shared,
standard processes and procedures that cut across component boundaries.
This is particularly true for support activities within the Department.
Second, the Department must continue to work with external stakeholders
such as veteran support organizations; unions; the White House; and
Congress to allow new approaches to these support activities, even if
it means changing the structures and processes those stakeholders
currently understand and are comfortable with. Finally, in order to
provide a basis for both the internal and external engagements, the
Department must have a reasonable set of performance measures that show
both how the job is being performed today, but also shows at what cost
the job is accomplished.
The assessment above leads directly to the answer to the second
question. The Department has a robust set of performance information
that it can draw upon to make decisions. The DCMO is working with the
staff to make this information more readily visible to the senior
leadership. For example, the DCMO just provided a detailed progress
report on the various efficiency initiatives that Secretary Carter
approved in our plans for FY17-20. The DCMO also supported a detailed,
performance-based report on how the Department is doing on making
progress toward audit readiness. Both these reviews were done with
military department Under Secretaries; service vice chiefs of staff;
the OSD Under Secretaries; commanders of combatant commands; and the
Deputy Secretary of Defense and Vice Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Comparing to what a CEO in private sector has accesss to, the
Department needs to improve these measures by providing a better means
to measure how much it costs the Department to achieve the performance
outcomes. The Department is working to that end. In fact, achieving an
auditable condition will help us move in the direction of measures that
show outcomes per dollar spent or per person involved.
Mr. Wilson. What are you doing to improve the quality of data
senior leaders have and use for management of the Department?
Mr. Levine. The DCMO has been working with the Joint Staff and OSD
components to identify performance measures that better describe the
major initiatives the Secretary and Deputy Secretary have set for the
Department. The DCMO will then use the Deputy's Management Advisory
Group (DMAG) to present focused progress reports based on those
measures to the military department Under Secretaries and Vice Chiefs;
the OSD Under Secretaries; and the Deputy Secretary of Defense and Vice
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff. The DCMO and CIO just presented
detailed progress status on the various efficiency initiatives approved
by Secretary Carter for the FY17-20 period, including measured updates
on major headquarters efficiencies; services contracts efficiencies;
defense retail; and information technology efficiencies. Working with
the OSD Comptroller, we also provided data on Departmental progress
toward achieving audit readiness. DCMO is still working with Joint
Staff to ensure that progress on readiness is presented and reviewed
regularly to the same group.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Mr. Langevin. Mr. Halverson, the Defense Threat Reduction Agency is
conducting research & development and prototyping for a Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction (CWMD) Situational Awareness Information
System utilizing a cloud-based architecture called Constellation.
Constellation is intended to provide an information sharing platform
for the Department of Defense, interagency and international users to
be deployed on NIPRNET, SIPRNET, SUN NET and JWICS networks using
cross-domain solutions to transfer data across security domains.
What is the role of the Chief Information Officer and Defense
Information Systems Agency in Constellation research, development and
prototyping? Specifically, what was the role in establishing a security
plan to achieve an accredited cross-domain solution, including security
milestones and review of proposed security architecture? Has this
effort been reviewed in order to determine if architecture elements and
applications could be met with existing capabilities, to include
computing tools and architectures, or those already being developed? If
so, please describe the review and unique capability gaps identified.
Mr. Halvorsen. The Constellation program is presently in the
formative stages of development and prototyping activities needed to
identify and mature information technology capabilities to meet CWMD
Situational Awareness requirements
DISA and the DTRA Constellation program office are collaborating
via the TCRI (Tactical Cloud Reference Implementation) community since
the core of Constellation's architecture is DISA's Big Data Platform
(BDP), a component of the TCRI.
The Constellation program will eventually require the capability to
move data across multiple security domains and DTRA intends to use
existing, accredited cross-domain solutions to meet this requirements.
DTRA will not develop a new cross-domain solution. The DTRA program
office is collaborating with the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA)
Enterprise Cross Domain Services (ECDS) to meet DOD Instruction 8540.01
``Cross Domain (CD) Policy'' requirements. Using an ECDS provider
allows Constellation to rely upon existing and proven computing tools
and architectures, while reducing initial cost and deployment time. The
program expects DIA's ECDS to meet Constellation's requirements to pass
information between NIPRNet, SIPRNet, and JWICS. Regarding the cross-
domain requirement between the public network (SUNet) and our NIPR DOD
network, DTRA expects to use Commercial Off the Shelf (COTS) products
to perform deep-content filtering and sanitization of public data prior
to ingestion into Constellation on the DOD networks.
Mr. Langevin. Can you provide an update on DOD's process for
completing the instruction manual for DOD Directive 8140 and when this
process might be completed? How is it being accepted by the services?
Mr. Halvorsen. DOD Directive 8140.01 will be supplemented by an
Instruction and at least one Manual. The Instruction will establish
policy and procedures and assign responsibilities for the DOD
Components to identify, code, track, and report on their respective
cyber workforces. A draft of the Instruction completed a first round of
informal coordination with DOD Components in December 2015. In the
interim, the Department will publish policy guidance to implement the
identification and coding requirements of the Cybersecurity Workforce
Assessment Act of 2015. The Instruction is scheduled to be completed in
2017 and will incorporate the interim policy guidance.
The Manual(s) will establish procedures, standards, and
requirements for qualifications of the DOD cyber workforce, as required
by DOD Directive 8140. In 2015, the Department commissioned a study to
identify the standards for qualification criteria across cyber work
roles. The study, completed in March 2016, provides an analysis of
current government, academia, and industry best practices in
recruiting, developing, professionalizing, and retaining cyber
personnel. In May 2016, the DOD CIO will convene subject matter expert
panels to develop specific qualification criteria for each respective
information technology and cybersecurity work role. The Manual(s) are
scheduled to be completed in 2018.
The Services and Defense Agencies have been involved in the
Department's transition to a holistic view of cyber from the onset and
continue to play an important role in shaping the policies and DOD
Cyber Workforce Framework that will govern and shape the Department's
cyber forces into the future.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. KLINE
Mr. Kline. What is your assessment of the impact of one service
acquiring commercial satellite communications on behalf of the
Department of Defense as required under section 1610 of the FY16 NDAA?
Mr. Halvorsen. In the past two years, the Department has realized
successes in the commercial satellite communications (COMSATCOM) domain
as a result of improved COMSATCOM planning, acquisition and management
reforms discussed in the responses to Senate Report 113-44, page 167,
accompanying S. 1197 of the NDAA for FY 2014 and Sections 1603 and 1605
of the FY 15 NDAA. Specifically, the cost of COMSATCOM services has
been declining, DISA's operational responsiveness has improved, and
DISA's SATCOM pathfinders are yielding efficiencies in the use of the
acquired services. Likewise, the Air Force pathfinders are providing
valuable lessons related to investments in COMSATCOM solutions that
will further drive acquisition and utilization efficiencies as part of
our Wideband SATCOM Plan. To the extent they can, these lessons learned
will be folded into the Wideband SATCOM Analysis of Alternatives
directed by Section 1611 of the FY 16 NDAA.
With that in mind, the Department is concerned that restructuring
this approach by assigning a single agent for acquisition of COMSATCOM
services and investment in COMSATCOM capability may ultimately result
in increased cost and decreased operational responsiveness for DOD
customers with no noticeable improvement in DOD's overall SATCOM
``planning, acquisition, and management'' processes and governance. To
that end and in response to Section 1610 of the FY 16 NDAA, my office
has tasked the Air Force to evaluate, and provide the cost estimates to
implement, alternative courses of action to satisfy the intent of
Section 1610. These plans and cost estimates will be evaluated and
coordinated with the Services and Combatant Commands with their inputs
incorporated in the DOD response to Section 1610.
Mr. Kline. Section 1610 of the FY16 NDAA requires the Department of
Defense to designate a single acquisition agent to acquire commercial
satellite communications. Have the major users (services and combatant
commanders) of commercial satellite communications provided input to
the Chief Information Officer regarding changes to commercial satellite
acquisition and management required in the FY16 NDAA?
Mr. Halvorsen. In response to Section 1610 of the FY 16 NDAA, DOD
CIO has tasked Air Force to evaluate, and provide the cost estimates to
implement, alternative courses of action to satisfy the intent of
Section 1610. These plans and cost estimates will be evaluated and
coordinated with the Services and COCOMs with their inputs incorporated
in the DOD response to Section 1610.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Lamborn. What is the status of the DOD Commercial Partnership
Data Distribution Center you mentioned in last year's testimony, and
when will you have a secure commercial cloud capability operating from
within a DOD data center facility?
Mr. Halvorsen. IBM's Cloud Managed Services for Government (IBM-
CMSG) is an Infrastructure as a Service cloud provided from the Navy's
Allegany Ballistics Laboratory (ABL) in West Virginia. It was granted a
DOD provisional authorization at level 5 (Unclassified-FOUO) for use by
the Defense Logistics Agency and Naval Sea Systems Command in February
2016.
Two additional acquisitions of a secure, on-premise clouds are
currently underway in the Army and the Defense Information Systems
Agency:
The Army's effort will assess the feasibility and value of an on-
premises, commercially owned/commercially operated cloud service
offering at Redstone Army Arsenal. The Army is taking a ``statement of
objectives'' approach to obtaining this capability in order to fully
partner with industry, learn from its experts and implement commercial
best practices for cloud migration and security. The intent of the
pilot is to produce a secure, commercial cloud capability by fiscal
year 2017 that meets all requirements for hosting sensitive National
Security Systems at information security impact levels 5 (FOUO) and 6
(Secret). The Army released a request for information in November 2015
and held an industry day on 21 January 2016 with interested parties.
DISA is also exploring the use of commercial infrastructure
services residing in DOD facilities to implement an ``on-premises
private'' infrastructure service for the DOD community and mission
partners. The initial phase of this effort is referred to as milCloud
2.0 Phase 1 (M2P1). DISA released an RFI (PL83220028) on February 12,
2016, to assess the marketplace's interest in providing on-premises
infrastructure services from within DOD data center facilities and to
get advice on refining the businesses model process. DISA is currently
reviewing RFI responses and refining their approach for a planned award
in first quarter FY17.
Mr. Lamborn. The DOD has access to a vast amount of data generated
by its own IT devices, networks, and equipment. How is the Department
leveraging this data to reduce costs, improve operations, and
strengthen cybersecurity?
Mr. Halvorsen. DOD leverages data from a wide array of DOD IT
devices, networks, and equipment to guide it in reducing costs,
improving operations and strengthening cybersecurity (CS) across the
department in support of warfighting and business mission areas. DOD is
committed to constant improvement in its data collection and analytic
efforts to ensure the best possible mission outcomes for our
warfighters and the most efficient use of taxpayer dollars.
DOD CIO led the development of the SECDEF Cybersecurity Scorecard
populated with internal DOD data against 11 key cyber measures. The
measures were informed by our understanding of how we are vulnerable to
adversary attacks as described in the 2015 DOD Cybersecurity Discipline
Implementation Plan. This management tool therefore allows the
Secretary to assess progress against goals which will tangibly reduce
vulnerability. Further, it focuses each of the Department's 46
component organizations and the Department as a whole on assessing and
addressing vulnerabilities. Most of the Scorecard data is pulled from
automated cybersecurity tools currently deployed across the Department
and we are actively working to build on this momentum to improve how
data is automatically collected, integrated, analyzed and reported
across the Department.
The SECDEF Cybersecurity Scorecard is one very visible element of
the Department's overall effort to use data to reduce costs, improve
operations, and strengthen cybersecurity. The Defense Information
Systems Agency (DISA), working with the Military Departments and
USCYBERCOM, is leading the effort to build a joint interoperable
(common) platform to collect and visualize vast amounts of data. This
capability is called the Big Data Platform (BDP).
The BDP's value is three-fold:
First, it is a computing information system infrastructure
(software) that can be easily shared. Sharing this infrastructure
enables the ability to create common visualization analytics that can
then be distributed across operational centers, ultimately reducing
work efforts, re-work and overall costs. Moreover, it leads to a common
way of operating, strengthening Tactics, Techniques and Procedures
(TTPs) to aid in the cybersecurity mission.
Second, the BDP is data agnostic. The platform can collect vast
amounts of data in any mission area (cyber, business, personnel, etc.).
The concept is that the data can be collected and queried (correlating
analytics) to answer an infinite amount of operational questions (use
cases/scenarios). Data drives situational awareness and an operational
use case drives what data should be collected and visualized. The BDP
inherently drives the DOD toward the development and implementation of
data standards. An example would be the Structured Threat Information
eXpression and Trusted Automated eXchange of Indicator Information
(STIX)/TAXII) efforts.
Third, the BDP is a critical part of an information ecosystem that
includes cybersecurity sensors, information sharing systems and
security and incident management (SIEM) capabilities. As the DOD
collectively consolidates security architectures and TTP's, the BDP is
being architected to support this consolidation. An example is the
design and implementation of the Joint Regional Security Stack (JRSS)
within Joint Information Environment (JIE) Framework.
Mr. Lamborn. Recently, the Secretary of the Air Force stated that
over time, the AF wants to transition more and more of network
operations and maintenance to the private sector. You also spoke of
leveraging the private sector as well, specifically as it relates the
use of cloud computing capabilities. Currently these potentially
outsourced functions are performed by military personnel as well as DOD
civilians. What happens to the thousands of civilians when this occurs?
Will they all get re-rolled to defensive operations? Do current legal
authorities permit the use of title 5 civilian personnel in title 10
defensive cyber activities? If not, what authorities would the Congress
need to change or add within the U.S. Code?
Mr. Halvorsen. The Air Force, like all DOD Components, is
responsible for deploying capabilities and aligning their workforce to
meet mission needs. Any military personnel or DOD Civilian efficiencies
realized as a result of transitioning network operations and
maintenance functions to the private sector will be available for the
Services and Agencies to repurpose. At the Department-level, DOD
Directive 8140.01 unites the management of all cyber skill areas under
a single governance construct. This construct is bolstered through the
use of the DOD Cyber Workforce Framework, which will be used to develop
qualification criteria for all cyber work roles. These qualification
criteria will provide the Components with the training requirements for
military and civilian personnel who will remain in cyber work roles.
DOD civilians currently serve across the Cyber Mission Forces (CMF) and
can, consistent with law and policy, participate in the CMF's Title 10
activities.

[all]
