- [H.A.S.C. No. 114-52] IMPLEMENTING THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CYBER STRATEGY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 114-52]

IMPLEMENTING THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CYBER STRATEGY

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

SEPTEMBER 30, 2015

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-198                         WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, Texas, Chairman

WALTER B. JONES, North Carolina      ADAM SMITH, Washington
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            LORETTA SANCHEZ, California
JEFF MILLER, Florida                 ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
ROB BISHOP, Utah                     RICK LARSEN, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JIM COOPER, Tennessee
JOHN KLINE, Minnesota                MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                NIKI TSONGAS, Massachusetts
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado                   Georgia
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia          JACKIE SPEIER, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
JOHN FLEMING, Louisiana              TAMMY DUCKWORTH, Illinois
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               SCOTT H. PETERS, California
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
JOSEPH J. HECK, Nevada               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida           RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
PAUL COOK, California                MARK TAKAI, Hawaii
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               PETE AGUILAR, California
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
RYAN K. ZINKE, Montana
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma

Robert L. Simmons II, Staff Director
Kevin Gates, Professional Staff Member
Lindsay Kavanaugh, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     1
Thornberry, Hon. William M. ``Mac,'' a Representative from Texas,
Chairman, Committee on Armed Services..........................     1

WITNESSES

Rogers, ADM Michael S., USN, Commander, U.S. Cyber Command.......     5
Work, Hon. Robert O., Deputy Secretary of Defense; accompanied by
Terry Halvorsen, Chief Information Officer, Department of
Defense........................................................     2

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Rogers, ADM Michael S........................................    58
Work, Hon. Robert O..........................................    49

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Brooks...................................................    74
Ms. Duckworth................................................    74
Mr. Rogers...................................................    73
Mr. Wilson...................................................    73
Mr. Wittman..................................................    73

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Forbes...................................................    77
Mr. Lamborn..................................................    79
Mr. Shuster..................................................    77
Ms. Speier...................................................    79
Mr. Walz.....................................................    79

IMPLEMENTING THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CYBER STRATEGY

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, September 30, 2015.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. William M. ``Mac''
Thornberry (chairman of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM M. ``MAC'' THORNBERRY, A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM TEXAS, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED
SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. Let me
welcome our witnesses and guests for our second hearing this
week at the full committee level on cybersecurity. We are very
pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses to help us
with this challenging area.
For those members who were able to participate in our
hearing yesterday, we heard from the private sector and from
academia, think tanks, about some of the challenges that we
face in cyber. For example, questions such as: What is the role
of the military in defending private infrastructure? Should
private industry be able to hack back against those who may try
to steal their intellectual property? What does ``deterrence''
mean when it comes to cyber?
A number of difficult questions that we talked about some,
but we will continue to pursue that line today. Cyber, as many
people say, is a new domain of warfare, and so what that means
for the Department of Defense [DOD], what that means for our
country's national security is very much at or near the top of
the agenda for all of us who are involved in national security.
Before I turn to our distinguished panel of witnesses, I
will yield to the distinguished ranking member for any comments
he would like to make about today's hearing.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing and the one yesterday.
Our outside experts sort of basically said that the
strategy is sound. It is the implementation that is key. And,
obviously, this is a very difficult area of public policy. It
is constantly evolving. The threat changes every single day. We
have to prepare to meet that threat.
I think a lot of it is, you know, having the right
personnel, having very, very smart people who understand
technology, and obviously, we have to compete against private
industry as we try to bring those folks in. So that is
definitely a challenge.
Coordination is also a challenge. There are so many
different pieces of the Department of Defense: Who is in charge
of cyber strategy, and how is it being implemented DOD-wide
because, as we all know, the big problem with cyber is the
classic single point of failure. You can get absolutely
everything right except for one thing and have a disaster. How
do we comprehensively make sure that we are taking into account
every single one of those points of failure? That is not easy
to do.
And then some of the questions that the chairman raised
about, you know, when is offensive cyberattacks okay? What are
the rules of the road? And I think that that is a real
challenge as we deal with China, as we deal with Russia, as we
deal with Iran and others. What are the red lines, and how do
we respond if someone crosses those red lines?
I know that the agreement that was reached with China on
this is unsatisfactory to many. It is unsatisfactory to me. It
has a long way to go, but I think we need to have those types
of conversations, certainly with Russia and China, so that we
better understand what the rules of the road are so that we can
get to the point where we don't, you know, stumble into
something greater than we had expected.
But I know cyber policy isn't easy, but I look forward to
hearing from Deputy Secretary Work and our other witnesses on
how we can get our arms around it and then, also, of course,
you know, what the legislative branch can do to make it easier
for you to implement those policies.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Again, I want to thank our distinguished witnesses for
being here. We are very pleased to have the Honorable Robert
Work, Deputy Secretary of Defense; Admiral Michael Rogers, the
Commander of USCYBERCOM [U.S. Cyber Command]; and Mr. Terry
Halvorsen, the Chief Information Officer [CIO] for the
Department of Defense.
Without objection, your full written statements will be
made part of the record. Thank you for submitting those.
And, Mr. Secretary, we will turn the floor over to you for
any comments you would like to make.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT O. WORK, DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE;
ACCOMPANIED BY TERRY HALVORSEN, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Secretary Work. Thank you, Chairman Thornberry, Ranking
Member Smith, distinguished members of the committee.
Thank you for inviting us here this morning to discuss the
Department of Defense efforts in cyberspace. As both the
chairman and the ranking member said, this is an extremely
important issue that we grapple with every day. And so we
welcome these types of meetings to discuss the policy issues.
As you know, cyber intrusions and attacks by both state and
nonstate actors have increased dramatically in recent years.
And particularly troubling to us, as the Department of Defense
and as a nation, are the increased frequency in scale of state-
sponsored cyber actors breaching U.S. Government and business
networks. These adversaries continually adapt and evolve in
response to our cyber countermeasures. They threaten our
networks and systems of the Department of Defense, our Nation's
critical infrastructure, and the U.S.' companies and interests
globally.
The recent spate of cyber events that have been in the
press, the intrusions into OPM [Office of Personnel
Management], the Sony, and the Joint Staff networks by three
separate state actors is not just espionage of convenience, but
a threat to our national security.
As one of our responses to this growing threat, the
Department recently released its 2015 DOD Cyber Strategy, which
will guide the development of our cyber forces and strengthen
our cybersecurity and cyber deterrence posture.
We have three core cyber missions, as defined in our
strategy. First and foremost--and this is what Secretary Carter
has made a clear number one priority first--is to defend DOD
network systems and information. That is job number one.
Second, we help defend the Nation against cyber events of
significant consequence. And third, we provide cyber support to
operational and contingency plans in support of our combatant
commanders. And in this regard, U.S. Cyber Command may be
directed to conduct cyber operations in coordination with other
U.S. Government agencies, as appropriate, to deter and defeat
strategic threats in that domain.
Now, my submitted statement contains additional detail on
how we are moving to achieve these goals, but I would like to
highlight a particular focus, which is bolstering our cyber
deterrence. This was a big issue yesterday in the Senate Armed
Services Committee.
I want to acknowledge to all of you upfront that in terms
of deterrence, we are not where we need to be as a nation or as
a Department. We do believe that there are some things the
Department is doing that are working, but we have to improve in
this area, and that is why we have revised our cyber strategy.
Deterrence is a function of perception. First and foremost,
it works by convincing a potential adversary that the costs of
conducting the attack far outweigh any potential benefits that
they might gain from it. The three main pillars of our strategy
are denial, resilience, and cost imposition.
When we talk about denial, denial means preventing a cyber
adversary from achieving their objectives.
Resilience is ensuring that our systems will continue to
perform their essential military tasks, even in a cyber-
contested environment or while under attack.
And cost imposition is our ability to make sure cyber
adversaries pay a much higher price for the malicious
activities than they had hoped for.
I would like to just dive down deep into these three kinds
of pillars very, very quickly. To deny an attacker the ability
to adversely impact our military missions, first and foremost,
we have to defend our own information networks and data
systems. Now, we have made a lot of investments in this regard,
and we believe they are starting to bear fruit, but technical
upgrades, this is not just about technical upgrades. Because
nearly all successful network exploitations up to this point
can be traced to a single or multiple human errors, raising the
overall level of individual cybersecurity awareness and
performance throughout the Department is absolutely paramount.
So we are working to transform our DOD cybersecurity culture
for the long term by improving human performance and
accountability within our systems.
As part of this effort, we just recently published a
cybersecurity discipline implementation plan and a scorecard,
the first of its kind. The first time it was implemented was in
August of this year. These, we believe, are going to be
critical to our strategic goal of defending the networks and
securing our data and mitigating risks to our missions. The new
scorecard system is reported to the Secretary and me on a
monthly basis, and it will hold commanders accountable for
hardening and protecting their end points and critical systems,
and directs compliance with our overall policy.
Denial also means defending the Nation against cyber events
of significant consequence. The President has directed DOD,
working in partnership with other agencies, to be prepared to
blunt and stop the most dangerous cyber events against our
Nation and its infrastructure. There may be times where the
President or Secretary of Defense directs DOD and others to
conduct a defensive cyber operation to stop a cyberattack from
impacting our national interests. And so that means to us we
have to build the capabilities to prevent or stop a potential
cyberattack from achieving its effect.
This is an extremely challenging mission. It requires high-
end teams and capabilities, and we are building our Cyber
Mission Force and deepening our partnerships with law
enforcement in the Intelligence Community, and we can talk
about that in questioning.
A second principle of deterrence is improving our
resiliency by reducing the ability of our adversaries to attack
us through cyberspace and protecting our ability to continue to
execute missions even while in a degraded cyber environment.
Our adversaries unquestionably view DOD cyber dependency as
a potential wartime vulnerability. Therefore, we have to have
the ability to fight through these cyberattacks as a mission-
critical function. That means normalizing cybersecurity as part
of our mission assurance efforts, building redundancy into our
systems whenever they are vulnerable, and training constantly
to operate in a contested cyber environment.
Our adversaries have to see over time that cyberattacks
will not provide them a significant operational advantage, and
that will be one of the key aspects of deterrence.
The third and final aspect is having the demonstrated
capability to respond with cyber or noncyber means to impose
costs on a potential adversary. The administration has made
clear that the United States will respond in a time, manner,
and place of our choosing, and it has developed cyber options
to hold aggressors at risk, if required.
Successfully executing our missions in cyberspace requires
a whole-of-government and whole-of-nation approach. This is a
much, much, much more difficult problem than the debates we had
over nuclear weapons in the 1950s. For that reason, DOD
continues to work with our partners and other Federal
departments and agencies, the private sector, and our partners
around the world to address the shared challenges we face.
Secretary Carter, I think you know, has placed a particular
emphasis on partnering with the private sector. We know we do
not have all the right answers, and our working with industry
will be very, very critical to make sure we have both the
cutting edge of technology as well as best practices and
procedures.
Finally, our relationship with Congress is absolutely
critical. We very, very much appreciate the support for DOD
cyber activities both last year and this year, as we
understand, in the 2016 National Defense Authorization Act
[NDAA]. I encourage continued efforts to pass legislation on
cybersecurity information sharing, on data breach notification,
and law enforcement provisions related to cybersecurity, which
were included in the President's legislative proposal submitted
earlier this year.
The American people expect us to defend against cyber
threats of significant consequence. The Department looks
forward to working with this committee and Congress to ensure
we continue to take every step possible to confront the
substantial cybersecurity risk we face.
Thank you for inviting us here today, Mr. Chairman, and the
attention you are giving this urgent matter. I look forward to
all of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Work can be found in
the Appendix on page 49.]
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
Admiral Rogers, thanks for being here. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF ADM MICHAEL S. ROGERS, USN, COMMANDER, U.S. CYBER
COMMAND

Admiral Rogers. Sir, thank you. Chairman Thornberry,
Ranking Member Smith, and distinguished members of the
committee, I am honored to appear before you today and before
the American people to explain how we are implementing the
Department of Defense Cyber Strategy. I thank you for convening
this forum and for your efforts in this important area. I am
equally pleased to be sitting alongside today Deputy Secretary
of Defense Work and the DOD CIO Terry Halvorsen.
It gives me great pride today to highlight the
accomplishments of the uniform and civilian personnel of U.S.
Cyber Command and its components. I am both grateful for and
humbled by the opportunity that I have been given to lead this
cyber team. U.S. Cyber Command and its subordinate elements
have been given a responsibility to direct, operate, and secure
the Department's systems and networks, which are fundamental to
the execution of all of DOD's missions. The Department and the
Nation rely on us to build ready cyber forces and to be
prepared to employ them when significant cyber events against
the Nation require DOD support.
We are expected to work closely with other combatant
commanders to integrate cyber operations into their broader
military missions. Policy makers and commanders alike look to
us for cyber options in all phases of operations.
Our military is in constant contact with agile learning
adversaries in cyberspace, adversaries that have shown the
capacity and the willingness to hit soft targets in the U.S.
The demand for our cyber forces continues to outstrip supply as
we bring more capability online, but we continue to rapidly
mature based on real world experiences and the hard work of the
men and women of U.S. Cyber Command and our service cyber
components.
The Secretary of Defense and the Department of Defense
Cyber Strategy direct us to intensify our efforts to defend the
United States and its interests in our digital age. It is my
intent that we move forward quickly with our partners to build
our military capabilities, and I have provided this guidance in
a recently released Commander's Vision and Guidance for U.S.
Cyber Command.
In line with that guidance, we are building and employing
the Cyber Mission Forces. We are conducting exercises with our
interagency and private sector partners to inform whole-of-
nation responses to crises in cyberspace, and we are supporting
DHS [Department of Homeland Security] and FBI [Federal Bureau
of Investigation], when directed, to defend the Nation's
critical infrastructure from cyber incidents. We support
operational commanders around the world every day.
The bottom line is we are being challenged as never before
to defend our Nation's interests and values in cyberspace
against states, groups, and individuals that are using
increasingly sophisticated capabilities to conduct cyber
coercion, cyber aggression, and cyber exploitation. The targets
of their efforts extend well beyond government and into
privately owned businesses and personally identifiable
information.
I welcome this opportunity to elaborate on the progress we
have made to date and where we should be focussing going
forward to ensure that we continue to stay ahead and deter
threats to secure our digital networks and our combat systems,
to ensure our ability to execute the Department's missions.
With that, I look forward to your questions, and thank you
again for taking the time today to spend on this important
topic.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Rogers can be found in
the Appendix on page 58.]
The Chairman. Thank you, sir.
And, Mr. Halvorsen, I understand you do not have a prepared
statement but are available to answer questions. Is that
correct?
Mr. Halvorsen. That is correct, sir.
The Chairman. Great. Thank you for being here, sir. I
appreciate it.
Admiral Rogers, yesterday, one of our witnesses made the
point that in any challenge in warfare, what counts is the net
assessment. In other words, we can talk about what we are
doing, but what really counts is what the results of that
versus what the adversaries are doing. And so just at the very
highest level, as you look at cyber as a domain of warfare, how
would you describe the net assessment, where we are today and
where those trends are taking us? Are we in a good direction to
reduce the vulnerabilities and have the capabilities we need?
Are the adversaries moving faster than we are? How would you
describe that kind of net-net in cyber today?
Admiral Rogers. So this is a mission set where I think we
have to acknowledge we have at least one peer competitor in the
form of the Russians when I look at their level of capability,
when I look at their activity. Then we have a set of other
nation-states we pay great attention to who I am watching
increase their level of investment, increase their capacity,
and their capability. The Chinese are probably the ones that
get the most attention, if you will, but they are not alone by
any stretch of the imagination.
The challenge for us, in many ways, is we are attempting to
overcome literally decades of investment with a very different
attitude, where redundancy, resiliency, and defenseability in
terms of our systems--whether they be our networks, whether
they be the combat systems and the platforms that we count on
to execute our missions--defenseability, redundancy, and
resiliency were, until only recently, they were never core
design characteristics. They tended to be something that we
thought of after we focused on efficiency, cost, speed.
And so we find ourselves trying to overcome literally
decades of investment, of sunk capital costs, if you will, if I
was a business. I think we have got a good strategy, a good
vision for where we need to go. The challenge always is you are
never as fast as you want to be. So as a commander, the
argument I have made with my teams is: So this is all about
prioritization, Team. We have got to step back and assess where
do we think the greatest vulnerabilities lie, where do we think
our opponents are most interested in attempting to generate
effects against us, and how do we forestall their ability to do
that in broad terms.
The Chairman. So, to summarize, we are getting better but
not better fast enough.
Admiral Rogers. I think that is a fair----
Secretary Work. Mr. Chairman, if I could add something to
this on the net assessment side.
The Chairman. Yes, sir.
Secretary Work. All of the adversaries that we face are
generally, in this regard, are authoritarian powers. We are the
most open nation on the Earth. It is a tremendous competitive
advantage, but it provides--we are much more open on our
Internet than our adversaries are in their own countries. That
makes us inherently more vulnerable. The number of attack
surfaces that we have to defend against are very, very much
larger. So in terms of net assessment, that is one of the
things that are challenging us and we are trying to sort
through.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, I want to ask you, on the three core
missions you laid out, number two is defend the Nation against
significant cyberattacks. As you know, there has been
considerable conversation about what that means. So if I am a
company under cyberattack, when is the government going to come
help defend me? And I realize you probably can't put a dollar
threshold or something very specific on what that means, a
significant cyber event, but can you help clarify for us, when
the Department of Defense becomes engaged in defending the
country and what that means, significant cyber event?
Secretary Work. Well, those were the--we call it a cyber
event or activity of significant consequence.
The Chairman. I am sorry, Mr. Secretary, is your microphone
on?
Secretary Work. I am sorry, sir. You are exactly right. We
are obligated to defend the Nation against cyberattacks or
cyber activities of significant consequence, and that is not a
purely defined term. Each attack would be looked at. So, for
example: Did the attack result in any death? Injury?
Significant destruction was associated with it? Was it an act
of espionage? Was it an act of cybercrime? In other words, was
it a nonstate actor who is trying to get a PII [personally
identifiable information]? But a significant consequence would
be things which would go against our national critical
infrastructure, and this would be decided primarily with the
Department of Homeland Security, which would have the lead on
attacks within the United States on critical infrastructure,
and we would then work through with the policies to make an
appropriate response.
Admiral Rogers works this constantly, so I think he would
be very well placed to answer this question, too.
Admiral Rogers. I would agree completely with the
Secretary.
It explains why the response to Sony, for example, is very
different than the response to OPM. We try to look at things in
a case-by-case basis given a specific set of facts, and we are
clearly still working our way through some of these broader
definitions. I don't think there is any doubt about that.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate it. I think other members
may want to follow up.
I mean, you look at OPM and huge consequences for our
national security. I presume if you had seen it occurring, then
there would have been action taken to prevent it, but it is
large consequences, even for the theft of information that did
not result in death, we trust.
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
And I know you can't talk about this in an open setting in
terms of what our response has been to some of these
cyberattacks, but can I ask if, you know, you feel that
response has been effective? Has it deterred more attacks? At
this point, how comfortable are you that our responses to--and
again, there are, as you have laid out, levels of cyberattacks.
When you pass a certain level, then, you know, we feel like a
response is appropriate, have those responses been at all
effective in your view at this point? And how would you define
effectiveness?
Secretary Work. I would say at this point we don't believe
that our deterrence policy has been effective up to this point
or as effective as it should be, and that is why we want to
strengthen it. As we talked, one of the problems is
attribution. So the first thing is, where did the attack come
from, a geographical location? Then who was the actor who the
attack came from? And then did the state control the actor, or
was the actor operating independently?
So that will tell you whether it is a law enforcement
response, whether it should be economic sanctions, whether it
should be offensive or defensive cyber operations. And I
believe what we have to do is have a very strong policy on cost
imposition, which we are working towards and we have announced,
and then we have to prove that through our actions. So I would
say that we are not where we would want to be in terms of
deterrence right now.
Mr. Smith. And following up on that, how effective are you
at figuring out where the attack came from? Now, I understand
there is the final piece of that is the one that is really most
difficult because even if you were to determine who the actor
was, was that person acting on their own or acting at the
behest of a government? But how effective are you at when an
attack comes in saying, all right, tracing it back and saying,
that is the person who did it?
Admiral Rogers. We continue to gain increased insight and
knowledge in that area. If you look, for example, using Sony as
an illustrative example, we were very quickly able to determine
the nation-state and the specific actor within the nation-
state. I think that is one reason, again, why you saw, you
know, a policy response that was relatively quick. We were able
to provide policymakers with a high level of confidence as to
who did it, how they did it. It really varies. Though I will
say we are watching actors around the world as they realize
that we are gaining increased capability in our ability to
attribute cyber activity, specific nation-states, specific
groups.
It is interesting watching them now attempt to obscure
that, create different relationships, use different processes,
so this is one, as was indicated in the opening, the dynamics
here just change so quickly. It is the nature of this. I don't
see that fundamental changing any time soon.
Mr. Smith. Right.
Secretary Work. One of the problems is we have a very
strong policy that we will respond in a place and a time and a
manner of our own choosing, and the problem with this is it is
not like it can happen sometimes very, very quickly. First, we
have to go through the attribution phase. Then we have to
determine: Was it cybercrime? Was it an independent actor? Was
the actor responding in charge of the state? And what are the
appropriate responses? That might a law enforcement measure. It
might be economic sanctions. It might be offensive or defensive
cyber operations. It could be military operations, depending on
the damage or threat of the attack to our Nation.
So this is much, much different than nuclear deterrence
where you can attribute the attack immediately, generally, and
you have specific response options already ready. In this case,
it is a much more whole-of-government approach that takes more
time.
Mr. Smith. Understood.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
You know, this is the new world we all live in. We all know
that. It is kind of interesting--I am getting to a question in
just a moment--but I bank with the credit union here in
Washington. So, last Saturday, I started calling 24-hour
banking to find out what was in my account. As of today, they
are not online.
Well, I am certainly not saying that is a cyberspace
invasion of anything, but it is just the complexities of the
world we are living in now. So when I hear your testimony, I
want to first say thank you for who you are and what you are
doing.
My next question would be, at this point, knowing that we
are constantly here in Washington worried about a shutdown,
worried about the debt growing, I will never forget--I have had
reason to call Admiral Mullen recently--of course, he is
retired--the former chairman--I have great respect for him--on
a totally different subject. And I have used many times back in
my district, the Third District of North Carolina, the home of
Camp Lejeune, Cherry Point, I have used many times what he said
when he was chairman: The biggest threat to our military is the
debt of our Nation.
What I would like to note, as you move forward to give us
the very best protection that you can, what type of financial
commitment should the taxpayers and the Congress understand
that we need to make to ensure that we have got the best
protection?
Secretary Work. I believe we have been very clear, sir,
that the President's request, the PB16 [President's budget
2016] request, we believe, is the absolute minimum needed to
provide the national security necessary for the United States.
I would just like to say, I was talking with the chairman
just before this, and we are very, very thankful--or we hope--
that we will avoid a shutdown. This would be extremely
disruptive. I think Admiral Rogers can tell you: the last time
we went through a shutdown, it set us back 6 months in terms of
preparing our Cyber Mission Force. So we believe the PB16 level
is the absolute minimum.
I would also like to say that, you know, in the last 6
years, we have been under a CR [continuing resolution] for 2
years of the 6 years, and each of the first quarters of the
fiscal year, we have been under a CR for about 93 percent of
the time. In essence, we are operating in a 9-month fiscal
year. There is no COO [chief operations officer] in the United
States who could operate under this type of uncertainty, and we
hope that the CR will be handled or will be resolved as quickly
as possible.
So I very much thank the question, sir. This is an
important thing. I hope that we will be able to resolve our
differences on the budget level and provide for the national
security.
Admiral Rogers. If I could.
Mr. Jones. Excuse me.
Go ahead, Admiral, please.
Admiral Rogers. The only other comment I would make is, and
I think it goes to the point you are trying to make: There
shouldn't be any doubt in anyone's mind that there is a cost
component to all of this, that, as a Department, we try to
prioritize that because we clearly realize there are many
competing requirements and resources are tight for the Nation,
and we certainly understand that. But there just shouldn't be
any doubt that there is a cost component to that. And that cost
may change over time, but I don't think it is going to get
cheaper for us, at least in the near term, not with the level
of activity that you see out there every day.
Secretary Work. Congressman Jones, I will tell you that,
regardless of level of our budget, Secretary Carter has made it
clear that cyber defense and cybersecurity is going to be at
the very, very top of our priority list. So whatever budget we
receive, cyber will receive the attention that we believe it
deserves.
Mr. Jones. Well, I believe that the shutdown will probably
be avoided, which you know, not getting into the politics of
that, but I think it probably will be. And I think you all have
done a great job. I think the American people, like me--I am
not talking about my colleagues--have really understood that
this threat of cyberspace warfare in any form is probably at
the foremost, as you said, Admiral, will grow and the threat
will become more and more. So I thank you gentlemen for being
here today and your testimony.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Davis.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all of you for being here. And as you
know, we heard from outside groups, the private sector,
yesterday, and I think you spoke, certainly, Mr. Secretary, to
the importance of that partnership. One of the questions I
basically asked them was, you know, what hampers that
relationship? What hampers moving forward? And they spoke of
the regulatory burden that is placed on companies wishing to
work and partner with the DOD, and particularly for newer
companies who don't have a history of working with the
government.
And so I am wondering how can we make that process easier?
Do you think that is a appropriate analysis or response? You
may feel that you have done everything you can to assist in
that way, but obviously, there is a different response.
The other issue is really whether or not we are kind of
losing out on working with some of the best minds in the
business because we just make it so difficult for them to work
with the Department of Defense.
Secretary Work. Congresswoman, I would ask Terry Halvorsen,
our CIO, who works extensively with the private sector, to
answer your question. I think he is the best to do that.
Mr. Halvorsen. Thank you, sir.
I think there is absolutely some truth that we have got to
get better at bringing in particularly newer companies. I
think, first, you have to understand, if DOD was a Fortune 500
company, we are Fortune 1. We are very big. That in itself
causes us some difficulty with companies that do not have
experience with us.
So in the last year, some of the things that we have done
to make that better, we have reached out, as many of you have
seen, to Silicon Valley. We are holding different events to
make industry clearer. One of the things that we did last year,
which I thought was one of the bigger breakthroughs, you
probably will ask me a little bit later about Cloud. One of
things we did to make Cloud easier for people to play and
easier for industry to get in, we wrote our new Cloud policy
completely with industry. First time we have done that. They
actually--we convened them, we brought them in from the
beginning. We had leading industry providers--I think Amazon--
on the panel to write that. We have gotten very good reviews
from that. We have got to continue to do that.
This year we are going to bring some industry players into
the DOD CIO staff and some of the other service CIO staffs. We
will actually do exchange with the industry. Some of that will
be focused on some of the new industries so that we learn how
they need to respond and how we need to respond.
So we have to do better. I think we are doing better in
that area, and I think you will see more results in the next 6,
7 months coming down that we will be able to concretely show
you what we have done to improve that relationship.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah, that is good to hear. I think we have to
continue to push and, obviously, ask them how that is working.
I guess we also would agree that in the procurement areas,
again, maybe there are some better ways of doing it. And
everybody talks about it, but sometimes it feels like nothing
is getting done.
So I wanted to ask you as well in terms of the hiring as
well because in personnel areas, we know that we are not as
adaptive in hiring as, obviously, as the private sector is.
What are we doing to make sure that in the field of
cybersecurity that we are able to push through nominations to
positions so that they don't have to wait so long that they go
ahead and take those jobs in the private sector?
Mr. Halvorsen. Two things, and first of all, let me thank
all of you. You did pass good legislation that gave Mike Rogers
and I some more authority to directly hire people without
having some of the normal rules and regulations that we have to
follow so we could compete. I know there is some work on some
additional. We would appreciate that.
I think one fact we just have to understand: we are not
going to pay exactly as much as industry in the cybersecurity
area and some other areas. One of the things we have going for
us: we have a pretty exciting mission. So when I talk to--and I
spend a lot of time talking to people who want to come to work
for DOD. We are trying to attract them, and we have been able
to pull some people in even the last year into my staff. As
long as we can get them in fast and offer them the right wage,
which the new authority gives us, I think we will be able to
continue in the right--they want to work this mission. And your
legislation that recently passed has really helped us with
that. Thank you.
Admiral Rogers. If I could just add, this is one area where
I suspect over time we may in fact end up coming back to you as
our experience tells us, are there things we could be doing
differently? Are there challenges here we need your help in
overcoming? Because I always remind people, look, while we
spend a lot of time focused on technology, don't ever
underestimate, at its heart, this is an enterprise powered by
men and women. And they are our advantage, and that is where we
need to make sure we are getting really good talent.
To date, I would argue, at the mission force level, the
execution piece for us, we have been able to exceed our
expectations both in terms of the ability to bring in quality
people, as well as retaining them.
Mrs. Davis. Perhaps some chart showing the differences as a
result of some of these changes would be really helpful in
understanding what the impact has really been. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
And as I mentioned earlier, we stand ready to work with you
all on those authorities as we assess how they are doing. That
is very important.
Mr. Forbes.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I reiterate what Mr. Jones said in thanking each of you
for what you do for our country and for being here today.
Mr. Secretary, you probably think strategically and
analytically on national defense issues as well as anybody we
have in government today, and we appreciate and respect your
opinions as you come before this committee.
I would like to follow up on some questions that the
chairman offered specifically related to net assessment, and
one of the things that I just want to ask, as you are aware,
some of the best strategy we have developed over the years have
been informed and supported by the practice of net assessment.
Has DOD done any net assessments of the cyber domain at this
particular point in time?
Secretary Work. Well, as you know, sir, we just had a
leadership change in the Office of Net Assessment [ONA]. It
reflects Secretary Carter's very strong support of that office
in providing independent assessments to him and I. Jim Baker,
who is the new director, has just gotten in and is going to
come back in. Cybersecurity and cyber is at the very top of our
list, but there are many, many other strategic challenges, as
you know.
This one is going to be one that I believe ONA is going to
help us on, but I know of nothing at this point as far as an
ongoing assessment, but we expect to be able to start asking
Mr. Baker.
Mr. Forbes. And that is not a criticism; it is an
encouragement. As the chairman talks about net assessment, if
we haven't done a net assessment of that, it is kind of
difficult to know where we are. So I think we would just
encourage, perhaps, the Department, if it can, to do what it
can to have that net assessment done, and because I do think it
helps us in determining what our strategies are going to be.
The second part of that is I know you have worked very,
very hard and very, very well on a third offset strategy. Do
you expect that cyber will be a part of that third offset
strategy?
Secretary Work. Absolutely. We assume that the future will
be an extremely highly contested cyber and electronic warfare
environment. So no matter what strategy we have, that kind of
is the underlying baseline that we assume we must be able to
contend with.
There are a lot of questions on whether or not--many people
say, well, if you go to a more network force, are you going to
be able to have the certainty that you will have the networks
when you need them? Will you have the confidence? So it will be
absolutely critical to the third offset, yes.
Mr. Forbes. And, once again, just an encouragement, the net
assessment often really helps us inform what we are doing, that
having that net assessment done would be, I think, very
helpful.
Admiral Rogers, do you think we need to leverage a wider
range of tools, like sanctions, or diplomacy, criminal
proceedings, to deter cyberattacks with the threat of
punishment? And can you tell us a little bit more about what
options you think would be most effective at imposing costs
upon perpetrators?
Chairman Wilson and I, for example, have introduced
legislation calling for targeted economic sanctions, but I am
not asking you to address that bill----
Admiral Rogers. Right.
Mr. Forbes. But what else? What do we have? What else do we
need, in your opinion?
Admiral Rogers. That has been part of our strategy to date,
that just because someone comes at us in a cyber domain doesn't
mean the response has to be primarily or purely back in that
same arena, if you will.
You see that reflected in the response to the attack on
Sony, for example, where we publicly acknowledged the event. We
publicly attributed the event. And we talked about an initial
set of actions we are going to take in response. In this case,
it was economic sanctions. And then the President also talked
about and we will take additional action if that is required,
we believe, at the time and place of our choosing.
We have used the legal framework within the last year where
we have indicted individuals of foreign states, individual
actors, we have indicted them. We have done the economic piece.
There is a broad range of options that are ongoing with law
enforcement, what the FBI, for example, does every day today.
Mr. Forbes. I hate to interrupt you, but I only have----
Admiral Rogers. Go ahead.
Mr. Forbes [continuing]. 50 seconds, and I would just like
to ask you this. Secretary Work said that we have not been as
effective up to date as we would like to be. Fair. Again, no
criticism, just an observation.
What do you attribute that to? Is it our lack of
willingness to use the tools we have, or does this committee
need to help you get more tools? What would you say is your
assessment of how we make that more effective?
Admiral Rogers. I mean, I think clearly there is a broad
range of tools available to the Nation to include cyber
options. One of my particular responsibilities is to be able to
generate cyber options so that the Secretary has options to tee
up. We are in the relatively early stages of that journey, but
we are on that journey, and we have developed some levels of
capabilities already. I am not going to get into specifics.
I think the biggest challenge in some ways is just time. I
mean, we are in the very early stages of this, and if you look
at, for example----
Mr. Forbes. Speaking of time, my time is up, but if you
don't mind, we would submit some questions on the record.
Admiral Rogers. Okay.
Mr. Forbes. And maybe you can respond back.
Admiral Rogers. Be glad to.
Mr. Forbes. With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And, with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The gentleman from Rhode Island, who has been a leader in
this area for some time, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you and the ranking member, as well as
Chairman Wilson, for the time and attention that you and the
committee have put into focussing on cyber.
And, Mr. Secretary, and Admiral, and Mr. Halvorsen, we
thank you for your testimony here today.
I think that the discussion we have been having on imposing
costs on our enemies and adversaries is critically important,
and I am not going to ask a question on this today, but I will
say that I know that the committee and certainly I am going to
pay a lot of attention on this. We are looking for specifics
about what those costs being imposed on our enemies and
adversaries will be.
I know the American people are looking for answers on this
because right now, up until now, our enemies, adversaries have
been eating our lunch for a long time, especially when it comes
to cyber espionage, especially when it comes to things like
defense contractors over the years.
I know we have gotten better, and we have had the DIB
[defense industrial base] pilot in place now, and the follow-on
program that has done a better job of defending our defense
contractors and the like, but imposing costs on our enemies and
adversaries has to be an important part of the equation, and
they have to know what it is. I know some of our responses may
be classified, but others we need to make public so that our
enemies know, our adversaries know that they can't operate with
impunity, which is what really is happening right now. It is
like the Wild West out there, and they are on the better side
of the equation. We have got to flip that so we have better
outcomes on our side.
So let me just turn to another topic. Do you believe--and
Mr. Secretary, we will start with you--that there is an
effective accountability mechanism in place for reported
cybersecurity breaches at defense contractors? And could you
describe to us the process by which contractors are held
accountable?
Secretary Work. Congressman, I do believe we have an
effective means. We are getting better. We have established our
own cyber scorecard. This has been one of CIO Halvorsen's top
jobs, so I would ask him to answer the question with more
specifics.
Mr. Halvorsen. Thank you, sir. As you mentioned, sir, we
actually have improved the DIB process, which brings and gives
the companies better ability to share data with us. It protects
them and gives them some protection when they share that data
with us. That has been very successful.
We have also improved our ability working with industry to
look at the supply chain, risk management. I won't get into
everything we have done there, but what basically done is we
are sharing it, and we are putting some systems in place with
industry to be able to see that data better.
We have now included working very much with industry to
include now language that is in all IT [information technology]
and cyber contracts that requires certain levels of security
and reporting. All of those things are beginning to show
results, and one way that we impose costs on them is to raise
our basic level of cyber defense and make them play much higher
to play the game. The things we are doing I believe we are now
starting to see some effects in that area about who isn't
playing as much anymore and what they are having to pay to
play.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you. So I have been examining the
practices and techniques that the financial sector is using to
determine and address the cyber risk of their contractors and
vendors, and in many ways, they are way ahead of what the
government is doing.
To what degree have you cribbed from civilian sector best
practices?
Mr. Halvorsen. Sir, very much so, and I would say that we
share a lot. In the financial sector, in particular, they have
just published some new standards about what they expect from
their vendors. If you looked at what they wrote and you looked
at what we wrote in our ours, they are very similar. That was
actually a fairly collaborative effort with the financial
industry.
We are also doing that with other segments of industry,
with the logistics companies and other things. So we are
cribbing a lot from industry. I spend a lot of time on our
mobility policy. We will see, as that comes out, that will be
completely again written with industry playing right from the
beginning to help us get those pieces right so that we get the
advantage of effectiveness and efficiency while we are using
industry practices to raise the level of security.
Mr. Langevin. Can you describe for us the Department's
progress on the creation of persistent training environments of
the type and scale necessary to conduct group and collective
training, rehearse missions at the unit level, as well as
integrate and exercise the full spectrum of national, state,
local, and private sector capabilities?
Admiral Rogers. So we identified that as a core enabler for
us to build the vision, actually create the capability we think
we need. In fact, this is one I actually--Deputy Secretary Work
and I worked directly on this--and where I said: Hey, boss, I
could use some more help here in fiscal year 2015. He was kind
enough to generate additional funds for us. We have created a
capability down in Suffolk, Virginia. In fact, we have been
using it now every year with the Guard and interagency to look
at how we can model different scenarios where DOD would be
applying the capabilities to support critical infrastructure.
In addition, we generated the capability at the Fort Meade
area that we can increasingly pour it out across the framework
for us. This has been a big investment area. You see it on the
2016 budget as well. We thank you for your support for that.
Secretary Work. In our PB17 [President's budget 2017]
build, Congressman, Secretary Carter has again defense of the
networks is number one. Improving training is right up there.
So this is going to have a very, very high level of attention
from the top down.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
As I mentioned to our witnesses earlier, Mr. Smith and I
have to go testify ourselves in front of the Rules Committee,
so I am pleased to yield the chair--and yield for questions he
may submit--to the chairman of the Emerging Threats and
Capabilities Subcommittee, Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson [presiding]. And ladies and gentlemen, it is the
unique situation where I have just been recognized and I get to
preside simultaneously. But it really gives me an opportunity
to thank Chairman Mac Thornberry and Ranking Member Smith for
their planning this week, cyber week. It is really a
recognition for our three witnesses how important what you are
doing, protecting American families. And so I am very grateful
we had a hearing yesterday on cyber threats to American
families, our national defense.
We have this hearing. Later this afternoon, we have a
briefing. I want the American people to know that we have got
really good people, like Congressman Jim Langevin, all the way
from Rhode Island, who is the ranking member of the Emerging
Threats Subcommittee. This really is a bipartisan issue that we
face of great concern of attacks on our government, on private
businesses, on American citizens, and what you are doing is so
important. We have also got extraordinary staff, people who are
here working on these issues.
And, again, each one of you, in your capacity, are making
such a difference, and we look forward to working with you in
the future. In particular, Secretary Work, during the cyber
hearing yesterday and the chairman mentioned in his opening
statement about the concept and proposal of hack-back; for
example, when a private company takes retaliation into their
own hands and hacks back at someone who has attacked our
networks or systems. Can you outline concerns that you have?
And is hack-back inherently a government function that only the
government should do? Or is there a private role?
Secretary Work. Well, this is a very, very important issue
for us because cyberattacks often have second and third and
fourth order of consequences that we really have to understand,
that they may cause escalation that were unintended. So this is
an extremely important policy question for us as a nation to
grapple with.
Admiral Rogers deals with this on a daily basis, and I
would ask him to provide some specifics.
Admiral Rogers. So I not only acknowledge the policy
complications, but I also try to point out, at an operational
level, we have so many actors in this domain already, adding
more only complicates things.
The second and third order effects, as the Secretary has
outlined, are of significant concern. And so I have, from my
perspective, urged be very careful about going down this road
because I don't think it is one that we truly understand. And
from my perspective, the potential to further complicate an
already complicated situation is very significant here.
Mr. Wilson. And as complicated as it is, I am just so
hopeful that with the expertise that you have, to me, it would
be a deterrence with some level of hack-back. And so I hope
this is pursued and the capable people that you are and that
you have working with you, I can't wait to hear of their
capabilities as to deterrence, stopping hacking on American
families.
And, Mr. Halvorsen, the Department recently issued a new
manual for the defense support of civil authorities, which for
the first time addresses cybersecurity related incidents. Could
you discuss how DOD gets a request for such support, especially
if it might be coming from a State or local agency?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, sir. As the manual lays out, there are
some formal processes we would go through with that, but one of
the things I want to stress is the informal processes that we
have put in place. We have now scheduled routine meetings with
industry CISOs [chief information security officers]. My CISO,
Richard Hale, who you will, I think, hear from later today in a
closed hearing--had scheduled meetings with their security
officers, both officially and unofficially. So we are sharing
that data. We are moving forward to be able to give them some
of our data quicker.
Mike's work has been superb in being able to lower the
classification levels of data so that we can share that much
quicker with industry and accept theirs in a similar fashion.
So I think all of those things plus what is in the manual are
adding to our--all of us, industry and the government's--
collection of data and what I will call operational
intelligence that we can use to better security.
Admiral Rogers. And I would also add, this is an issue
where we collaborate very closely between the Northern Command
commander, U.S. Cyber Command, the Department of Homeland
Security, the Guard and Reserve, the FBI, about how can we make
sure that we are most efficient about how we are going to apply
DOD capacity within the cyber arena within the broader defense
support to civil authority construct because I am trying to
make sure, can we use that existing framework to the maximum
extent possible as opposed to trying to create something new,
something totally complex in the cyber arena?
Mr. Wilson. Admiral, thank you for being--pitching in. I
want you to know, as a very grateful Navy dad, with three sons
in the Army Guard, but I am very grateful for your service and
naval service in general.
Secretary Work, in your testimony you stated, quote: ``The
Iranian actors have been implicated in the 2012, 2013 attacks
against U.S. financial institutions and in February 2014, last
year, cyberattack on the Las Vegas Sands Casino.''
What economic sanctions or legal actions resulted from this
activity? Are they being maintained?
Secretary Work. Sir, I am going to have to take that for
the record. I don't know exactly what sanctions the DDOS
[distributed denial of service] attack that you referred to
against the financial services was attributed to Iran, as well
as the Sands Casino, as you said. I am going to have to get
back to you and say exactly what we did as a result of those
two attacks, but Mike might know.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 73.]
Admiral Rogers. No specific sanctions tied to those each
individual discrete events. It is clearly a broader discussion
about what is acceptable, what is not acceptable. We have seen
a change in behavior. The activity that we had seen previously
directed against financial Websites, for example, has
decreased, in part, I think, because of the broader, very
public discussion we were having in which we were acknowledging
the activity, and we were partnering between the government and
the financial sector to see what we could do to work the
resiliency piece here to preclude the Iranian's ability to
actually penetrate, which, knock on wood, we were successful
with.
Mr. Wilson. And, again, thank each of you.
We now proceed to Mr. Larsen of Washington State.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Any of you can answer this question. I am curious, though.
Are we still exploring what the outer limits of what
constitutes the equivalent of a physical kinetic attack against
the U.S. when we are looking at cyberattacks? We still know
what would be the equivalent kind of cyberattack that would
warrant the kind of and size of response that we might do if
there was a physical kinetic attack against the U.S.? We
exploring the outer limits still?
Secretary Work. Well, we defined an event of significant
consequence, it has to include either a loss of life;
significant damage to property; serious adverse U.S. foreign
policy implications or consequences; or serious economic
impact. Now, that is a broad statement, and each of them have
to be addressed as an individual act, and that is why there is
no established red line on what we would say this constitutes a
physical attack.
The question we are often asked is, when does a cyberattack
trigger an act of war? And each of those would be discussed in
turn, depending on the type of attack and what its consequences
were. As of this point, we have not assessed that any
particular attack on us has constituted an act of war.
Mr. Larsen. Can you--and Admiral, you addressed this a
little bit--be more specific about the title 10 versus title 32
responsibilities in working with the National Guard or even
going beyond that, working with either national, State, or
local law enforcement? What specific criteria do you use to
make that distinction?
Admiral Rogers. For me, among the things I look at our
scope of the activity we are dealing with, the nature of the
event that we are trying to deal with, capacity that exists
within the title 10 arena versus in the title 32. Are there
specific knowledge or unique insights that, for example, a
particular Guard structure might have that are really well
tailored to deal with this specific issue?
Again, it is a case-by-case basis. The touchstone, though,
I have tried to maintain with my Guard teammates and the States
is we need one integrated workforce between the Active and the
Reserve Component, trained to the same standard using the same
basic scheme of maneuver so that we can use these capabilities
interchangeably. That maximizes our flexibility as a
Department, and it gives us a broad range of options in terms
of how we employ the capability.
Mr. Larsen. And then are you making that largely permanent?
At some point in the future, you have moved on to something
else, and someone comes in behind you? So is this still
evolving, how you are trying to establish these relationships
as they apply to cyber, or are these going to be largely
permanent? Will you be changing the story?
Admiral Rogers. Right. I think they will be largely
permanent. I feel pretty good that we have done the
foundational work, if you will, broadly. I always remind
people: Remember, no plan ever survives contact. And the broad
framework we are going to acknowledge as we get into this, we
are likely to see things we hadn't anticipated, and we have got
to be flexible and be willing to change as we need to given the
specifics of whatever particular event it is that we are
dealing with.
But I would compliment the Guard and the Reserve for the
way we have partnered on developing the cyber capability within
the Department. It hasn't been adversarial at all. It has been
a great team.
Secretary Work. In fact, I would like to jump in on that,
sir. We work very closely with the Council of Governors. I
would like to give them a shout out. We have been dealing with
this on how to build up cyber capacity in the Guard and
Reserve. We are building right now toward about 2,000 Guard and
Reserves that are associated with this. And what we are doing
right now is trying to work out the policy on what our folks
can do in terms of coordination, training, advising, and assist
under title 32 and title 10 authorities.
That is actually--the policy--is working well. We are
working well with the Governors, and we believe that this is
going to be a great new story for the Nation.
Mr. Larsen. Right, that is nice. In my last few moments
here, I have a question. We talked about defensive networks--
defense of networks, that is--talked about resilience, denial,
and the whole deterrence issue, but this issue of hybrid
warfare, of course, has come up and I am curious about what
steps you are taking to incorporate in a U.S. response or even
in NATO's [North Atlantic Treaty Organization's] response and
the role CYBERCOM plays in this in incorporating a responsive
capability within this hybrid warfare concept that we hear
really a lot out of General Breedlove.
Admiral Rogers. So, it is a concept--we are partnering both
with General Breedlove at EUCOM [European Command] as well as
in his NATO role as the Supreme Allied Commander, and it also
highlights the work that Special Operations Command, that
General Votel's team are doing in this regard. In fact, I was
just down in Tampa about 10 days ago. This was part of our
broad discussion about how do we integrate the full range of
capabilities within the Department as we are trying to respond
to an evolving world around us?
I think we are starting to have some good conversations in
a good broad way ahead within the Department. The international
framework for this is little more difficult. I think it is fair
to say not as far as advanced, for example, with us and NATO.
It is an area we have talked about we have got to work on.
Mr. Larsen. My time is up. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Larsen.
We now proceed to Congressman Doug Lamborn of Colorado.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciated your comments to earlier questions that were
directed from Congresswoman Susan Davis, but I would like to
follow up and build on that. This concerns recruiting and
retaining top talent. So what are your efforts to--and this is
for you, Admiral Rogers, in particular--what are your efforts
to develop a unique cyber career track for those in the
military?
Admiral Rogers. So, services have the responsibility for
man, train, and equip within our Department, in terms of they
generate the capacity I employ then as the joint commander. In
the cyber arena, though, one of the things that has been a real
strength is the joint world and the services have been totally
integrated as to how we are going to develop this, what are the
standards, what are the skills, how do we create that
workforce. And that is what I did, in fact, in my last job. I
am very comfortable with how each service has tried to create a
career path that enables us to extend over an entire career
both this capability as well as generate the insights we need
in the workforce. I think that is a big change for us over the
last 5, 10 years. I think it is a real strength for the future.
It is not an area that I look at now and I go: Wow, I have real
heavy concerns there. I think we have got a good way ahead and
a good broad vision, and the capacity and the capability of
that workforce, I have yet to run in--knock on wood, with my
luck, this will happen tomorrow--but I have not yet run into a
scenario where we didn't have the level of knowledge.
The challenge has been I might have had a handful of people
with the right level of knowledge, but we had people with the
knowledge. I have got to build that capacity out more so we
have got more of it, if you will.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, well, I appreciate hearing that and that
is really encouraging, so thank you.
And Secretary Work, the Department has recently floated a
number of new civilian and military personnel reforms,
compensation, retirement, et cetera. How will some of these
reforms affect the cyber workforce?
Secretary Work. Well, I actually was going to try to jump
in here because this is a huge priority for Secretary Carter.
He came into the Department believing that over time we have
created these barriers for service in our government. And he
wants to really, as he talks, burrow tunnels through these
barriers or widen the aperture. And he uses cyber as an example
of new ways in which we might bring people into the government
and allow them to serve for a while, then go back out into the
civilian workforce, and come back in. And so he has challenged
us and the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel Readiness,
Brad Carson, on this force of the future to say: How can we
make sure that in areas like cyber, you know, space, electronic
warfare, we have more permeability in the Department to make
sure that we are getting the best ideas from outside the
Department?
I don't have any specifics to give you right now because
they are in the process of going through a deliberative,
``Which ideas are good?'' But we are right with the intent of
your question to improve the ways in which people can come in
and out of our government service because, as Mr. Halvorsen
said, this is an exciting mission for many, many people. And
maybe they don't want to make a 30-year government career, but
if they had a chance to help Admiral Rogers for a 2- or 3-year
period, they are all in. So we have to improve the way to do
that.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you.
And, Mr. Halvorsen, do you have anything to add to what has
already been said?
Mr. Halvorsen. No. I just echo all of the same comments.
And while we are waiting for some of that to be staffed,
you heard we are moving forward on some pilot programs to bring
industry into the government, for us to put, for the first
time, civilians out in industry. Those pilots are moving very
well, and as we have used those to inform Brad in his work, I
think you will see some great things coming out of this.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I thank you for your answers. And most
of all, thank you for the great work that you are doing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Lamborn.
We now proceed to Congresswoman Niki Tsongas of
Massachusetts.
Ms. Tsongas. Thank you all for being here. It is obviously
a topic of great importance. And I think, as you said, so much
of this is about personnel, really being able to attract the
people and keep the people who have the skill set and the
commitment to thinking this through because it is not easy
stuff--that is for sure--at all. And I gather from the
testimony I have heard that there is a fair amount of comfort
level with what DOD and the military services have been able to
do to put in place appropriate means of training, hiring, and
then compensating, even though you have said you may have to
come back to us in the future.
But you also commented that this is sort of an interagency
effort and you are working with the Department of Homeland
Security, law enforcement, the FBI, the Intelligence Community.
How much sharing across those borders is taking place in terms
of the skill set that you need in each of those aspects of this
effort and how comfortable are you with the ways in which you
are working together and how they are responding to the
challenges they face in terms of personnel?
Admiral Rogers. I mean, I would argue very well.
For example, this is one I have personally sat down with
the director of the FBI and talked about: Hey, are there things
we could be doing together? It is a conversation I have had
with the leadership at Homeland Security. It is a conversation,
quite frankly, I have also had with the private sector, where I
have argued: We are both competing for the same pool. What
works for you? What might we be able to do differently? Are
there ways, as you have heard previously, can we partner?
I would make just one slight twist because this is a point
I wanted to make today. I would tell you, on the opposite side,
though, the single greatest perturbation I have experienced
within my workforce in 18 months has been even the hint of a
shutdown. In the last week, I have had more agitation out of
the workforce arguing this would be the second time in 2 years.
And we are even having this discussion--hey, even if we don't
shut down the government, just the fact that we are even
getting this close, the workforce is very open with us about,
``I am not so sure I want to be part of an organization where
there is this lack of control, and I can't count on
stability.'' That really concerns me because I can't overcome
that.
Ms. Tsongas. Secretary Work, do you have any----
Secretary Work. Well, this is a very competitive field, as
the admiral said. We are building up a total of 133 cyber teams
in the Cyber Mission Force. Some are focused on protection of
the networks. They are called Cyber Protection Teams. Some are
focused on national infrastructure protection. They are called
the National Mission Teams. Then we have teams that are
supporting our combatant commanders. We want to build to a
total of 133 of these teams. It is going to be about 6,200
Active Duty military, civilians, and in some special instances,
contractors, and we won't get there until 2018. So we are in
the process of building these.
And this is a very competitive space. We are on track. We
are doing well in our recruitment. But as Admiral Rogers says,
any hints of shutdown or sequestration, that will really set us
back. So we think we have got a good mission that people want
to participate in, but we are not where we need to be yet,
Congresswoman, and we still have until 2018 to build up the
force to where we just think is the minimum necessary to do our
missions.
Ms. Tsongas. You know, I serve on the board of one of the
service academies, the board of visitors of one of the service
academies. And I know in our discussions, we have heard that it
has been difficult to attract young airmen, in this instance,
to the cyber field because they come into the academy with a
particular idea in mind of where they want to spend their time.
And so it is not always as simple as we would like to think,
given the extraordinary challenge.
But I have another question as well. You know, the
Department has shown its commitment to leveraging private
sector cyber innovation, and we have heard about that here
today. I commend Secretary Carter with making his way out to
Silicon Valley to create some presence there, a satellite
campus there, to have a way in which to interact more easily
with that community. And I just wonder, how will you expand
that program and look to other parts of the country where you
have a deep bench of cyber activists, cyber innovators, cyber
experts?
Secretary Work. Well, if you are referring, Congresswoman,
to the Defense Innovation Unit-Experimental [DIUx]--and it is
an experimental unit. We want to see how we can interact with
the private sector in the best way. So, for example, one of our
ideas was to bring people back to the Pentagon and show them
what we are doing. And they said: No, really what we want to do
is go to the field and see what your airmen, soldiers, marines,
and sailors, what do they do? We want to go on ships. We want
to see what their problems are. We want to help them.
So once we do the lessons learned there, we expect that to
be successful, and it will become a permanent unit. And then
where would we expand? We would go to other innovation centers
throughout the country, perhaps Boston. There are different
places. And Mr. Halvorsen has been helping us to think through
this also.
Mr. Halvorsen. You know, as the Secretary went out to
Silicon Valley, we had also taken a CIO team to Silicon Valley.
In December, we are doing a similar thing in Boston and New
York. And not just waiting for that, we have hosted just
recently a group down from Boston and New York, both some of
the more mature cyber companies but also a group of some of the
innovative companies. I think what we are trying to do with
DIUx is really take what Silicon Valley stands for, not the
geographic location, and make sure--and the Secretary is very
clear in his guidance--so is DEPSECDEF [Deputy Secretary of
Defense]--to us to: Hey, it is more about the concept of
innovation. Reach to wherever that is, and it is not just in
Silicon Valley. So you will see us in the next couple of months
spend more attention in the Northeast and, frankly, in the
Southwest sector.
Ms. Tsongas. There is really no substitute for physical
presence and the kind of physical interaction, day-to-day
interaction that can take place. Thank you.
My time is up.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Ms. Tsongas.
We now proceed to Congressman Mo Brooks of Alabama.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At Redstone Arsenal, next to Huntsville, Alabama, the Army
is establishing a cyber campus within the Aviation and Missile
Research, Development, and Engineering Center, also known as
AMRDEC. This campus consists of qualified cyber personnel and
facilities to provide world-class cybersecurity support to
aviation missile systems by using cutting-edge research and
development of cybersecurity solutions to challenges associated
with emerging and legacy technologies.
The AMRDEC cyber campus coordinates cyber activities with
industry, academia, and government partners. Although an Army
asset, it is uniquely positioned to integrate the Department of
Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, the Space and
Missile Defense Command, and the defense industrial base.
Additionally, it can provide deep technical expertise and
reduce the risk of cyber threats posed as it relates to
hardware, software, firmware, networks test and evaluation,
modeling simulations, forensics, industrial control systems,
supervisory control, and data acquisition systems. With that as
a backdrop--and these questions are for each of you--How does
the Army's vision with AMRDEC integrate with the Department of
Defense's overall cyber strategy?
Secretary Work. Well, as Admiral Rogers said, each of the
services are developing cyber skills within each of the--under
their title 10 responsibilities. And this is just one
reflection of many, many, many such organizations that are
being set up. The Air Force has units down in San Antonio.
And so I would ask Admiral Rogers to give you more
specifics, but each of these are going to have specific skills.
In this case, the one that you have talked about, Congressman,
really focuses on the aviation systems of the Army and how they
can make sure that they are not vulnerable to cyberattack, but
they develop other skills, too.
Admiral Rogers. So every service, as the Secretary
indicated, is developing a similar kind of capability, similar
kinds of relationships. Army has chosen to really harness the
capability resident at Redstone in the northern Alabama area.
The positive side thing for me is we have got a good, strong
collaboration across the services as to who is doing what and
where. The question I think increasingly for us over time is,
as we get more experience, do we need to increase investments
in certain areas where we are really seeing strong results
versus other areas where perhaps it hasn't played out as well
as we would like? And we are going to generate more insights in
that over time.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you.
Mr. Halvorsen, would you like to add anything?
Mr. Halvorsen [continuing]. The policy absolutely talks
about how we do better with industry, and part of what that
unit is doing is bringing in industry in the area, too, to be
part of the solution to the problem. So I think they are
perfectly aligned with what they said and what was in the
policy.
Mr. Brooks. Okay, a followup question. Is there a
consolidated effort to ensure cyber centers, such as the one at
Redstone, are interconnected with other services and Department
of Defense capabilities to properly leverage knowledge sets and
not create stovepipes of information or efforts?
Admiral Rogers. I don't know that we have a formal--I know
there is regular analytic and collaborative venues where they
all get together. I participate and my team participates in
some of those. I don't know that there is a formal process, if
you will. I try to synchronize that at my level with each of
the service components that work for me about: Hey, we have got
to look at ourselves as one integrated enterprise here, guys,
because we have got to maximize effectiveness and efficiency
because there are more requirements than there is money and
time, so it is all about, how do we maximize outputs?
Mr. Brooks. Mr. Work.
Secretary Work. Sir, I don't believe there is a formal
program right now. We look at it more in terms of function. So,
right now, I can tell you in terms of defense of networks,
everything is on the same playing field. We all have the same
score cards. We all grade ourselves exactly the same. But to
your specific question on whether or not we have a formal
program, that is something I will need to go back and research
and say--it sounds like a good idea. I just don't know exactly
how we would implement it yet.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 74.]
Mr. Brooks. Mr. Halvorsen.
Mr. Halvorsen. Like Secretary Work said, we will have to go
check and see. It sounds intriguing.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, gentlemen, for your insight.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Brooks.
We now proceed to Congressman O'Rourke of Texas.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Work, you were talking about the three basic
tenets of deterrence. And the first two, denial and resilience,
I understand pretty well. There have been a number of questions
about the third one, which is cost imposition. And I am
interested in knowing how we communicate or advertise the
consequences of cyberattacks to potential adversaries, and to
the degree that you can talk about it, how has that changed
their behavior? And how have some of the consequences that we
have imposed thus far changed their behavior? In other words,
how have we done on that third tenet, on cost imposition?
Secretary Work. The first is to have a strong policy
statement that we will respond at a time, place, and manner of
our choosing. And then we have to communicate, primarily with
state actors. I think Admiral Rogers said yesterday, we are
pretty good at stopping 99.5 percent of the attacks, you know,
getting rid of the basic hacker, but it is the state
adversaries that pose the biggest challenge.
And I would just like to weave in--I think the chairman
mentioned the Xi and--President Obama and President Xi, the
cyber agreement. And that came about from intensive discussions
with the Government of China saying: This behavior is
unacceptable, and we have got to come to grips with it. So
there were four specific aspects of what I would consider this,
call it a confidence-building measure.
The first one is that we have to have timely response for
information and assistance if we go to China and say: Hey,
there is an actor inside China that is conducting these
activities. We have agreed to share that information. Both the
United States and China have agreed that they will not
knowingly conduct cyber-related theft of intellectual property
for commercial gain. We are making common effort to develop
these norms of state, norms of behavior, which we have never
done before. And then we agreed to a high-level joint dialogue.
Now, people say: Whoa, there is no enforcement mechanism.
But it is a confidence-building measure, and it is the
first time that the President of China has said: I will commit
my government to these things.
We believe it is very, very significant and could lead to
this. And it came about from high-level dialogue where we were
saying: We find your behavior unacceptable. And we do have
options. But how can we work this out?
So I believe in the Sony case, we attributed. We did
sanctions. I believe that those types of activities will prove
that the United States is very serious about this and may lead
to these better norms of behavior between nation-states.
Mr. O'Rourke. I think that is the hope. What are you
actually seeing in terms of changed behaviors? I understand the
agreement, which is important, and the statements of intent.
What are you seeing in terms of number and severity of
intrusions or cyberattacks following, you know, letting our
adversaries know that we will choose the place and time of our
response? And having responded in some of these cases, what has
that done?
Admiral Rogers. So we are in an unclassified forum, but in
broad terms----
Mr. O'Rourke. To the degree you can.
Admiral Rogers [continuing]. You haven't seen the North
Koreans attempt to engage in another offensive act against the
U.S. infrastructure since November of 2014, and the aftermath
of our economic sanctions and very public attribution and
discussion. I would argue, in at least the denial-of-service
activity we saw the Iranians, for example, doing back in the
2012, 2013 timeframe, we have not observed that of late. I
would argue for other nation-states, the impact to date has
been--I am not seeing significant changes. Again, it is early
with respect to the PRC [People's Republic of China]. We need
to see how this commitment plays out over time, and trust me,
we will be paying great attention to how this commitment plays
out over time.
Mr. O'Rourke. I think that is something that I and perhaps
other members of the committee would be interested in receiving
a briefing on going forward, just to look at how behaviors are
changing and whether that third tenet of ensuring that our
adversaries understand the consequences and costs of these
kinds of attacks, making sure that that is really working. So I
appreciate your answers.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you, Mr. O'Rourke.
We now proceed to Congresswoman Jackie Walorski of Indiana.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Rogers, I have a question. You said earlier that
Russia is a peer competitor in terms of our cyber technology
and the cyber threats that are out there, and I guess I am
interested to see what your perspective is. I am just sitting
here and I have been watching through the course of this
hearing the Russian bombers that let loose today in Syria with
1-hour notice to our generals in Baghdad and striking non-ISIS
[Islamic State of Iraq and Syria] targets. And I think this is
a reprehensible activity that is happening today, and I have
many questions as to how we ended up here.
But I am curious from you, with this development today of
an overaggressive Russia, how in the world do we go forward
with talking about peer competitors and sharing intel
information and trusting anything that comes from Putin in
Russia?
Admiral Rogers. Well, clearly, your point is much broader
than the cyber arena that I am talking about.
Mrs. Walorski. I think it is completely related.
Admiral Rogers. Okay, I didn't say it was unrelated. I said
it was broader. One of the points I try to make is you have to
remember that cyber happens in a broader strategic context, so
it is important that we understand the broader strategic
context.
Mrs. Walorski. Would there not be an element of trust that
would have to prevail here when we just literally saw what
happened this morning, and for many of us that have sat here on
this committee for a long time, saw a red line that was
violated and not upheld in Syria. We have seen all of these
different gaps with all of these different countries around the
world with an administration that seems to not have any kind of
a strategy or a contiguous plan. How would we take a step
forward today? I know you are looking at the broad context--or
you are talking about the broad context, but I don't understand
the gap that is going to be there--that has already been there,
but the gap that is going to continue to emerge today, how in
the world do we breach that and how in the world do we say to
the American people with all seriousness and looking our
constituents in the eyes that we have their back and that we
are looking out for the security of the United States of
America and our allies and we are watching Vladimir Putin come
right into the Middle East right next to our cohort and friend
that we want to protect, Israel--does that not change the
equation of trusting or having any kind of semblance of trust
with Putin and Russia?
Admiral Rogers. Well, I would only argue this latest issue
fits in a broader context with the Ukraine and others. This is
not a new phenomenon in many ways with this particular actor.
It is why we have been very direct with them. I know the
Secretary has had conversations with his counterparts in the
Russian framework. I have not had specific cyber discussions
with them. I will say, one of the points I try to make in our
internal discussions is: I am watching the Russians use cyber
in an ever-increasingly aggressive way.
Mrs. Walorski. And would this not be a major alarm? This is
alarming to me that he just talked to the President yesterday
and evidently said, ``Stay out of our airspace,'' and we get 1
hour of warning. And they go in and they attack Syria. So now
they are a main state player as we are screwing around in our
country. We are fighting back and forth over all kinds of
things right now. We just had the Pope here. And while
America's distraction is focused over here, it, seemingly, is
that he is using a phenomenal window of opportunity to go in
and be another major push in Syria. And the alarm, I think--not
only for lawmakers today but for the citizens of our country
that we are vowing to protect--is we have now watched him
establish himself in Syria, in the Middle East.
Secretary Work. Obviously, as outlined by President Putin,
he believes he is following his national interests. We are
alarmed by what happened this morning. What was agreed by the
two Presidents is that our militaries would talk so that we
would deconflict operations.
Mrs. Walorski. So have we not seen a failure between our
President and President Putin if we were going to talk and try
to avoid something like this? Because now he is there 1 hour, 1
hour of notice, with all of our forces over there, the allied
forces, the NATO forces, the other nations that are fighting as
well? I mean, would we not see this as a failure?
Secretary Work. I don't believe it is a failure. I believe
it is an aggressive action by Russia right now in advance of
our discussions between our two militaries.
Mrs. Walorski. And are you confident that we have a
strategy with the President of the United States that just met
with Putin? Are you confident that those two leaders have a
strategy and that we are holding up our end of the bargain? Are
you confident that the administration is looking at this as,
``Oh, well, we expected this to happen''? I look at it as a
gigantic breach because I represent three-quarters of a million
people that are looking at their TVs right now like I am, and
the official response from the Pentagon, ``taken aback by
strikes.'' I think we are all taken aback. Is there a strategy
that was supposed to prevent this, or is our attitude now,
``Well, we know they are going to do their things; we are just
going to see at what point we are going to try to contain
them''?
Secretary Work. We have a disagreement on strategy. They
want to be able to do military action first followed by a
political agreement.
Mrs. Walorski. They are doing military action. They have
been doing military action. They encroach on the Ukraine, they
are making headway through that whole Eastern European area.
They have been doing military action, and today we are watching
a live bombing, and from your perspective and the perspective
of the administration, we expected that? The American people
don't. I don't expect that.
Secretary Work. The Russians made clear that they would
support the Assad regime with air strikes, and we made an
agreement to have our militaries talk so that there would not
be any problem between our interactions between our forces.
Mrs. Walorski. You think 1 hour of notice is legitimate for
two organizations and militaries that are talking? Obviously,
talks broke down, and we got a last minute--so what is our
response now?
Secretary Work. Well, you have me at a disadvantage,
Congresswoman. I don't know exactly what has happened over the
last hour. We heard about the attacks this morning. They asked
us to avoid the area where they would be operating. We continue
to fly throughout Syria.
Mrs. Walorski. And we continue to talk. Are we continuing
to talk to our Russian counter-opponents?
Secretary Work. We have agreed for our militaries to meet,
and that meeting just simply has not occurred. It was an
agreement between the two Presidents just a couple of days ago.
So we are trying to find out where we will meet, where it will
be, who----
Mrs. Walorski. Would you not agree this is a crisis because
for the first time, they have now entered the Middle East. And
for the first time, we now have watched the broadening of
Putin's powers, who was just here on the American soil right
next to a mess, a hotbed of war, and right next to our dear
ally Israel. Have we not now watched something elevate to the
point that this is now a crisis because Russia has just now
gone from their position, through the Ukraine, looking at
Eastern Europe, and now has sufficiently landed themselves with
a coalition inside of Syria?
Secretary Work. I do not believe it is a crisis. I believe
it is a disagreement in strategy, and that is what we are
trying to work out.
Mrs. Walorski. And I respect that. I believe it is a
crisis. I believe we have had a President with no foreign
policy whatsoever. We have had red lines talked about and
crossed. And this thing has played out all by itself, and now
today here we are, back in a crisis, back on TV in front of
every single American, wondering who in the world is defending
our country?
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you very much, Congresswoman Jackie
Walorski.
We now proceed to Mr. Takai.
Mr. Takai. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to rebalance and refocus to cyber strategy, if
I may. A lot of my colleagues have asked about deterrence
today, and this is something that I am also very concerned
about after recent events that have been discussed. With the
current threats to our cyber network, the need to discuss here
today, including creating and maintaining a persistent training
environment, development of a unified platform, and building
the Joint Information Environment to secure the DOD enterprise,
the development of these priorities cannot only serve as a
deterrent in their own right but will enable our CYBERCOM--our
Cyber Mission Force readiness to be the best in the world. So,
Admiral Rogers, where is DOD in allocating resources for these
priorities? If you could address each one, again, persistent
training environment, unified platform, and the Joint
Information Environment.
Admiral Rogers. So persistent training environment is a
program that we have put together. It will take us several
years to finish. I think we are in the--fiscal year 2017
represents the third year of funding for it. We are working
through the 2017 build now internally within the Department.
Again, I sense strong support for this. I haven't come to an
issue yet where I am saying, ``Oh, I have problems with the way
ahead.''
I think we have got a way ahead, and it seems to be
working. JIE [Joint Information Environment], I will let Terry
comment only because it has been a particular focus for him.
Unified platform, a relatively new idea for us that, based
on 5 years of practical experience now as an organization, we
think the Department needs to create a capability somewhat
separate from NSA [National Security Agency], if you will, for
us to execute operations. Unified platform is the program name
we put together in terms of our ability to do that. Again, we
really are starting that with the 2017 build. And it is an
example to me of how, as we gain more experience, as we do this
over time, we have got to continually reassess and ask
ourselves: So are some of the assumptions that we made when we
started, are they proving to be what we thought they were, or
do we need to make changes?
Mr. Takai. Okay, and the----
Admiral Rogers. JIE, if you want to----
Mr. Halvorsen. With respect to JIE, the first concrete
action that becomes of that is the establishment of the Joint
Regional Security Stacks [JRSS]. They are on track. They will
be funded in 2017, and they will be fully operational by the
end of 2017.
Mr. Takai. Okay. Thank you. I wanted to go back to the
integration of personnel. I know the Secretary mentioned that,
and I think you, Admiral, as well, I want to focus on defining
where the role of the National Guard fits into the cyber
strategy. I am a member of the Guard in Hawaii, and all of us
here on this committee have constituents in the Guard. So can
you touch upon some of the points on where the Guard can
increase their role in the larger cyber mission?
Secretary Work. Let me just start by saying, our cyber
force that we are building to as we discussed earlier,
Congressman, is about 6,200 Active and civilians and, in some
special cases, contractors.
Mr. Takai. Right. That is what you said. You didn't mention
National Guard when you said that.
Secretary Work. Two thousand--2,000--National Guard and
Reserves on top of that. Some of them will be part of the cyber
teams that I talked about, and others will be extra capacity
that might be able to help the States. As I said, the Council
of Governors and we have been working very, very closely
together. Our policy shop is working through all of the aspects
of what we can do under title 32 and title 10 authorities in
support of the States. But the Guard and Reserve will be
absolutely central to the Cyber Mission Force; about a quarter
of the entire force, 6,200 in the Active side and another 2,000
on the Reserve and National Guard. So they are absolutely
central.
Admiral Rogers. The only other comment I would make, and I
say this, I am the son of a guardsman. My father was a member
of the Illinois National Guard for 27 years. So, as a child, I
watched him every day, every month, every summer participate in
Guard activities. And I spent a lot of time playing in armories
as a little boy every day with my father.
Every service has used a slightly different construct. In
the case of the Air Force, they are using the Guard and the
Reserve to fill out a part, if you will, of the Active
requirement for their share of the 6,200. In the case of the
Army, they have decided that the Guard and the Reserve
represent an opportunity to generate additional capacity over
and above that dedicated 6,200 people. Clearly, Navy and Marine
Corps don't have a Guard construct. It is a little different
for them. But as I have said, the discussions today have been
very good. I think, as the Secretary said, we have got a way
ahead in terms of how we are going to work our way though this,
particularly this, quote, ``additional capacity,'' if you will,
that the Guard is developing and partnering with the States
about how we are going to view this as one integrated
enterprise, as it were, so we are maximizing the capabilities
that the Department and the States are investing in.
Mr. Takai. You spoke earlier about the cyber teams and the
number of teams that you are building. I understand that there
may be, in fact, opportunities for these teams to be wholly
Guard. You didn't mention that today. So can you----
Admiral Rogers. I said in the case of the Air Force, for
example, a portion of their share of the 133, they, in fact,
are creating a small number of teams that are wholly Guard.
Mr. Takai. Okay. Great. And then one more question for the
Secretary. How resilient are our military networks to
cyberattacks, and how do you measure and qualify resilience?
Secretary Work. We are getting better, but we are not where
we need to be. That is why Secretary Carter has said defense of
our networks is absolutely job number one. Now, that will come
through a whole lot of different things, as I said in my
opening statement. First, get the network as defendable as
possible. So the JIE that Terry Halvorsen talked about and the
Joint Regional Security Stacks will take 1,000 defendable
firewalls down to less than 200. A whole bunch of different--I
mean, the number of enclaves--and Terry can talk about this--
will be dropped.
So the first thing is to make your network with the
surfaces, the fewer surfaces as possible and as defendable as
possible. The second is to build up these teams so that is
another big part. And the other one is to have a cyber
scorecard, which is telling us exactly how well we are doing.
And Mr. Halvorsen was the creator of the scorecard, and I would
ask him to be able to tell you how we are going to track this.
Mr. Halvorsen. So cyber resiliency is actually a measure on
the scorecard that we are actively developing. It will look----
Mr. Rogers of Alabama [presiding]. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes himself for questions.
Secretary Work and Admiral Mike Rogers, good to meet you.
Do you use telecommunications--and either one of you--
telecommunications equipment manufactured by Huawei in your
offices?
Admiral Rogers. I apologize. I didn't hear the question.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Do you use telecommunications
equipment manufactured by Huawei in your offices?
Secretary Work. In the office of the Secretary of Defense,
absolutely not. And I know of no other--I don't believe we
operate in the Pentagon, any systems in the Pentagon.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Admiral Rogers?
Admiral Rogers. No.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Why? Why do you not use it?
Admiral Rogers. For us, I think it is a broader conscious
decision as we look at supply chain and we look at potential
vulnerabilities within the system, that it is a risk we felt
was unacceptable.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Secretary Work? Agree with Admiral
Rogers. What about your cleared defense contractors? Should
they be using Huawei telecommunications equipment?
Secretary Work. I will have to take that for the record,
sir. I know of no defense contractors that are using Huawei
equipment, but I just don't know.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 73.]
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Okay.
Admiral.
Admiral Rogers. This is a broader departmental issue. I
mean, we don't, the contracts we have, we specify security
standards that you have to meet. We specify the requirement to
notify us. Again, I think we would have to take it as a
question. I don't know if the current language--and Terry may
know--but I don't know if the current language specifies
specific vendors, if you will. You may or may not. I know in
some of the national security systems, we are very specific
about making that standard. In the nuclear and other areas, we
are very explicit that that is not allowable.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Well, Secretary Work, I would
appreciate if you would get back with me on whether you have
any cleared defense contractors that are compelled to use
Huawei telecommunications equipment.
And, with that, my next question has to do with the nuclear
enterprise review that recognized that Vietnam era Huey 1N
helicopters that helped provide security for our ICBM
[intercontinental ballistic missile] fields are woefully
antiquated and inadequate. The NER [Nuclear Enterprise Review]
said that we need to get new, modern helicopters into ICBM
fields because after all, we are talking about nuclear weapons.
Based on a meeting I had with the Air Force and the OSD
[Office of the Secretary of Defense] a few weeks ago, I am very
concerned that the Air Force acquisition approach is going to
take 4 or more years to get these helicopters. Now, these are
ICBM fields, and I had a hearing on this security issue and
this came up, and it is alarming, the concern that we are being
told by the commanders about their security of these fields.
What can you tell me about why we are looking at such a long
period of time?
Secretary Work. Well, first of all, this is an extremely
high priority, and we are dealing with it right now in PBR-17
[President's budget request 2017]. Last year, the Air Force
plan to replace those helicopters was to take their UH-60As,
their old--excuse me, take UH-60As and upgrade them to UH-60Ls
and it turned out that all of the As that were available in the
force were just too old and tired. And it became cost
prohibitive. And that is why the timing slid because now we
will have to go and buy new-build UH-60Ms or whatever
helicopter we decide, whether we decide whether we can do sole
source or whether it has to be a competition.
STRAT commander, the commander of U.S. Strategic Command,
Admiral Cecil Haney, has come in and said we cannot afford to
wait for 4 years, and we are looking at a wide variety of
measures to mitigate the problem until we can get these new
helicopters built. It is a very high priority issue for us in
this budget build, and I will be able to give you a little bit
more information once we work through all of the different
options before us.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Okay, well, I just want you to
understand that I really believe that we should see an
immediate reprogramming request for the fiscal year 2017
budget.
And, with that, I will close by saying that now that the
NDAA is about to be sent to the President, I would like to talk
with you offline about our new engine to replace the RD-180 as
soon as we can get a chance to privately.
With that, I will yield back my time, and go to Ms. Speier
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Speier. Speier.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen, for your service to our country. You
know, we are dealing with some very, very savvy actors in these
various foreign countries that have been hacking into us. On
the agreement with China, Mr. Work, you seemed somewhat elated
by the agreement, and yet I have reason to be very skeptical
about them complying with what they agreed to comply with. But,
more importantly, I would like to ask you, what isn't in the
agreement that you would have wished was in the agreement?
Secretary Work. Well, I wouldn't characterize my reaction
as elation, Congresswoman, so much as I believe it is a very
good first step. It is the first time that the President of
China has committed himself and his country to address the
issues that have been of such high concern to our government.
So I consider that a very good first step.
Ms. Speier. I understand that, but what wasn't in the
agreement? I have very limited time. So, please, if you would,
answer the question.
Secretary Work. There were no enforcement mechanisms per
se, and that, I think, is the key thing that people have
pointed out. But, again, I believe this was a confidence-
building measure. Now China is either going to prove that they
are serious about this or not, and then we can take actions as
necessary if they prove not to follow through on their
commitment.
Ms. Speier. Now, the OPM hack was devastating, and it is
clear that China did it. They denied it. It is also very clear
that they now have very personal information about many persons
with top secret status. And the phishing that just went on
recently of the Joint Chiefs of Staff's unclassified email
worries me a great deal. Whether it is Russia or China, access
to that personal information is such that if they know who your
family members are or who your next-door neighbor is and they
then can pretend like they are your family member or next-door
neighbor, you are more apt to click on to that email, and then
they can get in.
What steps are being taken to deal with phishing in terms
of either requiring greater accountability by those who hold
those positions who end up clicking by either punishing them or
coming up with some system, so that we can anticipate that kind
of phishing going on and prevent it?
Secretary Work. I would just like to make an overall point
and then turn it over to Mike and Terry. Although our
adversaries have very sophisticated capabilities in this
regard, almost every one of these intrusions that have
occurred, have occurred because of simple operator error, bad
cyber hygiene. They click on a spear-phishing attempt. So we
are going after that. I would just like to say that that is the
biggest problem we have right now is getting our cyber hygiene
better.
Ms. Speier. Okay, but my point is, is there any kind of
penalty being imposed on those who in a careless manner click
on to them?
Mr. Halvorsen. The simple answer is yes.
And I won't go into the specifics of what has been imposed,
but yes. We have upped the level of accountability on that and
actions have been taken for people who have misbehaved in a
cyber way.
Secondly, we have increased the training frequency,
phishing training, and we have taken certain actions on the
networks to eliminate the ability to click on links. And at a
minimum, we have a warning on there now that says you must
think about this link, and in some cases--and again, I won't
say--you physically can no longer click on links via any of our
networks.
Admiral Rogers. And I would say from a network perspective,
I have implemented nine specific technical changes where, quite
frankly, I have told users now, I am going to make your life
harder. If this is what it takes to drive a change in behavior,
I will make your user life harder to try to preclude this from
happening.
Ms. Speier. My last question and very briefly, what is
keeping you up at night?
Admiral Rogers. So I would say from my perspective, there
are three things in cyber that concern me: Are we going to see
offensive activity taken against U.S. critical infrastructure?
Are we going to see the focus shift from theft of intellectual
property, the theft of information, to manipulation of the data
that is in our system, so we no longer can trust what we see?
And then the third thing that worries me is, are we going to
see nonstate actors, meaning terrorist groups are probably at
the forefront on my mind, start to use the Web as an offensive
weapon?
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Secretary Work. I would add two things. One, we have a
large number of systems, Congresswoman, that were built in an
era, like Admiral Rogers, that was not--the systems were not
built to withstand the cyber environment that we are in now. So
what keeps me up at night is, can we get through all of our
systems and make sure that they do have cyber hardening? Going
forward, we are making sure that there are key performance
parameters in every system that we have, but we have to go
through this risk mitigation on every one of our systems and
saying, what is the critical cyber vulnerability? Have we taken
care of it? And I would just like to echo, it is manipulation
of data, since we rely upon our networks, that really keeps me
up at night.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. The gentlelady's time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes Chairman Wittman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thanks for joining us today.
Secretary Work, I want to begin with getting your
perspective on how we address the cyber threat. We have
constructed a military that is very adept and capable of
addressing kinetic threats, and that is top-to-bottom
capability. We have generalists. We have specialists. When
enlistees come in, they learn the lessons in training about
what to do in that kinetic environment. We have our officers
that learn tactics and strategy within that environment. Yet it
seems we have a very myopic or piecemeal element with the cyber
threat.
Give me your perspective. Shouldn't we have the same top-
to-bottom capability and capacity for cyber? Shouldn't our
enlisted men and women come in, shouldn't they also get
training in the cyber realm? Shouldn't our curriculums at our
service academies include very robust and extensive instruction
and education within the cyber realm? How do we construct a
force that is as capable kinetically as it should be in the
cyber realm? And we are far behind, and we need to be catching
up. Give me your perspective on how should we do that? Is that
valuable to do, and what are you doing to get to that
particular point?
Secretary Work. Congressman, it is very valuable. The first
thing is to include--what we call this is improving the cyber
hygiene of the entire force, making every single member--Active
Duty, civilians, contractors, and Reserves--to understand the
cyber threat that we face each day, and to understand the
simple actions they can take to improve our security. I think
many of the things that you say--in all of our education and
our schools, cyber is now an important part of our curriculum.
We have red teams that are going out and helping commanders
understand where their vulnerabilities are and how they can
improve. We have different types of means by which we hold
people accountable for like if you have a negligent discharge
with a weapon, that is a bad thing. We want everybody to know
that a negligent discharge in cyber is almost, I mean, could be
as dangerous. So I totally agree with what you are saying, and
this is a big, big cyber cultural shift that Admiral Rogers
spoke to earlier.
Admiral Rogers. And I would just echo that is the approach
we are taking. This is so foundational to the future for us as
a Department in terms of our ability to execute our missions
that the Nation is counting on. We have got to do this
foundationally across the spectrum. We don't need the same
level of training that the dedicated Cyber Mission Force has,
but there has got to be a level of basic cyber awareness across
our entire force, regardless of rank.
Last comment, this is the one environment in which if we
had given you access to a keyboard, you now represent a
potential point of vulnerability, and everyone in our
Department--that numbers in the millions in terms of the Active
Component, contractors, civilians, reservists, Guard--everyone
is an operator in this environment.
Mr. Wittman. In that realm, that priority also has to be
reflected in how resources are dedicated. Give me your
perspective: Where are we dedicating resources for things like
MILCON [military construction] for cyber, within personnel,
within training, within hardware and software? I think it is
also reflected not only in what you are doing from a doctrine
standpoint, a philosophy standpoint, and training standpoint,
but where are you dedicating resources to make sure that you
are successfully meeting that objective?
Secretary Work. Well, when Secretary Carter was the Deputy
Secretary filling the job that I fill now, starting around
fiscal year 2013, I believe, there was a concerted effort to
try to increase the investment in cyber forces. I believe that
we are doing very well in this regard. We could always do more.
It is budget dependent. But as I said earlier in testimony,
Secretary Carter says: Wherever our budget ends up, cyber is
going to be a very, very top priority.
The one area where I think we could do better on is in
tools. I think we are focused--we had to build the human
capital first, which we have been doing very well, but if there
is one area where I think we could do better for Admiral Rogers
and the team is to invest more money in tools that he would be
able to then create better options for the force.
Admiral Rogers. And I could echo. I think we are doing a
very good job with the dedicated Cyber Mission Force in terms
of the commitment to bringing it online. Where I think we are
going to need to look at over time, as the Secretary said, the
things I have raised are tools, situational awareness,
persistent training environment, the unified platform, and then
asking yourselves over time: Is the manpower piece right? Is
the command-and-control structure that we put in place right?
And this is part of an ongoing process. What I try to remind
people is, look, cyber is an environment in which where we are
today is not where we are going to wind up. And we have got to
stop focusing on the 100 percent solution up front. We have got
to take this in bite-sized chunks and keep moving out.
Mr. Wittman. If you could, just for the record, I would
love to see a breakdown about what you are proposing in
resource allocation now and what your projection is in the
future to make sure we are building that capability. And you
talked about the time element. Time in this, I think, is
critical. So getting your perspective on how you are going to
accomplish that, both strategically within the planning sense
but also in allocation of resources, is going to be critical.
Secretary Work. I will take that for the record, sir.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 73.]
Mr. Wittman. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair now recognize Mr. Ashford for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ashford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And many of my questions have been asked and answered. But
I want to pick up on something that Admiral Rogers and Mr. Work
mentioned a few minutes ago about the government shutdown. You
know, and I have been sitting here since February, and I admire
everybody on this committee and the witnesses. And I have
learned a great deal. I have been here 8 months or whatever.
I am from Nebraska. It is absolutely unfathomable, it is
beyond belief, it is incomprehensible that this government or
this Congress or anybody would even begin to talk about
shutting down the government for whatever political gain they
may get. And, you know, we were in the Middle East in February,
and at the beginning of the--not the beginning of the ISIS
effort, but certainly it was in the beginning stages of our
effort to combat ISIS. And we were in Baghdad, and there was
discussion at that point about standing up a force to address
social media issues. It was at the very, very beginning,
beginnings of that, at least in Baghdad, of getting both
civilian and military personnel up to speed on what was going
on with ISIS and social media. And we are now in October. And I
know this is a little bit of a speech, and I apologize. But it
seems to me at that time, I came back with the sense of all of
the things we talk about in Congress now and all of the
discussion about shutting down the government and all of these
other issues--I understand this is democracy; we can talk about
what we want to talk about. But I kept thinking to myself, why
don't we debate and discuss and at least give to the military,
every branch of the military, some clear plan and understanding
of where we want to go with not only ISIS but in the Middle
East, generally?
It seems to me that we are reacting to these various
incidents. We are reacting to what the Russians did today
because for whatever these existential threats are there; these
other threats are there. It seems to me it is incumbent upon us
in Congress to clearly indicate to you what we want you to do
and where we want you to go because I think that is totally
lacking. And this week, with all of the things that went on in
the House, I just kept thinking to myself, what is our military
thinking about we can't get our house in order? We can't
operate. And going back to my service in Nebraska, they look at
me like we are nuts. You know, we are sending our military. We
are asking them to do almost an impossible task around the
globe, and we are bickering about stuff that has nothing to do
with giving you the capabilities you need to go forward. So,
anyway, I have said enough.
So here is my picking up on your third point about the
social media issue, and that is the third thing that keeps you
up at night. What is your analysis of where we are--in the next
minute and 56 seconds--where we are, Admiral Rogers, where we
are with that third element, and how do you see that evolving?
Admiral Rogers. I think we need to do a better job of
contesting ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant] in the
information dynamic. Their ability in the information arena is
every bit as important in many ways as their battlefield
successes. And we have clearly focused a large piece of our
strategy on trying to stop and forestall that battlefield
activity level. I think we are going to need to do the same
thing in the information dynamic because part of their ability
to get out their story, their propaganda, their vision of the
world around us, we need to contest that. ISIL is as much an
idea in many ways----
Mr. Ashford. Right.
Admiral Rogers [continuing]. As it is a physical presence
simplistically on the ground.
Mr. Ashford. And how is that going?
Admiral Rogers. Clearly not where we want it to be.
Multiple components across the government ongoing. Don't get me
wrong. But I think it is fair to say we have not achieved yet
the impact that we think we need to have and certainly the
impact that we want to have.
Secretary Work. And, Congressman, if I could just say that
what your opening statement--certainly resonates with Secretary
Carter and me. Strategy is all about balancing in ways and
means. And when you have no idea what your means are, it is
almost impossible to have a good strategy. So as I said earlier
today, you know, in the last 6 years, we are in a situation
where we think a continuing resolution [CR] is a better deal
than a government shutdown, and it is. But it is certainly not
something that I as a COO would say I would want to operate
under.
In the last 6 years, essentially what we have is a 9-month
fiscal year because every first quarter, we are in a CR. And
that means that we are limited to do what you told us to do
last year, rather than doing the things we need to do this
year. It is an incredible situation, and there is no Member of
Congress in any House, in any party, that would sit in my job
as a COO and say: We can make this work without compromising
our national security.
So I am sorry I am on the soapbox, but this is something
that we deal with every day. We hope that we won't have a
government shutdown. We hope that the CR will be taken care of
in a very quick manner.
Mr. Ashford. Right. My time is up, but thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. McSally for 5 minutes.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen.
And now that you are on the topic, I want to make sure I am
on the record that I, after serving 26 years in uniform and
seeing government shutdowns and continuing resolutions and the
impact that that has on our ability to do our mission, I have
been strongly advocating against shutting down the government;
strongly advocating for us doing our job and actually passing
appropriations bills so that you guys can plan, you can
strategize, you can execute the mission. And I would urge all
of my colleagues, if you want to keep the government open, you
need to vote to keep the government open. And that would be my
urge to them today. Those of us who understand what that means
are going to do that, but we would appreciate a large number of
my colleagues actually showing some courage in joining us.
Anyway, on to the issues at hand. Prior to running for
Congress, I was a professor at the George C. Marshall Center,
one of our defense security centers. And one of the last
courses that I participated in was a Senior Executive Seminar
related to cybersecurity, cyberterrorism.
And so, in your strategy, you talk about building and
maintaining robust alliances, partnerships. Obviously, this is,
you know, a global domain, and so they are now starting a--one
of my colleagues, Phil Lark, retired Marine colonel, is
starting a program on cybersecurity studies or he is leading
that effort.
And so I am wondering if you could speak to how the defense
security centers fit in with this strategy; how you feel as far
as resources in order to use tools like these security centers,
like the Marshall Center, to execute that strategy; and whether
you need new authorities or additional resources in that venue.
Secretary Work. Well, first of all, these different centers
are very vital. Part of our strategy, regardless of what the
level of resources are, Congresswoman, is partnerships.
Ms. McSally. Yeah.
Secretary Work. And establishing strong partnerships, and
as Admiral Rogers and Terry have said, this is a collaborative
environment that we all face the same threats and need to
operate together.
Ms. McSally. Right.
Secretary Work. So I don't know if there are any
authorities that Mike would ask to help us work more deeply
with our partners, but I know that we are doing so very
aggressively.
Admiral Rogers. I would say----
Ms. McSally. Resources as well, yeah.
Admiral Rogers. Right. It hasn't been an authorities issue
as much. And the case specifically of the Marshall Center,
General Breedlove, in fact, has asked both I and the
Department, you know, for assistance, said: Hey, this is
important to me; I think it will generate good outcomes for us
in Europe----
Ms. McSally. Right.
Admiral Rogers [continuing]. As we are trying and
understand the broader cyber environment. So I have committed
to General Breedlove: Hey, look, I will be there to provide
expertise to help because that is what I can bring, not
necessarily money.
We are working--I don't think either of us off the top of
our heads know the specifics, other than the fact that we have
committed to moving forward on that. I know it is ongoing.
Ms. McSally. Yeah, and I will tell you, having been there--
and sometimes we have senior officials from 45 different
countries--this is not a technical course. It is more of an
awareness of best practices, policy issues, especially for some
of our less capable partners. They are not going to ever have a
Cyber Command like we do, but if we can raise their game up a
bit and we can have better collaboration and coordination for
strategic understanding and best practices, how to quickly
alert and respond and working with each other intelwise,
threatwise, I think it goes a long way. I mean, I was very
impressed with the capabilities that we have there. And I would
think it is a little bit of an investment for potentially huge
strategic outcomes.
Secretary Work. We agree with you completely.
Mr. Halvorsen. I will just say some of that work is
related. Mike will be doing some things, but over the next
months, we will be in NATO working to do exactly that with some
of our partners, raising their cyber basics.
Ms. McSally. Right.
Mr. Halvorsen. We will be in Bulgaria doing the same thing,
and some of that is a result of some of the arrangements that
were worked frequently from the Marshall Center.
Ms. McSally. Yeah. Great.
Mr. Halvorsen. That is paying back some good dividends.
Ms. McSally. Excellent. I look forward to working with you
in the future if you have any other additional requests related
to that with the firsthand experience that I have, so not just
the Marshall Center but the other defense centers, obviously,
because this is a global issue.
So I thank you, gentlemen. I appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. I thank the gentlelady.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Duckworth for 5 minutes.
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, I am very interested in looking at cyber
vulnerabilities in our critical infrastructure. I would love to
drill down more specifically to our bases and installations
that support core warfighting functions. I feel that they face
similar threats.
Our installations are tied into local grids, rely on sewage
and water from the surrounding areas, so there is always
potential for impact for those basic life services on the base.
Certainly continuity of operations is critical for DOD, just as
it is for our civilian infrastructure.
Admiral, I would like for you to sort of address this, and
I am going to give you an example that I found deeply, deeply
disturbing. I took a tour of a contractor that--a wonderful
company that works in smart grid technology. And as part of
this tour of this facility, small business, they were very
proud to show me what they were doing. They had won a contract
at one of our facilities, one of our bases. Actually, the base
where a major--I won't say which base it is because this is not
a secret room, but it was the home for a major maneuver
division in the Army. And from another State where I was, I
watched them turning off the lights at that base.
And then when I asked the person who was operating the
computer, who was turning the lights on and off at this base, I
said: ``Do you have a secret clearance?''
They said, ``No.''
I said: ``Do you, as the company, have anybody with a
secret clearance?''
``Yes, the chief engineer does.''
But this is an unsecure room. People in the business were
coming in and out. And they were very--I mean, amazing
technology that is going to help us save tons of money when it
comes to environmental costs and energy efficiency and all
those good things as a Democrat I love. But I was deeply,
deeply concerned that I was sitting there watching them turn
the lights on and off on a major road on a major installation
of a major maneuver division command in the Army.
Admiral, if you could speak a little bit to perhaps what
you are doing to both coordinate with Installations Command for
each of the different branches, whether it is the Army's
Installation Management Command, the Marine Corps'
Installations Command, and also local civilian infrastructure
as well. And, by the way, this base is outside of a major
metropolitan city. It is not one of the Army bases that is out
in the middle of nowhere. I spent a lot of time at those
myself, but I was deeply concerned.
Admiral Rogers. So we share your concern. The services and
installation and their respective installation commands are
working with each individual installation. I had been an
installation commander myself in the course of my career, so I
have experienced this as a commander. When you are so dependent
in some ways on infrastructure and capability that is outside
of your immediate span and control and yet it directly derives
your ability to execute your mission, it is one of the reasons
why collectively in the Department, we ask ourselves: So what
are the capabilities we need to bring on the installation, if
you will, to put redundancy and backups in so we have a level
of control?
We are working our way through this. The challenge I think
we find is, again, it goes just the scope of the problem sets
out there, just the infrastructure that we count on as a
Department, that just the broad swath of it, the size and the
age of it in many ways as we are trying to collectively work
our way through this. This is a problem set that is going to
take us years to work our way through. I don't think there is
any doubt about that.
Ms. Duckworth. Do you have a liaison from Cyber Command
that sits at installation command for each of the branches of
service?
Admiral Rogers. No. What I do is I work through my service
components who partner with their installation command. So, for
example, in my last job where I was the Navy's cyber individual
reporting to U.S. Cyber Command, I was working directly with
the Navy's Installations Command as to what we were doing in
naval installations, you know, around the world for us, and we
still do that now.
Ms. Duckworth. Is there any policy that looks at--and one
of the great things about this committee is this is a very
bipartisan committee. And I want to applaud our chairman for
his continuing work on acquisition reform.
But one of my concerns with acquisition reform is these
contractors and sub-subcontractors. Huawei North American
Regional headquarters is actually in my district. And I have
concern that we are talking about service subcontractors that
are several layers down, and we are not inspecting them. I
mean, there was nobody inspecting this contractor and making
sure that they were--I mean, that they had, you know, secured
the facilities and their computers and the devices that are in
the hands of people who are actually turning on and off the
lights at a major military base.
Admiral Rogers. Right. So we have taken the Huawei issue
specifically for action. We will provide feedback on that.
This, I share your concern, ma'am. This is something we are
going to have to just work our way through.
Ms. Duckworth. What do you specifically--do you have plans
in place? Are you writing policy? What are you doing
specifically to address this particular issue?
Admiral Rogers. I apologize----
Mr. Halvorsen. Mike, let me take that one.
Admiral Rogers. Yeah.
Mr. Halvorsen. There is policy in place. We are looking at
all of the installations and, frankly, grading them and looking
for where are the priorities.
But as Mike said, this is a priority issue. There is a vast
number of, you know, installations. Very frankly, the control
systems for power and water when they were built, there was no
consideration of cyber, so now we have to go back and fix that.
We have a list of those priorities. We are prioritizing on
those bases that have more strategic assets first, which I
think is smart, and we will keep going down that list to fix
those issues. But there is a priority list. We have new
language required in the FAR [Federal Acquistion Regulation]
for all levels of contractors now to meet certain requirements
about the security control systems, and that is in place.
Ms. Duckworth. Can I have a copy of your priorities list
and that new language for contractors? Is that available for
Members of Congress?
Mr. Halvorsen. We will certainly take that for the record.
I am sure it is, and we will figure out how to get it to you.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 74.]
Ms. Duckworth. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Franks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Rogers, I appreciate people like you that put
yourself at risk and assiduously try to do everything you can
to protect the homeland and the future generations. So, on
behalf of my children, thank you.
Admiral Rogers. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Franks. I am going to paraphrase here, but in recent
press briefings at the Wilson Center, you said that what keeps
you up at night--and I know you have been asked that question
several times today--are threats to critical infrastructure and
that you have been observing nation-states spending a lot of
time within the power structure of the United States. And as
you know better than perhaps anyone, the Department of Defense
relies upon the electric grid for 99 percent of its electricity
needs, without which even the Department's position is that it
cannot effect its mission.
And, of course, there are 320 million Americans that also
depend upon it pretty significantly for everyday survival. And
a widespread collapse of the electric grid, of course, would
lead to gross societal collapse.
So wearing your CYBERCOM hat, how protected is our electric
grid from, number one, cyberattacks and lesser discussed
attacks that could come from geomagnetic disturbance or
electromagnetic pulse? And do you find industry to be a willing
partner in helping to secure the grid? And what have you been
tasked with or coordinated with or asked to do from the
Department of Homeland Security or the FERC, Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, in regards to hardening the electric
grid and protecting it and just giving us your best military
advice? A lot of questions here, I am sorry. What do you think
needs to be accomplished to robustly harden our electric grid
against these stated threats?
Admiral Rogers. Let me try to do them backwards to
forwards.
Remember, DOD does not physically act on private sector
networks. I am not responsible for hardening them.
Mr. Franks. That is true, but without them, you will
certainly maybe revisit that.
Admiral Rogers. Right. My only point is, your question
specifically, though, is, what are you doing as--well, that is
not Cyber Command's role. What we do is we partner with DHS in
their role. I try to make sure that, again, because one of the
missions you heard the Secretary talk about in the very
beginning, where there is an expectation that DOD needs to be
ready to respond if the President decides that we have to
respond to a cyber event of significant consequence, a power
scenario is definitely one of the things that we talk about.
So we partner with DHS. We partner with the segment--for
example, we do a Cyber Guard annual exercise. I had two
different power sector segments from two different parts of the
United States that participated in this exercise. That was one
of the scenarios we walked our way through.
In terms of the grid, if you will, vulnerability, I would
argue it is pretty broad. If you look in the eastern part of
the United States, the grid is operating on the margin already
just between capacity and demand.
The other point I try to make, particularly in the eastern
part of the United States, is we need to think more than just
the U.S. Our grid in the east in particular is so tied into our
Canadian counterparts for hydroelectric and other power
generation. Capacity on their side of the border often is
flowing south to meet our basic needs.
The other challenge I find in the power sector is--and they
are quick to remind me of this--is their business model: ``A,
Admiral, we are a regulated industry. The only way for us to
generate revenue is through rates. Those are governed. I just
can't universally say I am going to upcharge this to generate a
$5 billion capital fund that I can use to invest in basic
infrastructure.'' So each of the utilities, if you will, within
the sector is trying to work their way through it.
Mr. Franks. Well, now, I appreciate that.
I guess one of things over the years in dealing with this
issue that has occurred to me is that what you just said--and
you are absolutely correct; I mean, you know, this is not your
responsibility to tell the private sector what to do with the
grid. But then the private sector, when we talk to them about
hardening the grid for national security purposes, they say
that is the national defense apparatus' job. And, in the
meantime, this, what could be a profound threat, given the fact
that all of our other security, our other critical
infrastructures rely heavily upon the grid, it walks the 13th
floor of congressional debate, and no one addresses it.
And, of course, you know, there is always a moment in the
life of every problem when it is big enough to be seen and
still small enough to be addressed. And I think we live in that
window. So I certainly don't offer you any advice. Just the
question I hope lingers in our minds is, are we doing what is
relevant to protect the national security on this particular
threat because certainly a loss of the grid would be the
ultimate cybersecurity issue? I mean, you know, if you can't
turn those computers on, you can't do really much else.
Again, there is no arrogance in my comments, Admiral. I
think that you are doing a great job, and I hope you will
consider this as much as possible.
Admiral Rogers. Certainly.
Mr. Franks. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers of Alabama. I thank the gentleman for yielding
back.
All of our members have completed their questions.
I want to thank the witnesses for their time and
preparation for this hearing. I know it takes a lot to get
ready for these and your time here today, but it has been very
beneficial to us.
And, with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

September 30, 2015

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

September 30, 2015

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

September 30, 2015

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Secretary Work. At this time, we have not taken legal actions or
pursued economic sanctions. The Administration remains concerned about
Iran's increasing capabilities and malicious activity in cyberspace.
The Department works closely with interagency and international
partners to enhance cyber defenses. The President is able to use a
broad range of tools--including diplomatic engagement, trade policy,
and law enforcement mechanisms--to address cybersecurity threats
emanating from Iran.   [See page 18.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS
Secretary Work and Admiral Rogers. Only in limited circumstances
would the Department have insight into or the contractual right to
control a cleared defense contractor's decision to use any particular
subcontractor or supplier. Absent suspension or debarment or a
statutory restriction on contracting with a prohibited source, our
cleared defense contractors would generally not be precluded from using
a specific vendor's telecommunications equipment.
However, it is important to note that the Department has several
mechanisms in place to help ensure the security of products or services
delivered to us and the systems that cleared defense contractors use to
store or process sensitive DOD information.
First, the Department requires Program Protection Plans (PPPs) to
address the full spectrum of security risks for the critical components
contained in our weapons systems, including supply chain
vulnerabilities, and to implement mitigations to manage risk to system
functionality. In addition to the security requirements applied to
deliverable products or services, the Federal Acquisition Regulation
(FAR) requires that contractor information systems used to store or
process classified information are compliant with the National
Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM). Additionally,
the Defense FAR Supplement (DFARS) requires that contractor
unclassified systems that will store or process sensitive Department of
Defense (DOD) information must also provide appropriate security for
that information.
There are additional statutory authorities available to the
Department to limit or exclude vendors in specific circumstances. For
example, section 1211 of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)
for Fiscal Year (FY) 2006, as amended by section 1243 of the NDAA for
FY 2012, and as implemented at DFARS Section 225.77, prohibits the
Secretary of Defense from acquiring supplies or services that are on
the United States Munitions List through a contract, or subcontract at
any tier, from any Communist Chinese military company. In addition,
section 806 of the NDAA for FY 2011, as amended by section 806 of the
NDAA for FY 2013, has been implemented at DFARS Subpart 239.73,
``Requirements for Information Relating to Supply Chain Risk.'' The
clause enables DOD components to exclude a source that fails to meet
established qualifications standards or fails to receive an acceptable
rating for an evaluation factor regarding supply chain risk for
information technology acquisitions, and to withhold consent for a
contractor to subcontract with a particular source or to direct a
contractor to exclude a particular source.   [See page 32.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Secretary Work. The Department continues to develop and maintain
cyberspace capabilities to support full spectrum operations in pursuit
of national objectives, and is prepared to defend the nation against
cyber threats and provide the President options in crisis or
contingency.
To support these strategic goals, the Department is prepared to
defend information, information-based processes, and information
systems against threats, thus ensuring their availability, integrity,
authenticity, confidentiality, and non-repudiation on the Department of
Defense Information Network (DODIN) at all security levels.
The Department has established a trained and ready cyber operations
workforce with all the technical capabilities necessary to complete
missions and support full-spectrum operations. The FY2016 President's
budget requests $5.5 billion in FY 2016 (FYDP, $27.4 billion) for the
cyberspace operations, an increase of 11 percent. The FY 2016
cyberspace operations budget continues to support: computer network
defense, cyber identity and access management, engineering and
deployment controls, cryptographic key production and management, cross
domain capabilities, workforce development, information assurance and
operational resiliency, offensive cyber operations, and cyberspace
Science and Technology.   [See page 37.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. DUCKWORTH
Mr. Halvorsen. The Department has a very mature and active Defense
Critical Infrastructure Program and a disciplined Mission Assurance
Risk Management process that is used to identify the Department's most
critical assets. The process includes working with the DOD Components
to identify single points of failure related to DOD OPLANs/CONPLANs,
and the Department's other strategic missions. It also includes
prioritization of assets for risk management efforts (to include
cybersecurity) and resource investment.
The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) language referred to in
testimony is actually an August 26, 2015, update to the Defense Federal
Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS), DFARS Case 2013-D018,
``Network Penetration Reporting and Contracting for Cloud Services.
This rule expands upon the existing ``Safeguarding Covered Defense
Information and Cyber Incident Reporting'' clause, which only covered
the protection of and reporting of incidents affecting the controlled
technical information. The August 2015 interim rule expands the
protection and reporting requirements to a broader scope of information
(i.e., ``covered defense information'') which includes controlled
technical information as a subset. This interim rule also requires
contractors to be compliant with NIST Special Publication 800-171,
``Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal
Information Systems and Organizations''.   [See page 42.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. BROOKS
Secretary Work. The Department of Defense (DOD) Cyber Strategy
emphasizes improving cyber collaboration, information sharing, and
unity of effort within the Department. The efforts at the U.S. Army
Aviation and Missile Research, Development, and Engineering Center
(AMRDEC) Cyber Campus, and similar facilities, are consistent with this
emphasis. The AMRDEC Cyber Campus at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, is an
organization designed to integrate, in one location, the expertise of
multiple DOD and non-DOD organizations that support aviation and
missile system cybersecurity. This campus participates in several
programs that leverage DOD-wide capabilities in cybersecurity and
related areas, such as the Joint Federated Assurance Center and the DOD
Software Assurance Community of Practice.   [See page 25.]

?

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

September 30, 2015

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FORBES

Mr. Forbes. The Intelligence Community is using commercial cloud
computing capabilities to enable important classified missions. If
commercial cloud services are able to meet the security standards of
the intelligence community, can DOD use commercial cloud services for
classified and sensitive missions? Does DOD have particular technical
concerns with regard to the capabilities available on the commercial
market?
Mr. Halvorsen. The Intelligence Community's (IC) use of a private,
classified instance of the Amazon AWS cloud demonstrates that, when
properly configured and separated from public networks and facilities,
commercial cloud services can be leveraged to satisfy many of the
Department's requirements for classified and sensitive missions. The IC
commercial cloud is essentially a private version of Amazon's public
cloud that has been built on the IC's premises supporting the Top
Secret network. DOD IC components are exploring contract mechanisms to
permit DOD applications and data on the IC cloud.
For the Secret environment, it is not the technical concerns that
present a significant challenge; rather, it is the time and investment
risk associated with acquiring a private cloud that operates solely
within that classified environment. The Department is currently in the
process of identifying requirements and options for expanding
commercial cloud services to support secret networks.
In the unclassified environment, the Department is able to leverage
more of the existing commercial infrastructure, which greatly reduces
the time and expense necessary to establish a commercial cloud service.
The Department continues to work with commercial cloud providers to
perform cybersecurity assessments and approve commercial cloud services
for use on the Unclassified but Sensitive Internet Protocol Router
Network (NIPRNet). As of October 2015, the Department has approved more
than 30 commercial cloud services for use within the Department.
Mr. Forbes. Is DOD looking at solutions that can prevent exploits
from succeeding via isolation/containerization strategies ``at the end
point''? What measures are you taking to address the advanced
``polymorphic'' threats you face?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, DOD is looking at solutions that can prevent
exploits from succeeding via isolation/containerization strategies at
the end point. The isolation/containment concept is a primary function
of DOD's DMZ architecture. By physically and logically separating
public, restricted, and private information systems into their own
security zones, movement between these zones becomes minimalized and
reduces the attack surface.
In regards to polymorphic attacks, DOD has expanded its detection
arsenal to include technology designed to identify malicious code
behavior through analysis that identifies specific code execution
patterns. This addresses the challenge of malicious code variants.
Behavioral analytics can be applied at runtime to a specific machine
tracing the execution of applications or offline via a sandbox
environment.
The ability to detect and react at the endpoints is a key part of
DOD's Defense in Depth and Layered Defense strategies. Once a
compromise is detected, containment from the rest of the unaffected
Information System (IS) and Information Technology (IT) assets requires
swift action and the ability to keep the event scope isolated to the
smallest area possible. Micro-segmentation, virtual computing, and
software-designed networking will enable Cyber Security Providers,
Network defenders, and security engineers more options and capabilities
to keep the IT and IS at the prerequisite security posture to meet it
missions.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SHUSTER
Mr. Shuster. We heard testimony earlier in the week that
attribution in cyberspace is much improved, allowing U.S. agencies to
identify and target our greatest cyber-based threats. Do you feel you
have adequate guidance and the necessary authorities to executive
sufficient offensive and defensive cyber-based activities in support of
DOD's three cyber missions?
Secretary Work. Yes, I believe we have adequate guidance and the
necessary authorities to execute sufficient offensive and defensive
cyber operations in support of the Department's three cyber missions.
Consistent with Presidential guidance and the Department of Defense
Cyber Strategy, the Department will streamline its policies and
procedures for cyber. This effort will help translate national and
departmental guidance and policy for implementation in tactical
operations.
Mr. Shuster. There are many companies that partner with multiple
sectors of the U.S. Government to include DOD, civilian agencies and
the Intelligence Community. I recognize that each entity must develop a
comprehensive cyber strategy yet I worry that differing strategies
among our government entities could create challenges for the companies
that work across agencies. What issue areas do you believe are best
legislated by Congress for the whole of government and what areas do
you recommend we defer to DOD and/or other executive agencies to
develop?
Secretary Work. The Department depends on passing legislation with
meaningful measures to address core critical infrastructure
vulnerabilities and provisions to facilitate public-private sharing of
information. This can be done while ensuring the protection of privacy
and civil liberties. The Department appreciates the early steps taken
during this session to build consensus on information sharing
legislation. The Department also looks forward to progress on other key
provisions, such as data breach and cybercriminal provisions, included
in the President's legislative proposal submitted earlier this year.
Internally, the Department works continuously with federal
interagency partners to develop a whole-of-government approach to
ensure all the resources of the federal government are used wisely. The
Department also amended its cybersecurity reporting requirements for
defense contractors who hold sensitive defense information in their
networks. On August 26, 2015, the Department issued an interim rule
amending the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement to
implement section 941 of the Fiscal Year 2013 National Defense
Authorization Act, which requires cleared defense contractors to report
network penetrations and to allow defense personnel to access those
networks to assess the impact of the reported cyber incident.
Mr. Shuster. What steps has and can DOD take to prevent malicious
attacks similar to the OPM breach from occurring on DOD networks? Given
that in many instances cyberattacks on U.S. networks are undertaken by
entities linked to foreign military forces, what response do you feel
is appropriate to such a malicious cyberattack?
Secretary Work. Once the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
breach was identified, the Department immediately took a number of
steps to mitigate potential impact to the Department's systems. This
included scanning systems for indicators of compromise from the breach;
mitigating vulnerabilities in other repositories of personally-
identifiable information of the Department's personnel; and assessing
any network connections between OPM and Department of Defense networks.
The Department's total network attack surface is very large. It is
critical to identify, prioritize, and defend the most important
networks and data so the Department can carry out its missions
effectively.
To stay ahead of cyber threats, Secretary Carter places a high
priority on investing in technology and innovation. The Department is
enhancing its cyber defense capabilities by building and employing more
defendable network architecture in the Joint Information Environment.
Many hackers frequently target the defense industrial base. Network
and data protection requires extensive collaboration with the private
sector. The collaboration includes sharing defensive information,
ensuring that the Department's contractors report attempted and
successful cyber intrusions, and encouraging or mandating adherence to
cybersecurity standards as appropriate.
In addition to building U.S. cyber defense and cybersecurity
capabilities, the United States will continue to respond to
cyberattacks against U.S. interests at a time, in a manner, and in a
place of our choosing, using appropriate instruments of U.S. power and
in accordance with applicable law. As with attacks in the physical
domain, the Administration takes into account the severity of the
attack, such as loss of life or property damage, and consider all
possible levers, including diplomatic, economic, and military efforts,
when contemplating any response.
Mr. Shuster. Many of the strategic objectives in the 2015 cyber
strategy require significant changes to the services' human capital
management programs related to recruitment, retention, training and
utilization. Is the human capital enterprise engaging and adapting
rapidly enough to achieve the stated objectives?
Admiral Rogers. [The information referred to is for official use
only and retained in the committee files.]
Mr. Shuster. Earlier in the week, we heard testimony from industry
experts that recommended a ``Zero Trust'' or ``micro-segmented''
network to prevent significant data losses. Do you agree with that
recommendation and if so, what would be potential barriers to
implementing that approach across DOD?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, we agree that a ``Zero Trust'' concept
implemented through ``micro-segmentation'' has significant advantages
for cybersecurity. Implementing these concepts would theoretically
allow for 100%, near-real-time inspection of network traffic and, if
necessary, isolation and remediation of impacted areas. In a perfect
world, micro-segmentation would occur at the lowest possible level; for
instance, an individual suite of offices versus an entire organization.
The Department has issued Requests for Information and has reviewed
responses received. This information will be integrated into the pilot
programs and proof of concept testing as these software-defined
networking and network virtualization programs move forward. Lessons
learned from the pilots and proofs of concept testing will determine
the required skill sets needed to operate and manage micro-segmentation
of the DODIN.
The challenges of implementing this concept DOD-wide include three
primary factors: First, the technology to implement is still emerging.
Although companies like VMWare, Palo Alto, and EMC are bringing
products to market, they're not yet complete solutions.
Second, full implementation requires re-engineering and integration
at the data center-level rather than at the network-level. DOD is still
working to implement a number of virtualization and software-defined
networking initiatives across the Department, and the best path forward
has not been determined.
Third, the skills and tools to manage the dramatic increase in the
number of virtual networks that would occur as a result of implementing
micro-segmentation do not currently exist in the Department.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SPEIER
Ms. Speier. During your testimony, you stated that those involved
in the spear-phishing attack on the JCS UNCLASSIFED network were
punished but were unwilling to discuss specifics in public. Please
provide an overview of those involved and their punishments as well as
any policies that have been put in place to punish those responsible
for breaches.
Secretary Work and Mr. Halvorsen. The Department of Defense follows
standard investigative procedures to derive an accurate accounting of
any situation requiring further investigation. In the case of the Joint
Staff spear-phishing attack, the Joint Staff conducted a fact-finding
inquiry to determine the facts surrounding the intrusion. In response
to the incident, immediate corrective actions were taken addressing
those involved; the Director, Joint Chiefs of Staff, led Joint Staff-
wide training, and additional comprehensive training was provided for
each affected individual prior to reconnecting to the network.
Ms. Speier. During your testimony, you stated that those involved
in the spear-phishing attack on the JCS UNCLASSIFED network were
punished but were unwilling to discuss specifics in public. Please
provide an overview of those involved and their punishments as well as
any policies that have been put in place to punish those responsible
for breaches.
Admiral Rogers. [The information referred to is for official use
only and retained in the committee files.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN
Mr. Lamborn. What are you doing to ensure cyber personnel keep
critical skills current, such as computer tech and programming
languages, which change constantly? More broadly, what are you doing to
improve cyber training?
Admiral Rogers. [The information referred to is for official use
only and retained in the committee files.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALZ
Mr. Walz. Do you believe our current capabilities pertaining to the
number of individuals and technical tools is sufficient to deal with
the scale of the amount of cyberattacks that the nation faces on a
daily basis? If not, how would you rate our risk level due to these
lacking resources? High, medium, low?
Secretary Work. Cyber-attacks are increasing in frequency, scale,
sophistication, and consequence. Although the nation will never
eliminate all cyber threats, both government and industry, acting
together, are taking important steps to reduce cyber risk. The
Department of Defense (DOD) is halfway through manning, training, and
equipping the Cyber Mission Force, which includes developing
capabilities to defend the nation from a cyber-attack. Additionally,
DOD, through efforts such as the Defense Innovation Unit-Experimental,
is strengthening interaction with industry to identify breakthrough and
emerging technologies to counter the sophisticated cyber threats the
U.S. faces. The risk of cyber-attacks against the United States remains
high, and the Department must do everything it can to be prepared. This
includes continuing to build and equip our Cyber Mission Force and to
innovate in partnership with the private sector. Congress can help by
expanding DOD's civilian hiring authorities to recruit and retain top
talent.
Mr. Walz. Is there any discussion or efforts taking place in DOD to
address and counter the use of social media and the Internet for
recruitment purposes by terrorist and extremists groups such as ISIS
and Al Qaeda?
Secretary Work. Yes. The Department of Defense is engaged on
multiple fronts to address and counter terrorist and extremist group
activities in social media, in close coordination with our interagency
and foreign partners as appropriate. More specifically, the Department
has a task force focused on supporting interagency and foreign
government actions to disrupt foreign fighter movement from their home
countries to the Middle East. One of the sources of information used to
enable these operations is derived from social media.
Additionally, the Department of Defense plays a supporting role in
the Department of State's effort to counter violent extremist
ideologies, including providing personnel to augment the Center for
Strategic Counterterrorism Communications, which has the mission to
coordinate, orient, and inform government-wide strategic communications
focused on violent extremists and terrorist organizations. The
Department of Defense's efforts alone will not solve the challenge of
this contested information environment and adversary propaganda.
The imperative to stay abreast of increasing technological change
and our adversaries' rapid adaptation of technology demands that the
Department use a thoughtful, strategic approach to achieve success
against a mix of adversaries. Simply trying to match our adversaries
``tweet'' for ``tweet'' or matching Website for Website would be both
fiscally irresponsible and operationally ineffective. Instead, the
Department continues to rely on the skills of its personnel to develop
thoughtful, well-constructed plans and partnerships with other U.S.
Government departments and agencies and with foreign partners, and to
leverage a variety of means to disrupt the adversary's narrative,
expose its contradictions and falsehoods, and ultimately bring
credible, persuasive, and truthful information to audiences who often
have significantly differing perceptions and cultural norms than our
own. The main challenge today is the size and pace of communications in
social media. Our ability to assess the social media environment is
challenged due to its broad scope and constantly changing nature.
Mr. Walz. As DOD continues to develop the Cyber Mission Force, how
does DOD plan on measuring its efforts toward progress and readiness on
a continuous basis?
Admiral Rogers. [The information referred to is for official use
only and retained in the committee files.]
Mr. Walz. Is there any discussion or efforts taking place in DOD to
address and counter the use of social media and the Internet for
recruitment purposes by terrorist and extremists groups such as ISIS
and Al Qaeda?
Admiral Rogers. [The information referred to is classified and
retained in the committee files.]
Mr. Walz. Is there any discussion or efforts taking place in DOD to
address and counter the use of social media and the Internet for
recruitment purposes by terrorist and extremists groups such as ISIS
and Al Qaeda?
Mr. Halvorsen. Countering the threat posed by terrorist and
extremists organizations using the Internet for recruitment purposes is
a concern of the Department. I would like to defer to Admiral Michael
Rogers, Commander of the U.S. Cyber Command, Director of the National
Security Agency on what the Department is doing to combat this threat.

[all]
