- VARIOUS MEASURES

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VARIOUS MEASURES

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

ON

H.R. 4347, H.R. 2283, H.R. 4411, H.R. 4640,
H.R. 4653, H. Res. 435, H. Res. 562 and
H. Res. 588

__________

JUNE 26, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-186

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

88-461PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         ENI F.H. FALEOMAVAEGA, American
DANA ROHRABACHER, California             Samoa
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   BRAD SHERMAN, California
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
TED POE, Texas                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          KAREN BASS, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
TOM COTTON, Arkansas                 ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                JUAN VARGAS, California
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina       BRADLEY S. SCHNEIDER, Illinois
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania                Massachusetts
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                GRACE MENG, New York
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SEAN DUFFY, Wisconsin                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

MARKUP OF

H.R. 4347, To require the Secretary of State to provide an annual
report to Congress regarding United States Government efforts
to survey and secure the return, protection, and restoration of
stolen, confiscated, or
otherwise unreturned Christian properties in the Republic of
Turkey and in those areas currently occupied by the Turkish
military in northern Cyprus....................................     2
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 4347 offered by
the Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign Affairs..............................................    10
Amendments to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 4347 offered by:
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in
Congress from the Commonwealth of Virginia...............    32
The Honorable Alan Grayson, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida................................    39
The Honorable George Holding, a Representative in Congress
from the State of North Carolina.........................    40
H.R. 2283, To prioritize the fight against human trafficking
within the Department of State according to congressional
intent in the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000
without increasing the size of the Federal Government, and for
other purposes.................................................    43
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 2283 offered by
the Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in
Congress from the State of New Jersey........................    51
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 2283 offered by the Honorable Christopher H. Smith....    58
H.R. 4411, To prevent Hezbollah and associated entities from
gaining access to international financial and other
institutions, and for other purposes...........................    60
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 4411 offered by
the Honorable Edward R. Royce................................    80
Amendments to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 4411 offered by:
The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Texas.......................................   100
The Honorable Ron DeSantis, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida, the Honorable Theodore E.
Deutch, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and the Honorable Grace Meng, a Representative
in Congress from the State of New York...................   102
H.R. 4640, To establish the Western Hemisphere Drug Policy
Commission.....................................................   107
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 4640 offered by
the Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York...................................   120
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 4640 offered by the Honorable Joaquin Castro, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Texas.........   133
H.R. 4653, To reauthorize the United States Commission on
International Religious Freedom, and for other purposes........   134
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 4653 offered by
the Honorable Christopher H. Smith...........................   138
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 4653 offered by the Honorable Grace Meng..............   142
H. Res. 435, Calling on the government of Iran to fulfill their
promises of assistance in this case of Robert Levinson, one of
the longest held United States civilians in our Nation's
history........................................................   143
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 435 offered
by the Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Florida...........................   147
H. Res. 562, Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives
with respect to enhanced relations with the Republic of Moldova
and support for Moldova's territorial integrity................   150
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 562 offered
by the Honorable Edward R. Royce.............................   156
H. Res. 588, Concerning the suspension of exit permit issuance by
the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo for adopted
Congolese children seeking to depart the country with their
adoptive parents...............................................   161
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 588 offered
by the Honorable Christopher H. Smith........................   165
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H. Res. 588 offered by the Honorable Edward R. Royce.......   168

APPENDIX

Markup notice....................................................   184
Markup minutes...................................................   185
Markup summary...................................................   187
The Honorable Edward R. Royce: Statement submitted for the record
by the Honorable Gus Bilirakis, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida......................................   188
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel: Material submitted for the record..   189
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly: Prepared statement.............   190

VARIOUS MEASURES

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 26, 2014

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:08 a.m. in room
2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Royce (chairman of
the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This committee will come to order. Pursuant
to notice, today we mark up eight different measures. And I am
going to ask the members to take their seats. I want to begin
by thanking all of our committee members, and I want to thank
the staff, too, on both sides of the aisle, for the extensive
preparatory work that went into today's markup, including those
subcommittees that held their own markups.
Without objection, all members may have 5 calendar days to
submit statements for the record on any of today's business.
And I now call up H.R. 4347, the Turkey Christian Churches
Accountability Act. Without objection, Royce Amendment 117 in
the nature of a substitute, which was provided to all offices
on Tuesday morning, will be considered base text for purposes
of markup, and is considered read and open for amendment at any
point.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. After opening remarks by myself and the
ranking member, I will recognize other members seeking to speak
on the bill before moving to any amendments. And I now
recognize myself to speak.
Members, in the midst of a turbulent Middle East lies
Turkey, a democratic nation that, despite its Muslim majority,
has historically bridged East and West, Christian and Muslim
worlds.
I have long been concerned that this balance is shifting as
Christian heritage sites in Turkey deteriorate and disappear in
the face of hostile government policies.
Despite optimistic claims by Turkish leaders in 2011 that a
revised law would allow all church properties to be returned to
their rightful owners within a year, 3 years later most of
those properties remain unreturned.
Despite the Turkish Government's numerous promises to
reopen the Halki seminary, that seminary remains closed. Of
course, no seminary, nobody then to practice the faith, no
future church.
Recently, two Byzantine Orthodox churches previously
expropriated and turned into museums, have been converted into
mosques by the Turkish Directorate General of Foundations.
There is even legislation before the Turkish Parliament to
convert the landmark Hagia Sophia in Istanbul into a mosque.
Hence the timeliness of this resolution.
As a beacon for religious freedom around the world and
having an interest in seeing Turkey maintain its secular
tradition, its respect for freedom of religion, the U.S. must
hold Turkish leaders to their promises.
By passing H.R. 4347, the U.S. will send a clear message to
Turkey that it must return church properties to their rightful
owners while providing an objective measure of its progress.
I would like to thank Congressman Gus Bilirakis for his
contributions to this bill, and without objection, I will
submit his prepared statement for the record. And I urge my
colleagues to support this important bill.
I now recognize the ranking member for any remarks on
today's markup that he might wish to make.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this markup of H.R. 4347, the Turkey Christian Churches
Accountability Act. I commend you for introducing this
important legislation, and I am pleased to be the lead
Democratic cosponsor.
In the last century, thousands of Christian properties in
Turkey have been confiscated by successive Turkish governments.
The same has happened in Northern Cyprus since the Turkish
invasion in 1974. Recently, Turkey has returned some
properties, but many cases remain unresolved. Clearly, more
needs to be done.
H.R. 4347 directs the Secretary of State to provide
Congress with an annual report through the year 2021 on the
status of stolen, confiscated, and otherwise unreturned
Christian churches, places of worship, and other properties in
Turkey and Northern Cyprus.
The report should include a comprehensive listing of all
properties claimed to have been removed from their rightful
Christian church owners and should describe all engagement over
the previous year by State Department officials with Turkish
representatives. This bill also mandates that the report be
included in the State Department's Annual International
Religious Freedom Report and in the Country Reports on Human
Rights Practices.
I want to acknowledge two visitors here today who are in
the audience, Arch Bishop Vicken Aykazian and Bishop Anoushavan
Tanielian. I hope I didn't mess the names up too much, but we
welcome you here, gentlemen.
In this context, let me take a moment to express my concern
about recent disturbing anti-democratic trends in Turkey. Over
the past several years, we have seen a lot of red flags:
Questionable trials of political opponents, increased media
censorship, propaganda blaming foreigners and in particular
Jews and Israel for domestic problems, and an increase of
government control over various state institutions, including
the judiciary.
As Mr. Keating and I wrote in a recent letter to the editor
in The Economist, the current government of Prime Minister
Erdogan is eroding Turkish democracy. I ask unanimous consent
that the letter be included in the record of today's markup.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
Mr. Engel. While I have concerns about Turkey's current
course, we should also take note of the bright spots.
Negotiations to resolve the 30-year Cyprus dispute are moving
along. Ending the division of Cyprus is critical for stability
in the Eastern Mediterranean and for prosperity on the island.
Also, Ankara's vitriol toward Israel has diminished somewhat in
recent months. This provides hope that reconciliation between
the countries might not be too far off.
Turkey and the United States have a long history as NATO
allies and partners. Our relationship is strongest when it is
based on our shared values: Democracy, human rights, tolerance,
and justice. When Turkey's commitment to those values is called
into question, it damages our partnership and it hampers
Turkey's progress as a free and prosperous country. One clear
way Turkey could reaffirm its commitment is by returning
confiscated and stolen church properties to their rightful
owners.
So, Mr. Chairman, I hope H.R. 4347 will bring attention to
this important issue and make it clear to Turkey that it needs
to do more to resolve the longstanding and legitimate claims of
the Christian churches. I urge my colleagues to support this
legislation. And once again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding the markup.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
Are there any members who wish to speak on the underlying
bill? Mr. Rohrabacher, go ahead.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I just would like to commend you, Mr.
Chairman, for bringing up this legislation. And let me just say
that I share the concerns that were just voiced by our ranking
member, Mr. Engel. There are some disturbing trends in Turkey.
And while we recognize that Turkey has made long-term progress
over the last 20 and 30 years, over the last few years there
has really been reason for concern here, and that people who
wish Turkey well need to make sure we are paying attention and
that those trends, those short-term trends that we have seen,
do not continue in the wrong direction.
And finally, one last point about the specific nature of
the legislation that we are dealing with today, Mr. Chairman, I
agree with you totally on the substance of this bill. We are
expressing our concern about properties that are taken that
also have very significance as to the very nature of the
government and the nature of the decision making that is going
on in that part of the world.
I would just suggest that as we pass this, with my strong
support, that we do note that there are probably properties in
surrounding countries, like Greece, for example, that belong to
the Turkish tradition that need to be addressed as well, and
people need to respect each other's rights. And we are
demanding today that the rights of Christian churches be
respected in Turkey. I would hope that we respect the rights of
Islamic and Turkish institutions in nearby countries, such as
Greece. Thank you very much.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and Ranking Member Engel for your continued commitment to
working across the aisle and marking up legislation to benefit
the American people. I am happy to see forward momentum on a
number of bills that I have cosponsored.
It is the responsibility of Congress to prevent terrorist
organizations like Hezbollah from growing stronger; to
emphasize the importance of our relationship with Moldova; and
to express our concern about the timeliness of adoption
processes from the Democratic Republic of Congo.
But I would like this morning to speak particularly in
support of H.R. 4347, the Turkey Christian Churches
Accountability Act, which rightly calls out Turkey for the
theft of Christian churches, religious artifacts, and religious
artwork. The United States was founded on the principles of
religious liberty and freedom, and the respect for religious
freedom must be central to the values and ideals that we
promote all over the the world.
Christian communities in Turkey have long suffered from the
destruction and confiscation of their holy sites, the force
closure of their theological schools, and restrictions on their
right to worship. There have even been reports that Turkish
people are prevented from praying in their own churches.
Continued persecution of the vulnerable Christian minority in
Turkey threatens the survival of their religious tradition.
In the 112th Congress, I was proud to work with Ranking
Member Berman to offer an amendment during the markup of the
Foreign Relations Authorization Act, which called on Turkey to
end its repression of its Christian minority and to return
stolen churches to their rightful owners. More specifically,
the amendment stated that Turkey should end all forms of
religious discrimination, allow the rightful church and lay
owners of Christian church properties to organize and
administer prayer services, religious education, clerical
training, community gatherings, and social services, and return
to their rightful owners all Christian churches, places of
worship, and properties, including artwork, relics, and other
artifacts. The amendment was overwhelmingly adopted by a vote
of 43-1 in committee and became part of the underlying bill
which was passed by the House Committee on Foreign Affairs.
This April, I had the pleasure of visiting Armenia on a
congressional delegation trip with Chairman Royce and Ranking
Member Engel, as well as several other colleagues. On that trip
I was disturbed to hear more on the ground about the
persecution of Christians in Turkey and the desecration and
fundamental lack of respect for Christian holy sites. More than
2,000 properties destroyed; reused for things like museums,
storage, and even a gas station.
Today, I am proud to continue advocating for religious
freedom in Turkey, and I urge support of this important bill.
Again, I commend you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Engel,
for moving these important pieces of legislation. I look
forward to their passage. I thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go now to Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for marking up H.R.
4347, the Turkey Christian Churches Accountability Act, in
order to ensure religious freedom for all faiths in Turkey.
Christians in Turkey and Turkish-occupied Northern Cyprus
deserve our assistance in ensuring that they can freely
practice their faith in houses of worship without fear of
hindrance or restrictions.
Since the early 20th century, thousands of Christian
properties have been confiscated, desecrated, and otherwise
taken from their owners in Turkey by the Turkish Government,
and since the 1970s in Northern Cyprus. I have personally been
to Turkish-occupied Northern Cyprus and seen the devastating
destruction to these churches firsthand. It is unacceptable
that Turkey has yet to return some of these properties. For
example, the Halki Theological School, the main seminary of the
Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, has been closed
since 1971.
Mr. Chairman, a century is much too long for violations of
religious freedom to go unanswered, and I am pleased that by
supporting H.R. 4347 a message will be sent to Turkey that the
United States does not stand for such intolerance. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank you
and Mr. Engel for working in a bipartisan fashion to actually
address some of the concerns that I have had with H.R. 4347,
because I believe that there has to be balance, et cetera. But
I just remain apprehensive, and I will have to oppose it,
simply because, you know, not because I don't have concerns. I
do have concerns. I have concerns of the status of stolen and
confiscated Christian property in Turkey; for example, I am
concerned about the continued closure of the Halki Theological
Seminary, an important Greek Orthodox educational institution
in Turkey for training, for one.
But I think we did the right thing when Congress directed
the State Department to carefully monitor the situation in
Turkey, which they have been doing. And when I looked at the
2013 State Department religious freedom report, it indicated
that Turkey has been responsive to some of the calls to return
stolen and expropriated Christian property. And maybe we need
to go further. But how do we do it, and what do we do? How do
we make sure things are balanced in the best way to work
forward with an individual who has been a strong ally of the
United States?
You know, this comes at a time when we are partnering
closely with Turkey on issues that are critical to the U.S.
global interest. At this very moment, Turkey is working to
secure the release of 80 of its citizens recently taken hostage
by ISIS during the insurgence in Iraq. Just a month ago, Vice
President Biden indicated during a monumental visit to Cyprus
that after a 2-year hiatus, talks were on the verge of speeding
up. That is something that I think that needs to be highlighted
and we should also talk about.
Also, in trying to make a decision on how and what I was
going to do on this particular bill, I talked and asked the
State Department where we were, and they say this bill will
probably or could cause tension between U.S.-Turkey relations,
as well as being burdensome on the Department so they can do
the very thing that we have directed them to do.
So, again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for working on this
bill and trying to alleviate some of my concerns. I just think
that as we go forward right now we need a little more balance
and we have got to make sure that--Turkey has been an ally that
we are working with, a very important ally in the region, and I
think that this sends the wrong message at the wrong time. I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to first of
all say that you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Engel have conducted
this committee in your tenure in a way that fosters comity and
civility, and I appreciate that. And I appreciate the attempt
we have had in the last 2 days with our staffs trying to work
together to see if we could modify the language of this
resolution to make it mutually acceptable. Unfortunately, we
were not able to do that, and as you know, Mr. Chairman, I will
be offering a substitute amendment that expresses our concerns
about these issues but in what I consider a more balanced way.
The current resolution in front of us is not about whether
you favor the return of Christian properties. I favor, all of
us favor that. All of us want to see more progress in Turkey.
This resolution shortchanges the progress that has been made.
Over 800 properties worth $1.5 billion. The restoration of
liturgical services in some religious facilities, some very
significant religious facilities.
I am fearful that in our haste to make a statement that
provides understandable comfort to our constituents, we are
going to rupture one of the most important bilateral
relationships we have right now in one of the most sensitive
parts of the world. Turkey isn't a perfect country; neither are
we. I know. I come from a Roman Catholic tradition. Catholics
suffered enormous discrimination in this country for a long
time.
But are we willing to junk the relationship with Turkey we
need right now? If we are looking at any kind of intervention
in Iraq, we need Turkey. Turkey has taken in 1 million
refugees, unsung. An enormous act of generosity in that region.
Turkey is strategically in a place where it is as an ally more
important than ever for the United States of America.
As we speak, Turkey has had almost 80 Turkish nationals,
including diplomats and truck drivers, kidnapped by ISIS in
Mosul. We are going to pretend none of that happened and none
of that is about to happen. We are going to make a statement as
if Turkey were a country that is at the very beginning of
evolution and needs to be lectured by us, and the consequences
we will not examine because we are determined to do something
else.
We are the House Foreign Affairs Committee. We are the
committee that Congress counts on to show judicious exercise of
judgment, pondering and weighing and balancing consequences.
The consequences of the resolution as worded--words matter--I
guarantee you will rupture the relationship with Turkey.
And by the way, if our objective is to get Turkey to show
more progress, and I share in that objective, this language
will only backfire. They have elections pending. We are
politicians. A politician in Turkey is going to use this
resolution to say, I am willing to stand up to the United
States of America. I am not going to be bullied. I am not going
to be lectured like we are some tinhorn dictatorship here in
Turkey, when we are not.
Turkey is not a perfect democracy, but it is an evolving
democracy, and it is one we want to encourage to turn westward,
to open up, to liberalize even more than they have. We want a
pluralistic, secular society in Turkey. It is the only such in
the Muslim world. To treat it with such disrespect in the
language included in this resolution is bound, bound to have
negative effects in Turkey. And all of the goals I think all of
us share in this committee will, in fact, be set back for a
cause that is noble, but for a resolution that is worded in a
way that can only be calculated to inflame Turkey, Turks, the
politics of Turkey, and do terrible damage to the bilateral
relationship between the United States and Turkey.
I urge my colleagues. I am going to offer a resolution that
I think is more balanced that recognizes the problem but also
says they have made a lot of progress and let's move forward.
Let's encourage them. If you want to vote as a statement that
more progress is needed on this subject and that you are on
record, my substitute gives you that opportunity. But I pray my
colleagues look at the wording of this resolution.
I thank the chairman.
Chairman Royce. Well, I thank the gentleman. The Chair is
going to recognize himself, and especially inasmuch as we
worked very carefully on the wording in this resolution.
I would just remind the members here that this bill
addresses an issue that has frequently been raised by the
United States in the past, including at the highest level by
President Obama, including raised by our Vice President, Joe
Biden, including an issue which has been raised by Secretary
Kerry. It has also been raised by our European allies.
At none of these previous times has there been any
deterioration in our relations or levels of cooperation with
Turkey. In fact, the opposite has been true. During or
immediately following these dialogues, the Turkish Government
has made positive steps on property returns.
We now face a situation where things are sliding in the
opposite direction, and if we do not reassert this principle we
will find, in all likelihood, an acceleration of a trend which
will not be reversible.
And I think we also have to disabuse ourselves of the
notion that every choice that Turkey makes is in response to
U.S. actions. Turkey is a mature, sovereign state. It evaluates
its relationships and cooperation with other countries based on
its calculus of what is in Turkey's best interest, not solely
in reaction to U.S. measures, certainly not solely in reaction
to a report by the House of Representatives.
Primary examples of this, one I would give you, was in
2010, when Turkey voted against the U.S. and the U.N. Security
Council on the Iran sanctions. That had to do with Turkey's own
calculus of its relationship with Iran. This was a significant
action by Turkey, and it wasn't in response to any
congressional action.
It is clear that maintaining close cooperation with the
United States on Iraq and Syria is, in fact, in Turkey's best
interest. Should Turkish leaders choose to point to our raising
of this longstanding issue, in which they are moving in the
opposite direction, if they point to that, this well-known
religious freedom issue, an issue they themselves have
repeatedly promised to correct, as the reason to cut off
security cooperation, as I think was implied here, then it
would raise legitimate questions about their commitment to
church property returns and where security cooperation with the
U.S. weighs in their decision-making process.
But I think at the end of the day, because the President,
the Vice President, the Secretary of State are all weighing in
with the same intention that we have here, we need to do the
same.
And with that said, I am going to recognize Mr. Smith of
New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman. First of
all, I want to congratulate you and thank you for this
extremely important bill. It is timely. It is worded in such a
way, I think, that it strongly encourages and admonishes Ankara
to do the right thing. And you even point out in the bill, you
and the ranking member, that there have been some aspects of
progress, but it doesn't even come close, frankly, to where
they ought to be.
Let me just say to my friends and colleagues, unfortunately
the State Department for years has always taken the view that
we do not speak about human rights in a substantive way, even
though the human rights report couldn't be clearer about those
rights violations. I am the one who chaired the Armenian
genocide hearing in this room years ago. We had a Turkish
Ambassador come and testify, and he threatened us right from
the witness table that if you bring up an Armenian genocide
resolution we will take away your base in Incirlik. That kind
of friend in the soft underbelly of NATO certainly underscores
a weakness, and if that has a chilling effect on our ability to
speak about human rights, shame on us.
Let me also point out that today is Torture Victims Day. I
have written four laws called the Torture Victims Relief Act. I
am reintroducing a reauthorization for that legislation today,
and I hope friends and colleagues here on this committee will
join me in introducing that bill. There are torture victim
centers in Ankara and in other parts of Turkey. Torture is
endemic.
I have held several hearings on the use of torture, and I
have raised it in Ankara. And as chair of the OSCE
Parliamentary Assembly and the Helsinki Commission, I will be
in Baku tomorrow and will be meeting with members of the
Turkish delegation. Mr. Chairman, I will put in each of those
delegates' hands a copy of your resolution and we will have a
dialogue. Friends don't let friends commit human rights abuses.
Let me also point out that Reporters Without Borders makes
it absolutely clear--I have chaired hearings on this, as well--
that the journalists, they claim, and they have good
substantive background for it, there are 42 journalists in
prison suffering because they dared to write the truth about
what goes on or does not go on in Turkey, and especially if
anyone mentions the Armenian genocide, watch out, they will be
knocking on the door and it is off to the gulag for you.
Seventy-two media people in all.
Let me also point out that I will never forget, after
George Bush, first Bush, after the Persian Gulf War, kind of,
perhaps unwittingly, suggested that we had the backs of the
Kurds, and it looked like they were looking to overthrow and
topple Saddam Hussein. Next thing you know, they were all in
flight. Talking about refugees, when it comes to Syria, Turkey
has very little choice in the streaming of refugees, and we
congratulate them for providing temporary housing and help for
those who are coming across the border.
When the Kurds came across the border, the line of
demarcation between Turkey and Iraq was very strong. If it
wasn't for our special forces, I would say to my friends,
colleagues, we were there 4 or 5 days, after all of these Kurds
came to the border and couldn't get across, we would have seen
thousands of dead people, who happened to be Kurds, from the
elements from sickness and even from attack.
While we were there, a helicopter laden with foodstuffs for
Kurdish refugees, women and children, and the elements were
killing a lot of little children because it was cold--when
people went to get the meals ready to eat, one of the Turkish
soldiers shot and killed one of those who were just hungry
beyond words. Our military, thankfully, helped keep things in
check.
They are friends. They are colleagues. They are allies. But
we need to speak about human rights. And again, I think this
very, very prudently written bill will make a difference. And
we should not act out of fear because then it invites impunity
in a sense that we can do whatever we want and the Americans
and others who are concerned about human rights will muffle
their criticism.
So again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for this bill, as well as
Ranking Member Eliot Engel.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield for a minute?
Mr. Smith. Happy to yield.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
My only point is, I agree with him. We need to speak
forthrightly about human rights and abuses that may occur and
encourage democracy. It is how we say it that is important. And
I respectfully believe that how this resolution is worded is
going to be counterproductive.
Mr. Smith. I understand that. But let me just say, if I
could reclaim Mr. Royce's time, the churches, the Christians
there, are under a constant cloud. The sword of Damocles hangs
over them 24/7. This tells them we have their backs. And again,
I think the chairman has crafted a bill that is very
diplomatically articulated. And so I hope the members will
support it.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
I am a co-sponsor of this bill. I think it is well written,
and I commend the chairman for it. Its passage will build upon
the adoption of H. Res. 106, which we adopted in 2011, which I
and many of us cosponsored, put the U.S. House on record
calling for Turkey to return Christian religious properties.
The vote was 43-1.
This legislation is needed to address the ongoing
destruction of Christian religious heritage in Turkey. This is
a result of the Turkish Government's desecration in some cases
and just failure to protect in other cases Christian holy
sites. Because of this area's ancient history, so many of these
churches are tied to an important global Christian heritage.
Christians cannot legally train clergy in Turkey, any
Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Armenian Patriarchate are
prevented from owning and transferring property.
The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom has
listed Turkey as a serial violator of religious freedom for
several years. The U.S. Commission on International Religious
Freedom reported, over the previous 5 decades, the Turkish
state has, using convoluted regulations and un-Democratic laws,
they have used these to confiscate hundreds of religious
minority properties, primarily those belonging to the Greek
Orthodox community, as well as the Armenian Orthodox. The state
has closed seminaries, denying these communities their right to
train clergy.
Despite a few public pronouncements vowing to return some
religious property, as the U.S. Commissioner on International
Religious Freedom reports, ad hoc announcements have not
resulted in systemic changes in constitutional legal structures
that would remedy violations of religious freedom for non-
Muslim minorities, some of which are on the verge of virtual
disappearance.
Now, there is the argument that Turkey will retaliate if
anybody brings any of this to their attention. The fact is that
France faced a similar issue about a decade ago when its
Parliament recognized on the parliamentary floor the Armenian
genocide. That, as members of this committee know, is a much
bigger issue with Turkey than this resolution. The French
Parliament passed that resolution with France being under
threat by Turkey to cut the one thing France cared about, which
was trade and French exports. After the French Parliament
acted, French exports to Turkey tripled over the next 8 or 9
years.
So I don't think we should be dissuaded by bluffs, and I
think this committee should at least show the fortitude and
courage of the French Parliament. If we can't do that, why are
we here?
I will yield to the chair.
Chairman Royce. We have two amendments, Mr. Grayson and Mr.
Holding, that I was going to bring up on en bloc, but, Mr.
Connolly, you referenced an amendment that you have at the
desk.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Do you want to offer that amendment?
Mr. Connolly. Certainly. I have an amendment at the desk in
the form of a substitute.
Chairman Royce. The clerk will report the amendment.
Mr. Walden. Substitute for the amendment in the nature of a
substitute to H.R. 4347 offered by Mr. Connolly of Virginia.
Strike all after the enacting clause and insert the following:
It is the sense of Congress that Turkey has made progress in
ending religious discrimination and in returning church
properties to their owners. It is further the sense of Congress
that the Secretary of State, in all official contacts with
Turkish leaders and other Turkish officials, should emphasize
that Turkey should (1) endeavor to end all forms of religious
discrimination; (2) continue to make progress in allowing the
rightful church and lay owners of Christian church properties,
without hindrance or restriction, to organize and administer
prayer services, religious education, clerical training,
appointments, and succession, religious community gatherings,
social services, including ministry to the needs of the poor
and infirm, and other religious activities; (3) continue the
ongoing process being undertaken by the Government of Turkey to
return to their rightful owners all Christian churches and
other places of worship, monasteries, schools, hospitals,
monuments, relics, holy sites, and other religious properties,
including movable properties, such as artwork----
Chairman Royce. Without objection, the amendment will be
considered read.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. All members now have a copy of the
amendment. The Chair recognizes the author to explain his
amendment.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
This resolution is fairly simple. It recognizes progress
has been made but much progress needs to be done. I listened my
friend from California, Mr. Sherman, and I listened to my
friend from New Jersey, Mr. Smith, and to listen to them would
be to conclude, if one knew nothing else, that Turkey has
apparently done nothing with respect to the return of Christian
properties. The report cited actually also notes the return of
864 properties worth $1.5 billion.
In 2013 mass was held at Hagia Yorgi Church for the first
time in 89 years. Baptismal service was observed at the Akdamar
Church of the Holy Cross for the first time in 100 years.
Structures that have been restored, preserved to begin
restoring, include the Akdamar Church of the Holy Cross, Surp
Vortvots Vorodman Church, St. Nicholas Church, Mor Petrus-Mor
Paulus, and the Sahinbey Synagogue--and I am probably torturing
the Turkic language here--lands associated with the Mor Gabriel
Monastary have been returned, Heybeliada Theological School,
Surp Giragos Church, Hagia Yorgi Church, Bomonti Mkhitarian
School, and Galata Elementary School.
Now, one could go on. We are trying to achieve a balance
here where Turkey can work with the Christian communities to
return Christian properties. I favor that. I voted for H. Res.
306. But that was something that brought us together because it
didn't gratuitously just bash Turkey throughout the resolution.
And I am concerned that that kind of gratuitous language is
going to get us into a situation where the relationship is far
more complicated and the goals we all seek, in fact, will be
retarded rather than progressed.
And so I am urging my colleagues to vote for an alternative
that expresses our sense of Congress with respect to the need
for Turkey to have a lot more progress on the return of
Christian properties, but avoids language that I think can be
construed as inflammatory and unnecessary at a very delicate
moment in that region of the world. And I urge my colleagues to
support the resolution.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Connolly. You know, I
appreciate your amendment. I appreciate your perspective on
these issues. I know that you have been deeply involved in this
region of the world. But I am somewhat disappointed because as
members, I know myself and Mr. Engel have worked very hard
making many changes to the introduced text and accepting
changes from members yesterday, and we did that in an effort to
get this legislation to a place where I hoped all members could
support it.
And of course, that is not always possible. But we did make
an effort, and in particular we amended the base text from its
original version to include findings that note instances of
progress on church property returns to Turkey, as you
referenced. We make note of the 2011 reforms to the law on
foundations, which provide a process for churches to apply to
get their properties returned. We also note that since the
enactment of this reform Turkey has returned over 300
properties to the appropriate church authorities.
And further, clauses 23, 24, 25, clause 27, they all point
to positive developments in terms of church property being
returned, religious ceremonies being allowed, and the historic
meeting between Prime Minister Erdogan and the Ecumenical
Patriarch Bartholomew back in 2009.
But while recognizing these positive developments, there is
an urgency on some of the issues that are before Turkey today.
Progress on church returns, as everyone here knows, has been
haphazard, it has been very slow. The 2014 U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom report notes many religious
communities regard this process as biased and of course very,
very slow. And it highlights that over 1,000 applications by
churches to have their property returned have been denied.
But that said, even more troubling, this is why this
resolution is before us today. Since that time, two ancient
Byzantine-era Orthodox churches, which had been seized by the
Turkish government rather than being returned to their rightful
owners, have been converted into mosques. And as I referenced
earlier, there is a proposal before the Parliament now to do
likewise with the Hagia Sophia, the great church in Istanbul.
That is one of the most significant religious sites for
Orthodox Christians in the world. It is the former Eastern
Orthodox Cathedral and seat of the Patriarchate of
Constantinople for a thousand years, and for decades has
symbolized Turkey's efforts to respect the rights of Christian
minorities while promoting the country's secular democracy.
I am, and I know many other members are pretty troubled by
what this says about trends in Turkey. And we feel that if we
take a stand we may be able to arrest what would otherwise be a
very unfortunate circumstance here. Turkey has not acted
positively since we passed the last resolution. We cannot
expect sudden progress if we pass the same language again. We
need to reference these discussions that are underway in Turkey
and these events.
And lastly, as to now is not a good time, that argument,
which we have heard, and I partially answered that, but with
all respect to my own legislation here, we are just making a
report. Second, there has never been what has proven to be a
bad time to raise it, if you think about it. This issue was
raised, as I shared with you, by President Obama, and that was
in 2009 when we were relying upon Turkey's support in isolating
Iran and pressing Iran to abandon its nuclear ambitions.
It was raised by our Vice President, Joe Biden, in 2011,
when the Syrian conflict was beginning. It was discussed once
again a few months ago by Secretary Kerry on a visit to Turkey
and Cyprus as the situation in Syria worsened and as ISIS was
gaining greater influence in Iraq. And each of these times, I
think it is fair to say, there was no breach in relations or
cooperative efforts with Turkey on key U.S. foreign policy and
security issues. It was raised because it was important that
the United States take a stand.
And as I said, Turkey is a mature sovereign state. It
measures its actions based on its calculation of what is in its
best interests. When we have common interests, Turkey will back
us; when we don't, it won't.
And thirdly, I would ask why are we so sensitive? Do we
change our fundamental policies every time a foreign government
critiques us? No. Maybe a report will be used as an excuse, but
a report isn't going to tip that balance away from cooperative
relations between the United States and Turkey, in my opinion.
And I urge my colleagues to join me in opposing this
amendment. And I recognize Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to, first of all, commend Mr. Connolly. He is a good
member of this committee and very thoughtful and we generally
agree on most things, but on this one I have to respectfully
disagree and oppose his substitute. I know his intentions are
very, very well, very, very good.
The question here, as the chairman has mentioned, let's put
this in perspective. What are we doing here? We are mandating a
report. We are not taking any punitive actions against Turkey.
We are not hitting them over the head. We are mandating a
report. And I think that we need to put that in perspective.
The findings on our bill, the findings on the bill, the
chairman's bill, is based on the U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom report. It is also based on
State Department Human Rights Report. So we are taking two
reports that have been issued, and we are simply stating what
these reports, which have already been done, are saying.
Now, Turkey cannot have it both ways. You know, I am
disturbed about recent trends in Turkey over the past several
years by Mr. Erdogan. I am very much chagrined over what seems
to be his authoritarian rule, his maneuverings to swipe away
the secularism of the Turkish state, his attempts to neuter the
military so that they are no longer a barrier in preventing the
move toward an Islamist state in Turkey. I think those are very
troubling.
And I think, while Mr. Erdogan doesn't hesitate to tell the
United States when he thinks we are doing something wrong, I
don't think that we should hesitate to tell him. And they can't
really have it both ways. On the one hand, they say, well, we
are an ally so that should make you immune of any kind of
criticism; on the other hand, when we look around and we have
needed them, they haven't always been there.
Yes, they are an important country, but we are not
denigrating that importance. We are simply saying that the
findings in our bill are based on the U.S. Commission on
International Religious Freedom and the State Department Human
Rights Report.
The other thing to put this bill in perspective, there are
no sanctions or any penalty against Turkey in the bill. It is
just a statement of what we believe is fact, which has been
documented and proven about Christian properties. And so that
is what we are doing. It is a finding, again, based on the U.S.
Commission on International Religious Freedom report, the State
Department Human Rights Report, and we are not imposing any
sanctions. So I don't see why the chairman's bill should be
opposed. We are simply stating what is a fact. No one is
disputing the fact.
We are saying, well, Turkish sensitivities, they may not
like it, it is poking a finger in their eye. Well, you know
what, we are entitled to say what we feel and what we see. And
since we are mandating a report here, we are not imposing any
sanctions here, I think this is a very moderate bill and should
be supported by everyone on both sides of the aisle.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would like to say, I want to speak against the substitute
amendment from my dear colleague from Virginia and speak in
support of the underlying H.R. 4347. You know, one of the
groups, a little background, one of the groups that I belong
to, in fact, that I am proud to be a member of, is the Tom
Lantos Human Rights Commission. And last year, through the
Commission's defending justice project, I adopted a Vietnamese
prisoner of conscience named Mr. Nguyen Tien Trung. My role was
to bring attention to Trung's plight, and I am proud to say
that recently Trung was released from jail.
And just this week, I adopted another prisoner of
conscience in Vietnam, Pastor Nguyen Cong Chinh. Pastor Chinh
was unjustly sentenced to 11 years in prison in 2012 for simply
practicing his faith and exercising his right to religious
freedom.
These cases have raised my awareness of religious
intolerance around the globe, particularly in cases where it is
systemically and institutionally practiced by various
governments.
The reason why we are here today and talking about this
amendment and the underlying resolution is another sad
situation where a government is actively hindering its own
citizens' freedom of religion.
There is no denying that the Republic of Turkey has a poor
record on the treatment of Christians, and that is why the
substitute amendment does not go far enough. Christian churches
and communities in the Republic of Turkey and in Northern
Cyprus continue to be prevented from fully practicing their
faith and face serious obstacles to reestablishing full legal,
administrative, and operational control over stolen,
expropriated, confiscated, or otherwise unreturned churches,
and other religious properties and sites.
It should be pointed out that in the 3 years since the
Republic of Turkey revised its law to provide legal process for
claims to the return of religious properties that it has
confiscated, that more than 300 Christian church properties
have been returned. However, it is an encouraging sight, but
with more than 1,000 applications for the return of the
properties being denied by the Turkish Government, it is clear
that much more needs to be done. The only way we are going to
change this situation is to convince the Republic of Turkey,
and that is through international pressure. And that is why I
think this amendment does not really deal with the underlying
factors. And I oppose the substitute motion and encourage the
support of H.R. 4347.
And I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Hearing no further requests for
recognition--oh, Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I begin by saying I have tremendous respect for my
colleague from Virginia, who I rely on a lot as a new member of
this committee, a new Member of Congress, and admire his
thoughtful approach to this issue and to all the work before
our committee, but I most respectfully oppose his amendment.
I think it is correct that we have to be careful about both
what we say and how we say it. And this underlying resolution,
or bill, sends a message and creates the reporting requirement.
But the substitute amendment offered by the gentleman from
Virginia, I think, makes assertions that just aren't true: ``It
is the sense of Congress that Turkey has made progress in
ending religious discrimination.''
We have the United States Commission for International
Religious Freedom 2014 report, where they say,

``Turkish secularism, as codified in the 1982
constitution, requires absolute state control over
religion, which leads to governmental interference and
restrictions that hinder full religious freedom in the
country. The government limits all religious groups'
rights to own and maintain places of worship, train
clergy, and offer religious education. This has been
particularly detrimental to the smallest minority
communities and their ability to transmit their faith
to future generations. Other concerns include the
listing of religious affiliation on national identity
cards, societal discrimination, anti-Semitism, and
persistent religious freedom violations in the Turkish-
occupied northern part of Cyprus. Finally, it should be
noted that the overall landscape for democracy and
human rights has deteriorated significantly during the
past year.''

So I don't think we should express the sense of Congress
that Turkey has made progress in ending religious
discrimination. In fact, the report goes on to say that they
heard views from some religious minority communities that
conditions had worsened and that the steps taken were
negligible, as well as concerns that the improvements, which
are not codified in law, could be easily revoked, especially in
the current political environment.
So I do think, while some progress has been made on the
return, or some efforts have been made on the return of
property--that is reflected on page 3, paragraph 7. The
underlying resolution acknowledges that. But this is an
opportunity for us to again state, or to share our values, to
demonstrate that this is an important priority for our country,
an important shared value. And I urge my colleagues to reject
the substitute amendment and adopt H.R. 4347 as originally
proposed.
And, with that, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Hearing no further requests for
recognition, the question occurs on the Connolly amendment.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have it, and the
amendment is not agreed to.
I now ask unanimous consent that the following two
amendments that were provided to members yesterday be
considered en bloc and be considered read: Grayson Amendment
No. 284 and the Holding Amendment No. 851.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. Do any members seek recognition to speak on
these amendments en bloc?
Mr. Grayson.
Mr. Grayson. Thank you.
With regard to my amendment, Mr. Chairman, it is simply a
matter of making sure that the terms are accurate and that we,
to the extent we can, avoid language that might be misconstrued
by any party. That is the purpose of my amendment.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Grayson.
Mr. Holding?
Mr. Holding. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for recognizing me
and want to thank you for all the work you have done advocating
for religious freedom across the globe. It is certainly an
issue that I know is of great importance to many members of
this committee and Members of Congress.
In this committee, under your leadership and the leadership
of Chairman Smith, we have examined the plight of many across
the world who are prohibited from freely and safely practicing
the religion of their choosing.
As part of a delegation to Turkey last year, I had the
opportunity to meet with Christian church leadership while in
Istanbul. And there I heard firsthand about the ongoing
difficulties in the process to get church properties not only
returned but correctly identified in the inventory. However, it
was also expressed that, while this process was not proceeding
as expeditiously as it should be, the Government of Turkey and
local communities had been making strides, and positive
developments were noted.
That being said, Mr. Chairman, it is certainly my belief
and, I believe, the belief of many here today that more can and
should be done to move this process in the right direction.
While the base text before us today does note some of the
positive developments, I believe more could be added to
recognize some of these positive developments, which is
precisely what my amendment seeks to do.
So I urge support, and I appreciate the chairman and
ranking member's support for my amendment.
And I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Well, thank you, Mr. Holding.
I appreciate Mr. Grayson and Mr. Holding's contribution.
And the question now occurs on the Grayson and Holding
amendments, considered en bloc.
All those in favor, say aye.
All opposed, no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the
amendments en bloc are agreed to.
Are there any other amendments?
Hearing no further amendments, the question occurs on
adopting H.R. 4347 as amended.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the bill
as amended is agreed to.
Without objection, H.R. 4347 as amended is ordered
favorably reported as a single amendment in the nature of a
substitute. Staff is directed to make any technical and
conforming changes.
As all members were previously notified, we now intend to
consider en bloc the remaining seven bills, whose base texts
were circulated on Tuesday. All of the amendments to those
texts that were provided to your office, you got those
yesterday. And so, without objection, the following items will
be considered: H.R. 2283, the Human Trafficking Prioritization
Act; Smith Amendment No. 58 in the nature of a substitute to
that bill; and Smith Amendment No. 60 to that amendment; H.R.
4411, this is the Hezbollah International Financing Prevention
Act; the Royce Amendment No. 120 in the nature of a substitute
to the bill; the Poe-Sherman Amendment No. 92; and the
DeSantis-Deutch-Meng Amendment No. 5; then we go to H.R. 4640,
the Western Hemisphere Drug Policy Commission Act; the Engel
Amendment No. 60 in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 4640;
and the Castro Amendment No. 36; then H.R. 4653, the U.S.
Commission on International Religious Freedom Reauthorization
Act; the Smith Amendment No. 55 in the nature of a substitute
to the bill; and the Meng Amendment No. 47; next, we have House
Resolution 435, calling on the Government of Iran to assist in
the case of Robert Levinson; and Ros-Lehtinen Amendment No. 49
in the nature of a substitute; next is House Resolution 562
with respect to enhanced relations with the Republic of
Moldova; and Royce Amendment No. 123 in the nature of a
substitute; finally, House Resolution 588, concerning the
suspension of exit permit issuance by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for adopted Congolese children; we have the Smith
Amendment 57 in the nature of a substitute, and the Royce
Amendment No. 122 to that amendment.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. After opening remarks by myself and Ranking
Member Engel, I will be glad to recognize any member seeking
recognition to speak on the en bloc items.
So, first, let me thank Chairman Smith for authoring his
bill, the Human Trafficking Prioritization Act. The fight
against modern-day slavery has long been a priority for this
committee. The annual report and country rankings by the State
Department's trafficking office have turned trafficking into a
global policy priority.
But this annual work is a tug-of-war--a tug-of-war between
those charged with assessing trafficking conditions and State
officials concerned with the potential diplomatic fallout from
stating very hard truths.
This bill is intended to help level the playing field by
elevating the trafficking office to a bureau, without
additional cost or personnel.
Next, we have H.R. 4411, the Hezbollah International
Financing Prevention Act. It was good to work with Mr. Meadows,
Mr. Schneider, and Mr. Engel on this critical legislation.
The threat posed by Hezbollah's global operations, aided by
a vast financial network, has exploded. In 2011, we saw the tip
of the iceberg when a massive drug and money-laundering
operation for Hezbollah's benefit in weapons, logistics, and
training were uncovered.
To increase the risk in dealing with Hezbollah, the bill
would target those financial institutions that knowingly do
business with what has been called the ``A-Team of
terrorists.''
Then, H.R. 4640, the Western Hemisphere Drug Policy
Commission Act, sponsored by Mr. Engel. The ranking member has
been deeply involved in these issues, as has Subcommittee
Chairman Salmon.
The bill establishes an independent commission to conduct a
comprehensive review and make recommendations on U.S. efforts
to reduce the supply of illicit drugs. This includes an
evaluation of the link between the illegal narcotics trade in
this hemisphere and terrorist activities around the world.
H.R. 4653 will continue the good work of the United States
Commission on International Religious Freedom.
The Commission is an independent body of distinguished
experts who advocate for the first freedom of religious
practice.
This function has become even more critical as the State
Department has dropped the ball in prioritizing religious
freedom. So the Department has failed to make the required
annual designations of the countries of particular concern for
religious-freedom violations since 2011. And the Ambassador-at-
Large position for international religious freedom has been
vacant now for a total of more than 3 years.
So this bill carries forward the important work of this
streamlined body and includes some needed management
improvements.
House Resolution 435 addresses the case of U.S. citizen
Robert Levinson, who disappeared in Iran 7 years ago.
The Iranian regime has continually obstructed U.S.
Government efforts to investigate his disappearance, despite
promises of assistance. And this individual and his family
deserve our every effort to secure his freedom and safe return
home.
And I want to commend Mr. Deutch for his relentless efforts
in securing Mr. Levinson's release.
House Resolution 562 voices U.S. support for our relations
with Moldova and for that country's sovereignty. They have had
a long, difficult path.
Democratic reforms have not come easily, but the Moldovan
people have persevered, have absolutely persevered, in their
expressed desire to join more fully with the West and with
Europe. And, recently, the Russian Government has enforced
trade embargoes and threatened the cutoff of energy supplies as
consequences.
This resolution stands by Moldova, and we urge its support.
Finally, House Resolution 588. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo has suspended exit permits for Congolese children
adopted by foreign parents, affecting hundreds of families.
And, at this time, I would just like to briefly recognize
the families that are here today from across the United States
who have been impacted by the actions of the Congolese
Government. We are going to ask them to stand for a minute,
those who are here, the families, if you would.
And I want them to know we will continue to do everything
we can for your families. Thank you very much for attending
this hearing today.
And, as you can see, some of them are holding pictures of
their adopted children. These children are barred from leaving
the country to join with their parents here, even though the
courts have declared these parents as their legal guardians.
Nine hundred American cases are caught up in this adoption
limbo, and that breaks a lot of hearts here in the United
States, and it breaks a lot of hearts of children in Congo.
I witnessed firsthand the power of providing a child with a
loving home when my chief of staff, Amy Porter, who is here
with us, adopted internationally. And these children must be
allowed to make their way to homes that desperately want to
care for these children.
Congressional approval of this resolution, of course, will
send a strong message to Kinshasa that we need to unite these
families.
I now recognize the ranking member for his remarks on the
en bloc items.
Mr. Engel?
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this important markup. And, once again, I am grateful that we
could work together in bipartisan fashion on all of these
measures.
First of all, let me express my strong support for H.R.
4411, the Hezbollah International Financing Prevention Act.
Hezbollah has continued to terrorize the globe, reaching
into Latin America, Europe, Asia, and across the Middle East.
How does Hezbollah fund this violence and terrorism?
Kidnappings and ransom, conflict diamonds, narcotrafficking,
and other criminal enterprises. Claims that Hezbollah is simply
just a political organization or a social services agency are
simply naive. And this bill exposes the group for what it is: A
vicious terrorist organization with a global footprint.
This legislation goes after financial institutions that
knowingly support Hezbollah. It is modeled after the
Comprehensive Iranian Sanctions and Divestment Act of 2010. And
that measure worked. It was one of the prime causes of the
severe economic downturn that brought the Iranians to the
negotiating table.
H.R. 4411 also focuses on Hezbollah's efforts to spread
hateful propaganda through its media outlet, Al-Manar, which
is, in itself, a specially designated terrorist group.
Through sanctions, we hope to cut off Hezbollah's lifeline
and prevent future terrorist attacks.
I want to thank Representatives Meadows and Schneider for
their thoughtful leadership on this issue and their bipartisan
work.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for moving this forward,
especially at this critical time.
Next, Mr. Chairman, I would like thank you for bringing up
H.R. 4640, my Western Hemisphere Drug Policy Commission
legislation. Let me also thank Congressman Salmon, who is the
lead Republican cosponsor of this legislation, a great partner
of mine, and strongly committed to a strong U.S.-Latin American
partnership.
Despite at least $15.7 billion spent on counternarcotics
programs in Latin America and the Caribbean between 1980 and
2012, illicit drug use in our country remains high. In 2012,
there were around 24 million illicit drug users in the United
States. And while cocaine use at home is declining, heroin use
is on the rise. In fact, heroin overdose deaths in the United
States increased by an alarming 45 percent between 2006 and
2010.
This bill would create an independent commission to take
stock of what is working, what isn't, and help guide the future
of U.S. drug policy through recommendations submitted to
Congress, the Secretary of State, and the Director of the
Office of National Drug Control Policy. This commission will
save our Government money in the long run. Its recommendations
will help ensure that we are getting the biggest bang for our
buck as we tackle this problem in Latin America and the
Caribbean.
A similar bill passed the House of Representatives
unanimously in 2009 but stalled in the Senate. This year, I and
Mr. Salmon are determined to get this legislation onto the
President's desk.
I would also like to express my support for H. Res. 435,
which calls attention to the disappearance of Robert Levinson
in Iran more than 7 years ago. The United States has repeatedly
raised Mr. Levinson's case with the Iranian Government. Now is
the time for Iran to make a good-faith effort to bring Robert
Levinson home. Thanks to the leadership and tireless work by
Representative Deutch, Mr. Levinson's Congressman, this
resolution with lend a new sense of urgency to this effort.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to commend our committee
colleague, Representative Chris Smith of New Jersey, as well as
Representative Wolf for their leadership on international
religious-freedom issues and for their work on H.R. 4653, which
reauthorizes the U.S. Commission on International Religious
Freedom.
Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
states that everyone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience, and religion. This right includes the freedom to
manifest his religion or beliefs in teaching, practice,
worship, and observance. Nevertheless, every day religious
communities around the world are subject to escalating
violence, persecution, and discrimination. USCIRF is pushing
back against violations and helping to uphold our most
cherished values.
I would like to again thank Mr. Smith for introducing H.R.
2283, legislation that would elevate the Office to Monitor and
Combat Trafficking to the status of a bureau within the State
Department.
Human trafficking, as Mr. Chris Smith has always pointed
out, is a modern-day slavery and one of the most offensive
violations of a person's freedom and dignity. Around the world,
as many as 27 million people are victims of this heinous crime.
Elevating this trafficking office to a bureau will send a
message that combating modern-day slavery is a priority for the
United States. I urge my colleagues to support this important
legislation.
Mr. Chairman, let me also express my strong support for H.
Res. 562, a resolution introduced by Representative Pitts. This
measure reaffirms our support for the sovereignty,
independence, and territorial integrity of Moldova, expresses
strong support for strengthened U.S.-Moldova relations, and
affirms that Moldova has a sovereign right to determine its own
partnerships, free of external coercion and pressure. I am
delighted that tomorrow Moldova will sign an association
agreement with the EU.
The resolution also calls on Russia to remove its forces
from the Transnistria region of Moldova and urges all parties
to work for a peaceful resolution to the Transnistria issue.
I have met with Moldovan officials. They want to look
westward rather than eastward. They are frightened to death of
Russia's aggression, and it is very important that the United
States stand by them. This resolution does that, and I am very
proud of it.
And, finally, Mr. Chairman, we are taking up H. Res. 588, a
resolution introduced by Representative Peterson on adoptions
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have seen all
these brave parents stand up before.
The Government of the DRC has stopped issuing exit permits
for adopted children, affecting hundreds of children who were
set to be taken in by loving families. This is a terribly
painful situation that we need to help resolve.
This resolution recognizes the importance of ethical and
transparent adoptions, and it seeks to raise awareness about
the plight of the families currently stuck in limbo over these
suspended permits. It encourages dialogue between the
governments of the U.S. and DRC to find a path forward on this
issue. And I urge my colleagues to support it.
So, in closing, Mr. Chairman, I would like to once again
thank you for holding this markup and for working with our side
of the aisle in a bipartisan manner.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
Do any other members seek--Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. Chairman, thank you very much. And thank you for
bringing these very important pieces of legislation to the full
committee and, hopefully, to the floor very shortly.
H.R. 2283, the Human Trafficking Prioritization Act of
2013, is a bipartisan piece of legislation. We have 91
cosponsors, including some 13 who are members of this
committee. I want to thank Karen Bass for her co-sponsorship
and, again, all the other members of the committee and the
subcommittee.
The Human Trafficking Prioritization Act will keep the
fight against human trafficking from being downgraded or
trivialized in the shuffle of politics of other U.S. interests.
In the 14 years since my legislation, the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act of 2000, was signed into law,
legislation that created the State Department's Office to
Monitor and Combat Trafficking Persons, commonly known as the
TIP office, many countries have said that they have
strengthened their own trafficking laws--as a matter of fact,
more than 130 of them--because of U.S. leadership, guidance,
prioritization, and accountability.
The metamorphosis that has happened throughout the world
really can relate squarely to U.S. leadership, carried out so
effectively and faithfully by the personnel at the TIP office.
There are some 65 people who make up that office. Our
Ambassador-at-Large, Luis CdeBaca, is doing an outstanding job.
And in every Embassy in the world, when Members travel, there
is always one person, at least, who is tasked in the Embassy to
work on trafficking issues. We hope our Ambassadors and DCMs
will also make it a high priority.
We have found a strategy that works. Now is the time to
build on successes, however, for the sake of the 21 million
people--Free the Slaves puts that number at 27 million people--
who are captives of modern-day slavery. And we can do it
without increasing the cost of government.
H.R. 2283 will raise the status of the TIP office to that
of a bureau within the State Department bureaucracy without
creating new costs. These changes simply give TIP the latitude
it needs, the voice it deserves, and, above all, the line
authority within State that it requires. It gives the
Ambassador-at-Large who heads it equal stature with the
regional and the functional bureaus.
Mark Lagon, who was the Ambassador-at-Large to Monitor and
Combat Trafficking in Persons from 2007 to 2009, testified here
that the State Department does a tremendous job in producing a
report which tells it like it is, offering objective rankings.
Yet, at times, he pointed out, it pulls punches, typically due
to the urging of regional specialists rather than the TIP
office specialists dedicated to trafficking. This bill will
give the State Department's trafficking team the leverage
necessary to allow it to advocate most effectively on behalf of
the victims of trafficking.
And we saw a need for this just last week when China
undeservedly received an upgrade from Tier 3, an egregious
violator of human trafficking, to Tier 2 Watch List, despite
their atrocious record on trafficking.
Hence, I am offering another amendment that limits the
ability--it is in the en bloc--so that, the 4-year cycle of
being on the Watch List--is as long as it can be. There has to
be an automatic movement up or down after 4 years. After you
have been downgraded to Tier 3 after the 4 years, you get 1
more year, not a recess of 4 more years. And China would game
that system, believe me, for another 4 years, and they would
stay off being cited, and potentially sanctioned, by the
provisions of the law.
Next, I want to mention H.R. 4653, which reauthorizes the
U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom, or USCIRF.
In 1998, Congress had the foresight to make the protection
and promotion of religious freedom a priority in U.S. foreign
policy by creating an Ambassador-at-Large for Religious
Freedom, the Office of International Religious Freedom at the
Department of State, and, so very importantly, the U.S.
Commission on International Religious Freedom.
Importantly, this landmark piece of legislation, authored
by Chairman Frank Wolf, IRFA, created a system for naming and
taking action against Countries of Particular Concern, or CPCs.
History has shown that when the U.S. makes religious freedom a
priority and that priority is conveyed to Countries of
Particular Concern, we have seen conditions improve, with
minimal harm to security or economic cooperation, but, frankly,
human rights ought to trump that. And, in this case, it does
mean that prisoners are set free, and the record is replete
with those examples.
Two and a half years ago, there were some problems with the
reauthorization of USCIRF. It got bogged down in the Senate. I
don't think that will happen this year. It has to be
reauthorized by the end of this fiscal year or it becomes
defunct.
Dr. Robert George, who is the chairman of the Commission,
testified here just a few weeks ago before my subcommittee. And
if any Member travels anywhere, I strongly urge you to read
their reports. They are incisive, they are accurate, they have
action items, and those action items go to the country that is
committing deplorable acts against religious believers and
leaders, clerics, bishops, and the like, but it also admonishes
the administration and Congress to take effective action.
For example, the President has not designated CPC
countries, which is supposed to be done on an annual basis,
since 2011. We have asked the President, we have asked the
Secretary of State repeatedly, and USCIRF, Dr. George testified
to that effect. Name those countries, and, please, apply
sanctions where they are necessary.
And, finally, a brief word about the very important
legislation authored by Collin Peterson from Minnesota on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the parents, some of whom
are here. The government took the ill-advised action of cutting
off adoptions. Many of those were already well into the
process. Collin Peterson has picked up that baton, and he is
pushing very hard. This will help.
And, again, to the families that are here, Congress has
your back. We will do everything we can. I have been to DR
Congo a number of times, along with Greg Simpkins. They need to
listen. A home is awaiting kids who are orphaned. Thank you for
your generosity.
And I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Deutch?
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank you and Ranking Member Engel for
bringing forward these important bills today.
I want to especially thank you both, as well as my
colleague on the Middle East and North Africa Subcommittee,
Chairman Emeritus Ros-Lehtinen, for your continued support of
House Resolution 435, which calls on the Government of Iran to
fulfill its promises of assistance in the case of my missing
constituent, Robert Levinson.
Thanks to so many of our colleagues on this committee who
have spoken passionately in the past about securing the release
of the three American citizens detained in Iran.
Robert Levinson disappeared from Kish Island, Iran, on
March 9th, 2007, 2,664 days ago. That is 2,664 days that his
wife of 40 years, Christine, and their seven children have gone
without their husband, their father, and now their grandfather.
He has missed the birth of three grandchildren in the years
since his disappearance.
When Bob first disappeared, the U.S. was not sitting across
the table from Iran. Today, we meet almost weekly. And I know
that our team raises Bob and other American citizens' cases in
every meeting, and I am grateful for that. If Iran wants to
show the world that they can be trusted, whether they can be
taken at their word, then come through on the promise to assist
in reuniting Bob Levinson with his family.
Mr. Chairman, last week in our subcommittee markup, I spoke
at length about the Levinson family and about Bob's commitment
to his country over his 30-year career as an FBI agent. Today,
I simply want to remind everyone watching here and around the
world that the United States Congress has not and will not
forget about Bob Levinson.
I would also like to commend the chairman, Ranking Member
Engel, and Congressmen Meadows and Schneider for working to
advance our efforts to crack down on the Iranian-backed
terrorist organization, Hezbollah. Thanks for working with me
and my colleagues, Mr. DeSantis and Ms. Meng, to include the
language that would require reporting on steps other countries
are taking to disrupt Hezbollah's illicit networks operating
throughout the world.
This legislation will help expose Hezbollah for what it
really is: A global criminal and terror enterprise that uses
every available avenue to fundraise and finance terror
activities around the world. To say that Hezbollah is a
resistance organization or a political party with a separate
military wing is simply false.
In just the past few years, we have seen Hezbollah plot and
launch attacks in Europe, fully back--fully back and assist the
murderous Assad regime in Syria, and expand its criminal
activity in Latin America. We know that Hezbollah's
fingerprints can be found on a broad range of activities in all
of those countries and in Africa, a whole range of activities
from counterfeiting and credit card fraud to fundraising to
weapons trafficking. Hezbollah members and supporters operate
front companies, as well as legitimate businesses, used for
money laundering and other fraud schemes.
So as we continue to have a debate with some of our friends
and allies as to whether it is possible to distinguish
Hezbollah's political operations from its terrorist wing--and
we know that it is not--this amendment will help us get a
clearer picture not only of Hezbollah's reach but what other
countries are doing to disrupt Hezbollah's global operations.
In addition, this language will ensure that the
administration briefs Congress on these activities, ensuring
close consultation as we work together to thwart Hezbollah's
worldwide terrorism.
Thanks again to the chairman and the ranking member for
working to make these measures bipartisan. It is critical that
Congress shows that it is united on these vital security
measures, and I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Chabot?
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be brief.
I want to particularly associate myself with H.R. 4411, the
Hezbollah International Financing Prevention Act, introduced by
the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Meadows. The legislation
is certainly timely, in view of the developments in Lebanon and
the Middle East region in general and the nefarious role
Hezbollah is playing.
Hezbollah's sources of power have always been, in addition
to Iranian-supplied weapons, financial transactions and foreign
donations that keep the wheels of this terrorist organization
running. Sanctioning entities that do business with Hezbollah
is a significant step in our efforts to confront this issue.
So I want to commend the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Meadows, for introducing this legislation, and I urge my
colleagues to support it.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Royce. We go to Ms. Meng.
Ms. Meng. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Engel.
I appreciate the incorporation of the DeSantis-Deutch-Meng
amendment to the Hezbollah International Financing Prevention
Act.
This amendment strengthens sanctions against Hezbollah by
enabling the disruption of Hezbollah's global logistics
networks and its fundraising and money-laundering activities.
Furthermore, it requires the Obama administration to shed light
on those countries that either overtly or covertly enable any
sort of Hezbollah activities within their borders.
This provision is particularly important in the Hezbollah
context, because there are far too many countries that
outwardly condemn Hezbollah's military and terrorist activities
while privately fostering environments where Hezbollah can
operate politically and financially. Well, no more, not if you
want to do business with the United States.
I thank Mr. DeSantis and Mr. Deutch for their leadership
and partnership, the sponsors of the bill for crafting such
important legislation, and the committee staff for all their
hard work in putting it all together.
I would also like to thank the committee for accepting my
amendment to the United States Commission on International
Religious Freedom reauthorization legislation. USCIRF is
invaluable, and I am proud to be a cosponsor of this
reauthorization bill and to support its passage today.
My simple amendment revises the applicable
antidiscrimination laws relating to USCIRF to bar
discrimination at the Commission on the basis of religion. This
is only fitting for a commission that is devoted to religious
freedom. It is also appropriate given the sensitivities
regarding which violations of religious freedom around the
world the Commission chooses to focus on.
My hope is that this amendment will help ensure the
diversity, credibility, and strength of the Commission for a
long time to come.
I thank Congressmen Wolf and Smith for their leadership on
these important issues, as always, and Janice Kaguyutan and
Doug Anderson for their assistance with my amendment.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ms. Meng.
We go to Judge Poe.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you and the ranking member for bringing all
of this legislation up today. It is a good day in the Foreign
Affairs Committee, all of this important legislation.
I want to talk about four of the bills in the time that I
have, first the trafficking legislation that Mr. Smith has
sponsored; I commend him for his long endurance in making sure
that international trafficking is something that we recognize
is a problem and the work that he has done over the years.
And now Congress, 2 weeks ago, we passed the Justice for
Victims of Trafficking Act out of the House, bipartisan
legislation authored by Carolyn Maloney and myself, a unanimous
decision on a rollcall vote of all Members of Congress that
voted, going after the traffickers, the demand, and, of course,
rescuing children.
And that is a worldwide problem. That is a national
problem, as well. Unfortunately, my hometown of Houston, Texas,
is the hub for international minor sex trafficking that comes
into the United States. And this legislation, along with the
Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act, will let the world know
where the United States stands on the issue of trafficking:
That kids are not for sale--not here, not there, not anywhere.
Hezbollah, a terrorist organization. I commend Mr. Meadows
for bringing this legislation up.
My amendment to this legislation encourages the State
Department to offer the rewards program to get information
about Hezbollah's finances and where that money comes from. It
is the old-fashioned, kind of the code of the West, the
``wanted'' poster. You post up some outlaw's photograph--we
just say ``wanted'' now, not ``dead or alive,'' just
``wanted"--information about them, and other outlaws give
information to the good guys and they pay to get their buddies
arrested.
That has always worked. It has worked in the past with
legislation that is already on the books. It has worked in
Colombia. It has worked in other parts of the country, or other
parts of world, as well. So I thank Mr. Meadows, but, also, I
think this amendment will help put some teeth in it and go get
some folks brought to justice.
The other point I want to--the legislation is Moldova. I
met with Members of the Parliament from Moldova; they came over
here. They were nervous. They are worried. They think the
Russians are coming and they are next.
And we need to recognize the world the way it is, that
Putin sees himself as Czar Nicholas III. He wants the Russian
Empire again. He went into Georgia. Mr. Smith was in Georgia
right after the Russians were there. I was there about a week
after him. We saw those tanks on the border with Russia and
Georgia. Russia took one-third of the country, and the Russians
are still in Georgia. They waited a few years; they took
Crimea. Now they are in eastern Ukraine, and I don't see them
stopping.
So, the West, primarily the United States, needs to make
sure that the Russians know we are not Chamberlain, we are
going to act like Churchill. When it comes to aggression, and
let the Moldovans know that the United States sees them as a
partner and ally, and Czar Nicholas III needs to stay away from
Moldova.
And the last group I want to talk to are these wonderful
mothers that are here.
Thank you. God bless you for your tenacity--I can't even
say it right--tenacity and going and getting your children.
That is something that is just neat. It is great. It is God's
work.
I have 11 grandchildren, and my newest one, a 4-month-old,
is a special child. They are all special, but she is adopted.
And my youngest daughter and her husband adopted a child. And
when you get to pick the child, it is just--it is neat.
So thank you for your work in rescuing children in this
humanitarian effort, saving one child at a time. And thank you
for your perseverance with Congress, hoping we can get in this
case the Congo to do what is right. And so thank you for that.
And, Mr. Chairman, I will do something I rarely do; I will
yield back the rest of my time
Chairman Royce. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Judge.
Mr. Schneider?
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the chairman for the time and for the
tremendous bipartisanship you have shown in this committee in
general and, in particular, with respect to H.R. 4411, to
address one of most critical national security challenges we
face.
A special thank you to my good friend, Mark Meadows, who,
with me, initiated this bill, along with the chairman and
ranking member, for their tireless effort on this important
piece of legislation.
I would also like to thank the outstanding effort of the
majority and minority staff, along with Ansley Rhyne from Mr.
Meadows' staff and Tyler Stapleton from my staff, who have put
so much time into perfecting this bill.
The Hezbollah International Financing Prevention Act is a
leap forward in combating the threat of global terrorism
financing.
We have known for years that the international terrorist
organization Hezbollah has planned, funded, and executed
terrorist attacks in the Middle East, Europe, and the Western
Hemisphere. Hezbollah continues to use underground networks and
illicit materials to fundraise their global instability
efforts. They have used U.S. and European banks, along with
their subsidiaries, to hide and launder money out of South
America and Europe to help finance thousands of Hezbollah
operatives around the globe.
One must only look at some of Hezbollah's past acts to
understand the true threat they pose to U.S. national security.
In 1983, Hezbollah bombed the U.S. barracks in Beirut, killing
241 Marines. In 1992, Hezbollah bombed the Israeli Embassy in
Buenos Aires, killing 29. In 1994, Hezbollah bombed the AMIA
Jewish cultural center in Argentina, killing 85.
In 2006, Hezbollah operatives conducted cross-border raids
into Israel, kidnapping IDF soldiers, which led to a 34-day
military conflict between Israel and Lebanon. In 2011, reports
indicated that Hezbollah was behind the bombing in Istanbul
that wounded eight Turkish citizens. In 2012, authorities
apprehended a Hezbollah operative planning terrorist activity
in Cyprus against civilians and commercial airlines. In 2012,
Hezbollah bombed a tourism bus in Burgas, Bulgaria, killing six
Israeli tourists and their Bulgarian driver.
These are just a few of the activities of Hezbollah that
have targeted U.S. interests and our allies around the world.
We can and must do more to stem the global financing of these
activities. Today we have the opportunity, and I hope that my
colleagues will join in combating this pressing threat to U.S.
national security.
The Hezbollah International Financing Prevention Act
provides the administration with important tools to go after
financial institutions and satellite providers that provide
material support and propaganda tools to Hezbollah. This
important effort will result in fewer resources falling into
the hands of terrorists who have shown great resilience in
attacking Western targets in addition to their destabilizing
efforts in the Middle East.
I want to again thank the chairman and ranking member,
along with Mark Meadows, for working with us to introduce this
important legislation. With more than 300 co-sponsors in the
House, I hope that this committee will support its passage. I
also want to express my support for the other measures offered
today by members of this committee. It is a real pleasure to
work with my colleagues and to share a deep personal interest
in solving these complex problems.
And I also want to welcome the mothers and thank you for
what you are doing, standing up and continuing to fight so
hard.
Thank you to the chair. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Salmon?
Mr. Salmon. Thanks a lot, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to just make a few comments about H.R. 4640,
but before I do, it is hard not to have your heart touched when
you see such a wonderful group of mothers here. And I just want
to remind you of one of the best sayings I ever heard, and that
is, ``The hand that rocks the cradle rules the world.'' And so
you are making a difference. We see a lot of terrible things in
this world, but, you know, it is good to see great things and
it is good to see great people like you stepping forward. So
God bless you.
I would like to thank Ranking Member Engel for partnering
with me and allowing me to partner with him on H.R. 4640. And I
agree with you; this time it is going the distance. It is going
to go all the way to the President. And it is so needed. And I
thank the chairman for bringing up all the bills today but
especially this one.
You know, we have spent billions upon billions of dollars
fighting the war on drugs right in this hemisphere, and the
work continues. And this bill is going to make sure that our
precious taxpayer dollars are being spent in the most effective
way that we can possibly do it.
It establishes a commission that is going to evaluate
across all the Federal agencies what is working and what isn't.
And that is just common sense. It provides this Congress with a
report that will allow this committee and our partner
committees to implement a legislative strategy to attack this
vicious narcotrafficking criminal process and eliminate the
scourge of drugs from our streets.
But it is not just about drugs. The narcotrafficking
criminal organizations, they support terrorism in our region.
And they are actively participating in this current
humanitarian crisis that is happening right on our border with
the kids from Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador.
In fact, I visited the facility in Nogales just a couple of
weeks ago where 1,250 children are sitting in cages. I don't
know what else to call them; they are chain-link rooms with
razor wire on the top. And every one of those children is being
brought to this country by coyotes that are aided and abetted
by the narcotraffickers, the cartels. And so it is a terrible
scourge on our society.
And I had to ask myself, as I looked at those little
children, how many of them didn't make it? How many of them are
sold into sexual slavery? How many of them are murdered along
the way? How many of them die in the desert of dehydration? We
have to solve the problem, but we have to make sure that our
drug policies are working, because it is the drug scourge that
is funding these animals that are now preying upon these
children.
So fighting these criminal organizations whose staple is
the drug trade, even though they branch out into human
trafficking, is a U.S. national security priority. And this
commission is going to help us provide lessons learned in the
field to ensure we are spending our limited resources in the
most effective way and putting us on a path to winning this
war.
Finally, I would like to congratulate Congressman Engel,
the ranking member, for making sure that we are being fiscally
responsible, too, and that this bill, once we get the report,
it sunsets 60 days after. So it is not one of those things--
like Ronald Reagan said, ``The closest thing to eternal life is
a government program.'' That is not the case here.
So thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Let's see. Mr. Perry, were you next? You
were seeking recognition.
Mr. Perry. I will take it, Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much, on House Resolution 588.
Since September 2013, hundreds and hundreds of Congolese
children and their adoptive American families have been
affected by the suspension of exit permits in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Just yesterday, I got to hear firsthand the very
heartbreaking, heartwarming story of numerous families,
including one in the district I represent, that have legally
adopted and financially supported their two Congolese children
but have been unable to welcome them into their loving homes.
And I found it fascinating--maybe the world doesn't know--I
mean, the Congolese Government is happy to accept the money.
And these families have gone through every hoop, and they pay
every month, and they don't know the status of their children.
Imagine committing yourself to a child, having that child see
you, and wonder when the child is coming home. And the child, a
little baby, doesn't understand and doesn't know why they can't
come home with their loving parents, but they can't.
And the parents here in America, they pay the bill, and
they wonder what kind of care, what kind of treatment. And they
know, because they have lived it and they have heard, in many
cases they have lived it themselves, the horrific stories of
the children that never do make it while they wait, when they
were healthy when they started, because of the conditions that
they reside in far away from their loving parents, and never
get to come home.
As a father of two beautiful little girls, I can't begin to
imagine the uncertainty and the anguish these families go
through. And we owe it, we absolutely owe it, to these parents
and the children to request that the DRC Government resume
immediately the issuing of exit permits and to encourage and
demand--and demand the State Department work sincerely and
diligently.
That is the other thing, Mr. Chairman. I heard stories
about families that go to our Embassy in the Congo and wait
hours and hours and hours. These are Americans meeting other
Americans, and wait hours and hours for a 10-minute appointment
to hear nothing new. It is unacceptable. We demand that the
State Department work on these families' behalf and those
children's behalf to bring this to a successful resolution and
conclusion.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go to Mr. Weber.
Mr. Weber. I am good.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Cotton.
Mr. Cotton. Thank you.
I associate myself with the comments of Judge Poe earlier.
It is a good and proud day of this committee.
It has been said by cynics that justice is the interest of
the stronger, or, put differently, that the strong do what they
will and the weak suffer what they must.
We are blessed to live in a country where that is not the
case, where justice is based on the natural rights of every
person given to us by our creator. But too often in the world,
the strong do, in fact, do what they will, whether it is an
outlaw regime like Iran pursuing nuclear weapons and holding
American citizens like Robert Levinson in captivity or a
terrorist gang like Hezbollah that engages in drug trafficking,
money laundering, arts and antiquity looting, and human
trafficking to finance its activities around the globe,
criminal syndicates that prey on the most vulnerable people
among us to gain their own money through human trafficking, or
a government that exploits orphaned children at the expense of
loving families.
Fortunately, though, the strongest of the strong in the
world is the United States. We are also the most noble and the
most just. So I am proud to stand with my colleagues on this
committee, I am proud to be a part today of the Foreign Affairs
Committee to use American power and influence to deliver some
small measure of justice to the wicked and to their victims
alike.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is indeed an honor to serve on this committee. Your
leadership and that of Ranking Member Engel is to be applauded.
Before I speak on 4411, you know, the tears that I see from
many of the moms touch my heart. The prophet Isaiah, many, many
years ago, said that we need to defend the cause of the orphan.
So thank you for defending that cause.
I want to speak on 4411 and offer my thanks to the chairman
and the ranking member for their leadership, my friend Mr.
Schneider for his unrelenting work, for the committee staff,
for my staff, for those 313 co-sponsors that are on this bill,
truly for the outside groups that have helped perfect this
bill, for Mr. Deutch, Ms. Meng, Mr. DeSantis, Mr. Poe, who made
this bill better.
But in thanking all of them, it is really not about any of
us. It is about the target that Hezbollah has and about the
victims that they continue to perpetrate their terrorist
activities on each and every day.
When we look at this, it is about the fact that there are,
today, 40,000 to 60,000 rockets aimed at Israel by Hezbollah.
Today, there are thousands and thousands of Hezbollah fighters
in Syria. Today, there is trafficking of narcotics in Latin
America, in Africa, and throughout the world because of
Hezbollah.
This terrorist organization does not relent. But we have a
unique opportunity today, that because of global sanctions in
other areas, we can put our foot on the neck of Hezbollah and
finish them off by taking the financial resources they have and
stopping it.
I am pleased to be a sponsor of this bill.
But, more importantly than that, there are many others who
say, well, what about Hezbollah, you know, it may affect Israel
and it may affect Latin America, but it doesn't really affect
me. And that is where they are wrong, because Hezbollah's reach
is global. It is something that must be stopped.
And I want to conclude with this, Mr. Chairman, by reading
a quote from the U.S. attorney of the Western District of North
Carolina, my district that I represent, because we, too, have
dealt with Hezbollah. And the quote is,

``Mohamad Hammoud was a student and a member of
Hezbollah as a youth in his home country, and he came
to the United States on a Hezbollah-driven mission. His
loyalty accomplished his mission by creating a criminal
enterprise which accumulated millions of dollars in
profits, purchased businesses in the U.S., preached
radical Muslim fundamentalism, and truly led a
clandestine terrorist cell in Charlotte, North
Carolina, raised funds for the cause, and saw that the
funds were delivered to Hezbollah leadership in
Lebanon.
``His guilty verdicts rendered by the jury were
upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States. But
during his time of imprisonment, while he was awaiting
trial, he ordered the murder of the then-prosecuting-
attorney and the bombing of Charlotte's Federal
courthouse. He continues to this day to pose no less a
threat to our country and our citizens.''

If this is not enough for us to act today, if not for
Israel, if not for Latin America, if not for Africa, then for
the United States. And I urge the support and I thank the
support of all my colleagues on this particular bill.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Well, we thank you, Mr. Meadows, for your
authorship of the Hezbollah Financing Prevention Act and your
leadership on this.
We thank all of the members. I want to just mention also
the contributions of our ranking members, the ranking member of
this committee, Mr. Engel, as well as all of those who offered
up amendments and legislation that we have passed out today.
Hearing no further request for recognition, the question
occurs on adopting the en bloc items.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it, and the
measure and amendments under consideration en bloc are agreed
to.
Without objection, each of the seven measures as amended is
ordered favorably reported as a single amendment in the nature
of a substitute. Staff is directed to make any technical and
conforming changes.
And that concludes our business today. The committee is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:53 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]

