- ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS ABROAD: THE FY 2015 FOREIGN AFFAIRS BUDGET

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS ABROAD:
THE FY 2015 FOREIGN AFFAIRS BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 13, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-151

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

87-141PDF                      WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         ENI F.H. FALEOMAVAEGA, American
DANA ROHRABACHER, California             Samoa
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   BRAD SHERMAN, California
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
TED POE, Texas                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          KAREN BASS, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
TOM COTTON, Arkansas                 ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                JUAN VARGAS, California
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina       BRADLEY S. SCHNEIDER, Illinois
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III, Massachusetts
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            AMI BERA, California
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                GRACE MENG, New York
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
LUKE MESSER, Indiana

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESS

The Honorable John F. Kerry, Secretary of State, U.S. Department
of State.......................................................     4

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable John F. Kerry: Prepared statement..................     6

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    44
Hearing minutes..................................................    45
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    47
Written responses from the Honorable John F. Kerry to questions
submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign Affairs..............................................    48
The Honorable Brad Sherman, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California......................................    52
The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas...............................................    55
The Honorable Albio Sires, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Jersey......................................    60
The Honorable Matt Salmon, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Arizona.........................................    66
The Honorable George Holding, a Representative in Congress from
the State of North Carolina..................................    68
The Honorable Theodore E. Deutch, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida....................................    72
The Honorable Brian Higgins, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York........................................    74
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Rhode Island...............................    76
The Honorable Ami Bera, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California..........................................    89

ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS ABROAD:
THE FY 2015 FOREIGN AFFAIRS BUDGET

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 13, 2014

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:20 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing of the Committee on Foreign
Affairs will come to order.
We are again privileged to hear from Secretary of State
John Kerry. Last year, Secretary Kerry spoke before our
committee following a trip to Asia dealing with issues related
to the North Korean regional crisis.
Today, Russian regional aggression is at the forefront, and
I am pleased that the House took a position and spoke very
decisively this week condemning Russian actions in clear and
unmistakable terms. The U.S. has a strong interest in a
democratic and prosperous Ukraine. To that end, the House last
week passed important legislation to bolster the troubled
Ukrainian economy. The Senate should move on this legislation
today, and leave IMF debates until later.
While the committee is interested to hear about events in
Ukraine, the purpose of this hearing is to question the
Department's budget request for fiscal 2015. Needless to say,
resources are tight and must be aligned with clear goals and
objectives. This committee is responsible for oversight of how
Department resources are spent, and we expect the Department to
think strategically, not reactively. There is no margin for
waste. There is no margin for abuse, and I am pleased that the
Inspector General position was finally filled on a permanent
basis after a 5-year vacancy. Mr. Secretary, thank you for
hearing the request of this committee and acting.
Last year, Secretary Kerry testified that the U.S. ``is the
guardian of global security.'' Today, U.S. guardianship is
frayed. Committee members are very concerned that Iran
negotiations will leave the Iranian regime alarmingly close to
a nuclear weapon. Syria, according to the United Nations, is
the worst humanitarian crisis since Rwanda. Libya is failing
and forgotten. In Egypt, we haven't pushed an economic reform
agenda based on individual property rights that is desperately
needed there. For Asia, a senior Pentagon official asserted the
other week that because of budget constraints, America's high
profile pivot to Asia ``is being looked at again, because
candidly, it can't happen.'' Mr. Secretary, as always, the
committee stands ready to work with you on these and other
critical issues.
The Department must do a better job of holding foreign
assistance recipients accountable, ensuring that they are
meeting benchmarks for reform and development, especially in
countries like Afghanistan, where so much has been invested.
Our assistance is not an entitlement; it is a sign of our
willingness to help others help themselves.
Nor should foreign assistance dominate our relationships
with partners and with our allies. This committee's Electrify
Africa legislation is an example of using assistance to improve
the local investment environment while creating jobs here in
the United States, all at a cost savings to the American
taxpayer.
Our efforts abroad must be aided by robust broadcasting to
help advance our national interests. The current media climate
is crowded with state media, like RT from Russia and CCTV from
China, as well as non-state media like Hezbollah's television
station. These are our competitors on the ideological
battlefield, and as former Secretary Clinton told this
committee, right now, we are losing. Reforming the Broadcasting
Board of Governors is no longer an option, it is a requirement,
and I am pleased to be working on legislation with my
colleagues to do just that.
Mr. Secretary, our Nation faces many challenges, and the
difficulty of prioritizing is compounded by our fiscal crunch.
Through it all though, I look forward to working together to
ensure that America maintains the leadership role we both
support.
And I will now turn to Ranking Member Engel for any
comments that he might have this afternoon.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing to review the administration's Fiscal Year 2015
international affairs budget request.
Mr. Secretary, as ranking member, I want to welcome you. It
is a pleasure to welcome you back to the committee. I want to
begin by commending you for your tireless work on a wide range
of critical issues. Your efforts underscore the great
importance of continued U.S. engagement in the world and strong
American leadership.
At a time of crisis in the Middle East, Central Africa and
now Europe, the internal affairs budget request supports our
diplomatic and development efforts in these and other regions.
It provides critical funding to strengthen our allies, fight
the spread of infectious disease, combat terrorism, and support
many other essential activities.
The international affairs budget also stimulates job
creation and economic growth here at home. By helping countries
build their economies and develop free markets, we make it
easier for American companies to sell their products abroad.
The budget request also provides critical resources to help
ensure the security of our diplomats and development workers.
These brave men and women serve on the front lines every day,
and we must ensure there is adequate funding to keep them safe.
Finally, the international affairs budget includes
humanitarian assistance that reflects the compassion and
generosity of the American people. While we cannot solve all of
the world's problems on our own, we have a moral obligation to
help ensure that hungry children don't starve, that refugees
displaced by war or natural disaster have basic shelter and
that the poorest of the poor do not succumb to easily
preventable diseases.
All together, the international affairs budget accounts for
less than 1 percent of the Federal budget. And let me repeat
that: 1 percent of the Federal budget. In my view, that is a
very sound investment in our security, economy and humanitarian
goals.
Secretary Kerry, I know you agree with me that the United
States must maintain its leadership in global health. However,
I am frustrated to see that the budget request proposes
significant reductions to numerous global health programs. I
would like to work with you to ensure that we have the funding
necessary to maintain the tremendous gains that have been made
in the fight against HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis and to address
emerging threats, like pandemic influenza.
Mr. Secretary, on Ukraine, I believe we must continue to
stand up for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and make it clear to President Putin that there will be serious
consequences for his aggression. Chairman Royce and I are
drafting legislation on Ukraine, and we look forward to working
with you to ensure that the United States provides a robust
assistance package to the new Ukrainian Government and imposes
appropriate sanctions against human rights abusers and those
who are complicit in the violation of Ukraine's sovereignty.
I am also deeply concerned about the ongoing crisis in
Syria. Nearly 3 years after the start of the war, Assad remains
in power and offshoots of al-Qaeda are growing stronger.
Refugees continue to spill into neighboring countries, and we
are all horrified by their stories of violence, torture and
starvation. Secretary Kerry, I hope you will use this
opportunity to discuss the administration's strategy to end the
terrible conflict in Syria. Back in 2004, when I was able to
get passed the Syria Accountability Act, we knew then that
Assad was a bad player. We couldn't have imagined how bad he
really is now.
Iran remains among the biggest threats to our national
security, even if negotiations resume next week with the P5+1.
I hope these talks succeed, but I agree with you that our
engagement with Tehran cannot be based on trust. Iran continues
to be a bad actor on many fronts, supporting terrorism,
violating human rights, and sowing instability in the region.
We must keep that in mind as we negotiate on their nuclear
program.
I also want to recognize your efforts to facilitate a
framework for peace between Israel and the Palestinians. There
is still much work to be done, but you are helping to establish
the foundation of what we hope will be a lasting agreement, and
I hope there is sufficient political will to take meaningful
steps toward a two-state solution. I must say that the Arab
League's proclamation the other day that they will never
recognize Israel as a Jewish state is very disheartening. In
the meantime, I am glad that the budget request fully funds aid
to Israel and provides for Israel's urgent security needs.
And finally, here in our own hemisphere, I am deeply
concerned by the Venezuelan Government's crack down on peaceful
protesters and attack on press freedoms.
And in Haiti, I am pleased that U.S. reconstruction
assistance has accelerated, and I thank Chairman Royce for
expanding our committee's oversight in this regard.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to the
Secretary's testimony.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
This afternoon, we are joined by Mr. John Kerry, the 68th
Secretary of State. He has been there for just over a year now.
Mr. Secretary, welcome again.
And without objection, the Secretary's full prepared
statement is made part of the record, and members will have 5
calendar days to submit statements and questions and extraneous
materials for the record.
And if you could summarize your remarks, Mr. Secretary, we
will soon face a short vote series on the floor. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN F. KERRY, SECRETARY OF STATE,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Secretary Kerry. Well, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that.
Thank you very much for the privilege of being here with
you.
Ranking Member Engel and to all the members of the
committee, it is a privilege for me to be able to be here with
you today, and I hope to please you greatly at the outset by
giving you one of the shortest renditions ever.
I just want to start by saying thank you to all of you for
your leadership, which is critical. We have a tough budget,
nobody needs to be told that, but it has serious implications.
I just want to say to you that it is a privilege for me to
lead the 70,000-plus employees of USAID and the State
Department all around the world, and we are including in that
local employees, who are critical to our ability to be able to
function in the 285 posts around the world. These men and women
serve, not in uniform, but at great risk, and they serve our
interests, our values, and do an enormous job in an
increasingly complicated world.
What I would just say to all of you very quickly is, look,
we spend one penny of the U.S. taxpayer dollar on everything
that we do abroad in terms of our diplomacy in the State
Department and USAID. It is all our development, all of our
money, all the things we do for disease, antipoverty, 1 penny
on the dollar. I don't have to tell you, but I will just say
very quickly, I am amazed by the return on that investment. And
increasingly, as I have traveled around the world in the course
of the last year, I have seen the degree to which people rely
on the United States of America to be able to lead in instance
after instance. I say that without any arrogance, without any
chauvinism about, you know, the country. I say as a matter of
fact, whether it is in Africa, Asia, South Central Asia, the
Middle East, throughout the world, we play a critical role. And
this committee, needless to say, is critical in what it is
willing to authorize with respect to our ability to lead.
The final comment I would make to you is that what we do
really does make a difference, and increasingly in the State
Department, I have focused and am focusing the efforts of our
diplomacy on economics. We need to understand that in this
increasingly growing marketplace, where more and more countries
are chasing resources and opportunities are harder won, it is
critical for us to be able to open up opportunities. And I
could show you instance after instance where our Embassies or
our consulates have engaged directly with American companies,
helped them win contracts abroad in the multi-millions of
dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars, and that means jobs
here at home. It also means more security for the United States
ultimately because of the relationships we build.
I appreciate, Mr. Chairman, your adjusting the schedule a
little bit here. The President, as you know, has asked me to
leave in a few hours to go to London and meet with Foreign
Minister Lavrov regarding the Ukraine, and he has asked to see
me before I go, so I appreciate you moving the schedule up
slightly. I know you have some vote challenges here, so I will
end on that. We will submit the full testimony for the record,
and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Royce. Well, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Kerry follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Like you, we are focused right now on the
Ukraine, and best of luck on your mission there. We have taken
concerted action clearly condemning this act of Russian
aggression there. We have supported legislation to bolster the
economy there and to take certain steps, which I think will
bring some leverage to bear, but there is one other step we
could take that in my view would really give us a hammer over
Russia: 52 percent of the support for their military and their
budget and their government comes from their export of natural
gas and oil overseas, and most of that is their monopoly
position that they have in Eastern and Central Europe. And it
does seem that if the administration would move to allow the
export of natural gas into the Ukraine, that that would send a
powerful signal that we could indeed do something here that
would produce American jobs. After all, we are flaring a lot of
gas here. We are actually capping a lot of our wells. If we
exported that specifically to that market, it might take time,
but once we made that signal, investors would then put up the
terminals necessary for us to do it, and it would go into the
calculus in Moscow about whether or not they wanted to lose
that position. And it might bring them to the table. And I
wanted to raise this issue with you.
Secretary Kerry. Well, we are all for it, Mr. Chairman.
In fact, the Department of Energy has the jurisdiction over
this within the administration. They have issued six licenses
already for 8.5 billion cubic feet per day to be exported to
free trade and non-free-trade countries, including Europe. So
it is a possibility.
Now, the first major project to export gas is not going to
take hold until sometime in 2015, so--but since we are in
March, Ukraine's needs are, you know, such that they ought to
be able to--if there is any manipulation of gas with respect to
leverage by Russia, Ukraine will be able to weather it, and in
the long-run, we are prepared and I hope others will be
prepared to help shift the current energy dependency.
Chairman Royce. I think that is great. Those six have been
over a 3-year period, and it is only six. I think there are 24
pending. So anything that could be done to accelerate that and
actually open that up for Ukraine and Eastern Europe would be,
I think, very helpful.
Another issue I wanted to ask you about was Iran. We had a
situation where several hundred rockets, long-range ones that
would otherwise have threatened Israel were intercepted. They
were coming from an Iranian arms shipment, and they were headed
to Gaza. And to me, that is a much better indication of Iran's
lack of good faith than anything they are signing at the
negotiating table.
But in terms of response to this particular violation,
which is actually a violation of the U.N. requirement there on
Iran, what will be the response at the U.N. Sanctions Committee
and will the U.S. support additional terrorism sanctions as a
result of Iran being caught in the act here with this
violation?
Secretary Kerry. Well, Mr. Chairman, obviously, we need to
take some kind of action. And it has not yet been determined
precisely what, but let me just say, we worked very, very
closely with Israel in the discovery and then ultimately the
apprehension of this ship. And we didn't do it because we don't
want to create accountability. We want, obviously, to have the
strictest accountability, so it is very much on the table. I
can't tell you today what the decision will be, but I can tell
you that we obviously take it very seriously, which is why we
worked at it.
And I don't disagree with you. You know, it underscores the
reasons why we are so determined to put in place a no-nuclear-
weapon policy that is fail-safe in our ability to be able to
make those judgments, because obviously, there is a clash of
other interests that will not be reconciled by any nuclear
deal.
Chairman Royce. Lastly, Mr. Secretary, as you know, this
committee has been at the forefront of the scourge of human
trafficking. We have seen abuses involving the fraudulent
recruitment of people overseas. They are promised decent jobs
in the United States, but they find themselves trapped into
forced labor or into sexual slavery once they get here to the
United States.
I have introduced legislation that would require State
Department consular officials to glean more information and to
share more information in order to get at the schemes of the
syndicates that misrepresent these positions, and I hope that
we can work together on this. I know you have been focused on
human trafficking as well.
Secretary Kerry. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Thank you for your leadership on this. It is really
welcome. I have the privilege of chairing our all-government
effort. The President has made this a major priority. And I
chaired a meeting last year in which we reviewed every single
department's efforts with respect to human trafficking.
It is nothing less than modern day slavery. There are
millions of people who are the victims of this human
trafficking, and it is sometimes for sexual exploitation, but
it is also for labor exploitation, and the marketplace is
completely distorted and violated by virtue of this practice.
There are work-slaves and sex-slaves and other--you know,
family-help slaves, and others. It is a disgrace, and your
legislation and other efforts need to empower us. We need to
call greater attention to it. We need greater law enforcement
effort, greater awareness, education, and so I appreciate your
efforts on it and we will work with you very closely.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
We now go to Mr. Engel of New York.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I had the honor of meeting with the
Ukrainian prime minister this morning, and he reiterated to us
that obviously the United States is indispensable in terms of
Ukraine, Ukraine's freedom and the aspirations of Ukraine to
look westward rather than eastward.
An observation I have had for quite some time is that the
European Union, in its negotiations for affiliation with the
Eastern Partnership, laid down a lot of stringent hoops that a
country like Ukraine would have to jump through before they
could join, before they could get the aid, before they could
get whatever they needed. You contrast that with Putin saying,
here's $15 billion, no strings attached. Here is cheap energy,
we are going to give you that. It seems to me that the EU has
sort of failed in the past to really even the playing field.
And, of course, we are dealing with these countries that
are right on the cusp, not only Ukraine, but Moldova, Georgia,
Azerbaijan, Armenia, to some degree.
Does the EU finally get it? Do they finally understand that
making things harsher for these countries will only push them
into the arms of Russia? Are we now dealing with a more even
playing field because of what has happened?
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congressman, let me begin by saying
something that I think we need to think about as we approach
this, it has been one of the problems in the entire evolution
of this current situation in Ukraine, and that is looking
westward versus looking eastward. We don't believe it has to be
either/or. We do not believe it is a zero-sum game. And part of
the problem, frankly, that has led up to this has been this
kind of insistence that you have got to have all your eggs in
this basket. No country should be doing that today. The
marketplace just doesn't work that way, the world doesn't.
We believe Russia has interests and has an ability to be
able to be important to the development of Ukraine and so does
Europe, and there is no reason why they shouldn't look in both
directions. We do. We look east. We look west. We look north.
We look south. And I think it is very important to be careful
about those kinds of limits.
Now, that said, it is appropriate to require reforms and
transparency and accountability, and a progression by which
countries begin to adopt good governance practices and good
business practices at the same time, and that is really what
the standard has been with respect to accession, and we
certainly are supportive of that.
Mr. Engel. But do we not risk--if a government that is pro-
West, and I understand we want to make Putin not feel that he
is trapped, but I, frankly, would like Ukraine to look West
instead of looking East. Are we not worried that if we put too
many straitjackets on them of things they have to do, austerity
measures and things like that, that we wind up turning the
people against the very government that we think is reform-
minded and pro-West? Isn't that a problem----
Secretary Kerry. No question----
Mr. Engel [continuing]. Something we should be cognizant
of?
Secretary Kerry. There is no question, Congressman, that
there is a limit to sort of what you want to do all at one
time. And indeed, you can drive people away that way, no
question about it. I mean, look how many years Turkey has been
working to try to, you know, gain EU accession and so forth.
So I think that it seems to me that there is a balance. It
is up to the Europeans to determine that balance, not up to us
to try to dictate it or tell them what it ought to be, but it
seems to me that when I talk about ``Look East, look West,'' it
is clear Ukrainians want to embrace the freedom, the choice,
the sort of competitive atmosphere and the dynamics of social
life and structure that come with the accession to the West. On
the other hand, when I say, ``Look East, look West,'' I am
talking about sort of the economic bottom line, the economic
opportunities, trading, and so forth. And I think, in today's
world, there are a lot of people in Russia who also are looking
in different directions.
Mr. Engel. And, Mr. Secretary, I mentioned in my opening
remarks about the Arab League's rejection of recognizing Israel
as a Jewish state. That is very disheartening, because it would
seem to me----
Secretary Kerry. Well----
Mr. Engel [continuing]. That there are--that the way the
stars have lined up, these countries should understand that
Israel is not their enemy, Iran is their enemy. And Netanyahu
has said that that is a prerequisite of any kind of a peace
deal.
You have said it yourself, Mr. Secretary, that they have to
recognize Israel as a Jewish state. And let me say it is a
Jewish state, the national state for the Jewish people with
equal rights for all citizens. We are not implying that there
should be second class citizens, but if they are not willing at
this late date to recognize Israel as a Jewish state, which the
United Nations Security Council resolution in 1947, dividing
historic Palestine into what it called a Jewish state and an
Arab state, if 66 years later, they are still not willing to
recognize Israel as a Jewish state, then I don't know how we
can make progress in these negotiations.
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congressman, that is not the final
vote. And I have had plenty of discussions with all of the
members of the Arab League. The formulation that you just
articulated was not the formulation that was put to them for
that vote, and so I will maintain hope for the notion that when
you talk about a Jewish state or a nation state for the Jewish
people or homeland for the Jewish people, it is always
accompanied by what you said, which is with equal rights and
nondiscrimination with respect to any citizen, and I believe
that if that had been the vote, you might conceivably have a
different outcome.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go now to Ileana Ros-Lehtinen from Florida.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome back, Mr. Secretary.
It is disappointing that in your submitted written
statement for today's hearing, you failed to mention the
ongoing over 1-month-long crisis in Venezuela. The
administration has condemned Maduro's use of force against the
peaceful protesters in Venezuela, but voicing a concern is not
enough. One of the opposition leaders, Leopoldo Lopez, was
unjustly arrested and has been imprisoned, isolated in a
military jail now for 24 days as Maduro attempts to silence
dissent in Venezuela. Three more people died yesterday as a
result of Maduro's violent suppression, bringing the sad tally
to two dozen dead since the protests began.
The President issued an executive order that would impose
sanctions against Russian officials responsible for human
rights abuses, and I have written to the President asking that
he do the same for Venezuela. Maduro continues to get help from
the Castro regime, as you know. They have been sending Cuban
troops to crack down on the Venezuelan protesters. Will the
President hold these violators in Venezuela responsible and
sanction individual human rights abusers in Venezuela?
And continuing with the theme of accountability, Mr.
Secretary, I have doubts that accountability and oversight over
the Palestinian authority finances are actually taking place.
As Ranking Member Engel just stated, Abu Mazen repeatedly
reaffirms his refusal and unwillingness to recognize Israel as
a Jewish state. He continues to pay nearly $5 million a year
for the salaries of Palestinians who were imprisoned in Israeli
jails, many of whom have blood on their hands. In fact, just
yesterday, as you know, dozens of rockets were fired at Israel
from Gaza. So this serves as a grim reminder that Israel
continues to be under attack.
And in the West Bank, hundreds of millions of taxpayer
dollars continue to flow to the PA, wishing and hoping and
praying that they will do the right thing. What are you doing
to ensure that the PA recognizes and accepts Israel as a Jewish
state? Money is fungible, so one could say that U.S. taxpayer
dollars are being used to pay the salaries of these terrorists.
Would you say that that is true?
And the administration is still seeking a waiver authority
to fund agencies at the United Nations that admit a non-
existent Palestine state. Abu Mazen has repeatedly reaffirmed
that if the peace process fails to produce an agreement, the
Palestinians will make a full out push at the U.N. to get
statehood. You said that withholding our money would not deter
Abu Mazen, but I say that it very clearly could deter U.N.
agencies, so we cannot allow this waiver authority to undermine
the peace process.
And in addition, I would like to submit lastly for the
record, a letter to President Obama requesting that the
administration consider giving those at Camp Liberty in Iraq
the opportunity to receive political refugee status for those
who are eligible. So sanction, Abu Mazen and U.N.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congresswoman, that is a lot to
handle very quickly, but I will try and do it as fast as I can,
but let me just say to you on the issue of the oversight of the
Palestinian Authority and their position on Israel, we begin
with the premise that everything we are doing in this
negotiation begins with Israel's security, which has
paramount--it has to be addressed. And I think Prime Minister
Netanyahu would tell you that we have bent over backwards and
are working extremely closely with him in order to do that.
Now----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. If we could just segue, I am sorry, to
Venezuela, then, Mr.----
Secretary Kerry. Yeah, but I want to finish one thing on
that, because it is really important. On this, our position is
that Israel has to be recognized ultimately as a Jewish state,
but please remember, they are negotiating. Nobody is going to
give up. I mean, you know, by the same token, Prime Minister
Netanyahu doesn't stand up and say, Hey, here is how I am going
to give you Jerusalem or something. Everybody's negotiating,
and they aren't going to make those decisions until they know
what they are getting in other respects.
On the next issue of the U.N. waiver, please, I got to tell
you, this is a very one-sided event against us. Abu Mazen, if
he writes a letter to the U.N., to 63 agencies, is
automatically in them tomorrow, automatic. He is an observer
state. That vote was taken: 140-something to, I think, 9; 140-
something to 9.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yet we tried it in the budget to try to
get U.N.----
Secretary Kerry. I know. But----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. The money.
Secretary Kerry [continuing]. I want to----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. That was wrong of us.
Secretary Kerry. What I want to explain to you is, whether
or not the United States loses its vote and gets punished for
him going is irrelevant to him. He will go, because it is a
tool for him to be able to do things he hopes that will make
life miserable for Israel----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. But, Mr. Secretary----
Secretary Kerry [continuing]. But not for us. If we lose
our vote----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. We should not fund----
Chairman Royce. I am going to----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen [continuing]. UNESCO if they do that.
Secretary Kerry. I beg your pardon?
Chairman Royce. I am going to make a suggestion.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. We should not fund UNESCO when they do
this.
Chairman Royce. We are down----
Secretary Kerry. Well----
Chairman Royce [continuing]. To zero time left in the vote.
Secretary Kerry. But if I can just say to you----
Chairman Royce. Absolutely.
Secretary Kerry [continuing]. This is not funding UNESCO.
We are losing our vote. We can't defend Israel in UNESCO. We
can't defend any of our other interests. We are not there. We
are gone, because they went. And they will go again if they
think it is in their best interest, and who will pay the price?
The United States of America. We won't be able to vote. So I am
just saying to you this is a wrong-headed effort for
deterrence. It won't deter them. It will hurt us. We believe we
need a waiver.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, and I hope we get to Venezuela
in the next round. Thank you.
Secretary Kerry. No. But I will just tell you, on
Venezuela, we are absolutely in a--we need to and we are not
only speaking out, but taking steps. Vice President Biden was
just down in Chili for the swearing in of the new President. We
met with a number of neighbor states down there. We are engaged
now with trying to find a way to get the Maduro government to
engage with their citizens, to treat them respectfully, to end
this terror campaign against his own people, and to begin to
hopefully respect human rights and the appropriate way of
treating his people. And we are--we think it is time for the
OAS, for the neighbors, for partners and other international
organizations to all focus on Venezuela appropriately, hold
them accountable.
Chairman Royce. This committee will stand in recess
temporarily for the floor votes, and we will return immediately
after casting our vote on the last item in this series to
reconvene our proceeding.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Kerry. Thank you, sir.
[Recess.]
Chairman Royce. Without objection, I am going to go to Mr.
Smith of New Jersey for 3 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I will be very brief, because we don't have much time, but
first of all, Secretary Kerry, thank you for your work on
behalf of the Goldman Act and your personal intervention for
many years in the case of Colin Bower. I had him sit right
where you are sitting now, and he testified on behalf of his
children who were abducted to Egypt, and thank you for helping
that. The bill is now in the Senate. It was passed unanimously
in the House, 398 to 0, and hopefully, it will not get hung up
in any part of the process over in the Senate. Anything you can
do to help on the Senate side would be deeply appreciated.
We had a hearing on South Sudan, and Special Envoy Booth,
Ambassador Booth testified. Some of our witnesses said that
there is a need right now for a diplomatic surge, that this
could get much worse. It already is very bad. Salva Kiir and
all of the players there need to hear from us even more
robustly. If you could maybe comment on that.
And secondly, let me ask you, if I could, I have had four
hearings on brain health related issues, one on the
hydrocephalic condition as it affects mostly Africans. Some
300,000 children have a hydrocephalic condition, and a very
simple intervention developed by Dr. Benjamin Warf of Harvard
is very inexpensive and can be rolled out very quickly in
Africa. He has already, at Cure International in Uganda, saved
the lives of 5,000 children, and they are now building up
capacity as it relates to training neurosurgeons. There are
almost no neurosurgeons in Africa; in East Africa, there is 1
for every 10 million people, to give an example of the dearth
of neurosurgeons.
The other is the whole issue of Alzheimer's. We had three
hearings on the global crisis of Alzheimer's that mirrors the
HIV/AIDS pandemic in terms of raw numbers. One estimate from
one of our witnesses just recently was that we could be at 135
million Alzheimer's patients globally by the year 2050. Some
put it lower at 115, but whatever it is, it is huge. The G-8
summit was a step in the right direction. Please work with us,
if you would, on the issue of developing perhaps a global fund,
not unlike what we did with the issue of HIV/AIDS and the
pandemic of malaria and TBI.
I am almost out of time, so I will yield to our
distinguished Secretary of State.
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congressman Smith, first of all, I
really thank you for your continued passion on these kinds of
issues. And as you know, one of your witnesses was a
constituent of mine from my days in the Senate, who I worked
with very closely when his children were abducted, and it
continues to this day. We are still working on this issue.
We need accountability in countries on this issue. There
are many, many more people abducted than anybody knows, taken
away to a country of origin for a wife or husband, one or the
other, and the American spouse is left completely without
rights and without ability to access their children or child.
And it is a very, very painful thing, and I have seen the cost
of it, as you have. So I worked with you, obviously, on that
legislation. I congratulate you for pursuing it.
On the brain research, et cetera, and treatment, of course,
we would be delighted to work with you. Obviously, the age old
question is going to be resources. We are already crunching up
on some resources on the global fund and people who are dealing
with that issue, which we have been at for 10 years plus now
with an amazing story--I mean, 1 million lives of children
saved and so forth, it is quite extraordinary--but we are under
resource pressure. So if you can help us with that here,
particularly in the House and in the Senate, we will be your
ally and partner.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, we missed Mr. Sherman of California. We are
going to go to him for 5 minutes. And then, without objection,
so that we have time for the junior members to ask more
questions, we will go to 3 minutes per member. I will ask UC
for that, and afterwards we will go immediately to Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Secretary, like the last time you were
here, I have got so many questions, that I am just going to go
through the questions and ask you to respond for the record,
and then my last question will be one I will ask you to respond
to orally.
I have noticed that U.S. diplomats are far less
knowledgeable and far less concerned about commercial matters
than are the officials of other foreign ministries and other
diplomats that I have had a chance to deal with.
Secretary Kerry. About which matters?
Mr. Sherman. Commercial matters. And I am, therefore,
pleased that you said that our diplomats have secured contracts
for major American companies. In this room, I heard one of our
very top diplomats boast as to how he had introduced the South
Korean people to the Crossfire automobile and urged that they
buy it, unaware that that automobile, made by Chrysler, or with
the Chrysler name tag, was 98 percent German-made. And so I
would hope you would furnish for the record what procedures we
have so that our diplomats are pushing for U.S. jobs and U.S.
value added, not just U.S. companies.
In response to Eliot Engel, you put in kind of the
accepting Israel as a Jewish state with rights for all people
as kind of in the same category as negotiating about Jerusalem.
I will point out that Israel has already made a very painful
concession, and that is that there should be a sovereign
Palestinian state, which is the home for the Palestinian Arabs,
and I might add probably won't have equal rights for all
people. So I would hope that you would either persuade the
Palestinians to accept Israel as a Jewish state with rights for
all or, alternatively, suggest to our Israeli friends that they
withdraw the concession that they have already made that there
should be a Palestinian state that is a home for the
Palestinian people until such time as the Palestinians make
that same concession or co-relative concession.
As to Iran, the question I would ask you to answer for the
record is how--what defines a bad deal? Would it be a bad deal
if Iran had such stockpiles, such technology and such
centrifuges so that in a year of breakout, they could produce a
nuclear weapon?
My next issue is this committee voted to provide $1 million
and--that $1\1/2\ should be spent to communicate with the
people of south Pakistan in the Sindhi language. I don't think
there is a more important country for our national security
than Pakistan, and yet we face a lot of push back from your
Department saying, well, it is just easier to communicate with
Urdu. If you are trying to sell something, you need to sell it
in the language that your customer wants to hear.
I commend you, Senator Kerry, for your incredible record of
fighting for recognition of the Armenian genocide, and hope
that, as Secretary Kerry, you will do likewise. And, of course,
it was--the Azeri soldier that murdered a sleeping Armenian
soldier at a NATO exercise that has been promoted and praised.
And in light of that and other aggression, I hope that you
would review and perhaps withdraw the idea of any military
assistance to Azerbaijan. I would hope that you would also warn
the Azeris that it is simply outrageous for them to threaten
and shoot down civilian aircraft that try to fly into the
Nagorno-Karabakh Airport.
The phrase ``pivot to Asia'' sounds wonderful when people
think it means trade delegations to Tokyo. I hope you would
furnish for the record how we can be sure that this doesn't
mean that we take the eye off the Islamic extremists that have
killed many thousands of Americans and get captivated by
fighting for rocks which are misnamed as islands that have been
uninhabited throughout human history.
I hope that--but finally as to the Ukraine, I hope that you
would make it clear that the Senate should pass the House $1
billion aid bill now, because the plan to load up IMF reform,
which I know you very much support, and put that on the back of
the Ukraine bill threatens to delay that bill for 3 legislative
weeks, which I might add is 6 calendar weeks, and I don't think
that--I think it is critical that we provide $1 billion of aid,
both for financial reasons and to make a statement. And I
wonder whether you could respond to that last one orally, time
permitting.
Secretary Kerry. Absolutely, but I want to take--you have
pegged something that I don't want to leave any question about
whatsoever. And I appreciate if you misunderstood it. I don't
want to leave it hanging out there, and that is on the issue of
any equivalency between Jerusalem or the other. There is none.
And it wasn't meant in that way. It was purely that there are
bargaining cards everybody has. But you are absolutely correct.
The Jewish state was resolved in 1947 in Resolution 181,
where there are more than 40--30 mentions of a Jewish state. In
addition, Chairman Arafat, in 1988 and again in 2004, confirmed
that he agreed it would be a Jewish state. And there are any
other number of mentions, but those are the sort of most
important acknowledgements thereof. I think it is a mistake for
some people to be, you know, raising it again and again as the
critical decider of their attitude toward the possibility of a
state and peace, and we have obviously made that clear. That is
a conversation that will continue. But Jerusalem is an entirely
separate issue to be resolved entirely separately and has its
own set of obviously deep concerns, and our position has been
pretty clear on that.
So, with respect to Ukraine and the aid, I want both, and I
want them both now, but if I can't have one, we have got to
have aid. We have just got to get the aid immediately. We can't
be toying around here at a critical moment for Ukraine. And so,
you know, I know how things work up here. I don't want to get
into the politics in between, but I do, to the degree I get
into it, I want to say, we need both, we need them now.
Now, IMF, I know some people react, oh, my gosh, it is one
of those multilateral deals and, boy, do we hate that and so
forth. Folks, countries that have gotten aid from the IMF are
today donor countries in the world. They are contributors to
IMF. They are reformed. They are open market economies. They
are more accountable than they would have been. They are more
democratic than they would have been. This is our lever for
encouraging democracy and this is our lever for creating
transparency and accountability and pricing reforms and getting
rid of subsidies and creating an open market. That is how we
have done it.
And if you look dispassionately, non-ideologically, at the
record of countries that have gotten it, it is an amazing
return on investment for America. We don't spend money and lose
money. So I would urge people to do both, but, boy, do we need
aid for Ukraine, and we need it now.
Chairman Royce. We will go now to Mr. Meeks for 3 minutes,
followed by Mr. Rohrabacher of California for 3 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, let me first just say that I have been
delighted to meet and talk to a numbers of members of the chief
of mission, who don't get nearly the recognition that they
should for the work that they do around the world on our
behalf. They are just fantastic. Let me just see if I can ask
these questions real quick, since I only have 3 minutes. Some
are all over the place.
One is, you talked about we spend basically a penny on the
dollar. What help would it give, and as far as also influence
in the region when we talk about--when we are talking about
TTIP and making sure that we are getting involved with our
European unions on that deal, or TPP in Asia, and does it--
would those kinds of deals, does it help or hurt the State
Department how you are moving forward? Does it help with our
influence in those regions, or does it hurt us? So I would like
you for to just say, because we have those two bills that may
be before us some time soon, but how does it affect with
reference to the State Department? That is number one.
But then going to more specifics with the budget, I notice
that, for example, in Colombia, that our assistance is being
cut by almost $80 million. And as you know, that President
Santos is close to coming to a resolution with the
Revolutionary Armed Forces, and so if their peace agreement is
signed, it would be important to provide the Colombian
Government with support for demobilization and reintegration
programs. And that is particularly important to me, because a
lot of that has to take place, especially in African-Colombian
areas where many of these individuals will be going back into.
And so if we were cutting those funds, we would be devastating
the individuals still in that country that need the most help.
So, you know, that $80 million is substantial.
And lastly, of course, we had to down scale. There was a
report that found that USAID had to down scale by 80 percent
homes being built in Haiti after the devastation that took
place there, the devastating earthquake. And of those 15,000
homes that were originally planned for construction, it was
reported that only 2,600 or so were expected to be built.
Fortunately, I am told that reconstruction assistance has
started to speed up with $1.4 billion of the now $2.4 billion
disbursed. So my question is, my last question, how will the
State Department further expedite assistance to Haiti?
Secretary Kerry. Well, let me quickly touch on all three.
We absolutely want you to not just talk about, but embrace TTIP
and the TPP. These are essential ingredients of American
projection of power and our economic well-being in the future.
And, you know, you don't have to make a final judgment on the
thing at this point. Look at the deal when it comes. And it has
got to be one that passes muster, we understand that, but the
fact is that if we can reach agreed-upon standards for trading
with 40 percent of the world's market with respect to Asia, the
fastest growing market in the world, and 40 percent of the rest
of the world's market in Europe, which we have a commonality
with in terms of our standards, et cetera, already, we are
raising the standards globally of trade, increasing the
opportunity for jobs and job opportunities for Americans and
revitalizing our own economic prospects, not to mention
Europe's. So we believe in this very deeply, and we hope people
will see it as not just trade, but as security strategy,
economic strategy, job strategy and so forth.
On the issue of the cut to Colombia, it is very simple.
Colombia has been successful. I can remember when I voted in
the Senate for the first Plan Colombia. That was very
controversial, and I voted for it. I thought it was the right
thing to do, and now, I think that has been borne out. So we
have been very successful in Colombia. We have money. There is
increased capacity and security and development capacity in
Colombia. They are understanding that. There comes a time when
success means we don't have to continue to necessarily fund
something. And we are very supportive of President Santos'
peace efforts. Obviously, we want that to be successful.
Finally, on Haiti, Haiti reflects money in the pipeline,
and so we are being up front with you. We believe we have some
money in ESF and the inkling that--you know, once that money is
reduced, then we will come back and say, we need some money for
Haiti. So we are not reducing the effort. There is no reduction
in commitment. It is simply that there is some money in the
pipeline and that should satisfy our needs for this year.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Rohrabacher of California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your hard work. We see
you going all over the world working hard for us, and even if
we have some areas of disagreement, we respect and are grateful
to you for, you know, working so hard for your country. Thank
you.
Secretary Kerry. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. A couple of issues. First is Camp Ashraf.
Secretary Kerry. Yeah.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And you have got our friends here in their
yellow jackets. It is very clear that their group in Iraq have
been attacked and murdered in great numbers and on several
occasions, and that the current Government of Iraq is either in
collusion with these murderers or at least they are turning
their back and letting this happen.
I have a piece of legislation, H.R. 3707, which would grant
asylum to these people in Camp Ashraf who are obviously in
danger. Is the administration supporting this concept in this
legislation?
Secretary Kerry. Congressman, let me just say, first of
all, there is one solution to the problem of what is now Camp
Hurriya, formerly Ashraf, and the answer is, and I have been
concerned about it since I was a Senator, we need to relocate
those folks.
Mr. Rohrabacher. My legislation says relocate them here.
Why not?
Secretary Kerry. We are looking----
Mr. Rohrabacher. They are in danger.
Secretary Kerry. That is one of the things we are looking
at. We have managed--I have appointed a special envoy/advisor
with respect to this. He is a very competent counsel from here
in Washington. He has been working on it full time.
Mr. Rohrabacher. We need to get on this, Mr. Secretary----
Secretary Kerry. That is exactly what we are doing. We
have----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Before more of them die.
Secretary Kerry. We have 210 who are now being transferred
to Albania. We have about another 100 going to Germany.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay.
Secretary Kerry. And we are now looking at the process here
internally. We are working with UNAMI, with UNHCR, the
Government of Iraq, other relevant authorities, but right now,
the White House, Department of Homeland Security and other
relevant agencies are looking at how many we might be able to
take care of ourselves.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would hope that, within 30 days, if all
these things that you have talked about have not come to
fruition, that we decide to act and bring them here so at least
they will be safe. Otherwise, the blood of these murdered
innocent people are on our hands.
Another issue, Dr. Afridi, the man who helped us bring to
justice Osama Bin Laden, who slaughtered 3,000 American
citizens, Pakistan has arrested Dr. Afridi. And even now, after
all of this time and all these complaints and all of this
negotiation, he is still in a dungeon. This does not speak well
for the people who would side with the United States if we let
Dr. Afridi, the ultimate hero in the fight against radical
Islamic terrorism.
My question to you is, number one, how can we possibly give
the amount of aid you are proposing, actually a $1.3 billion in
aid, both military and civilian aid, to Pakistan, how can we
possibly do that when they are holding Dr. Afridi, which is a
hostile act to the United States, and basically is an insult to
those people who died on 9/11?
Secretary Kerry. Congressman, this is a very relevant issue
that I have raised personally with the leadership of Pakistan.
I believe, at some point, we are going to break through and
justice will be done, which means he will be appropriately
released and free to leave.
But you say, how can we give the aid? We have got a lot of
interests with Pakistan. It is a nuclear nation. We are trying
to work with them with respect to nuclear restraint and also
with India and other issues. We are conducting counterterrorism
efforts in that country that are vital to us with respect to
al-Qaeda. We are engaged in major efforts. They have been very
helpful with us, actually, in trying to work to bring the
Taliban to the table if that were indeed possible. There are
lots of efforts. Our basic supply line to our troops in
Afghanistan starts in Karachi and goes through Pakistan. So
these are the things that sometimes you have to weigh and
balance.
I believe the development of the country for many different
reasons as a peaceful, stable democracy is very, very critical.
They just had their first peaceful transfer of power from one
President to another at the ballot box, the first time since
1948. Other times, there have been coups and killings and
imprisonments. This was a peaceful democratic election. And so
I think that it is important for us to think about the long-
term, not just one issue.
But we raise and are pushing Dr. Afridi's cause. He should
be free.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. Ted Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here today. This past
Sunday marked the seventh anniversary of the disappearance of
my constituent, Robert Levinson, from Kish Island in Iran.
Monday marked Bob's 66th birthday, another birthday spent
without his family.
I know how committed you are, Mr. Secretary, to returning
Bob to his family, and I thank you for your statement of
support this past weekend. And I know that you and Under
Secretary Sherman continue to raise this case when you meet
with the Iranians. I would just ask that you please keep Bob at
the highest priority level in all of your meetings and
discussions with the Iranian leadership. We must use every
single opportunity to press for information and cooperation
that will lead to his safe return.
Mr. Secretary, as you know, also in recent days, 60 rockets
were fired from Gaza into southern Israel, some striking near
schools and libraries. Islamic Jihad, a militant group funded
by Iran, immediately claimed responsibility. The attacks come
just a week after Israeli officials intercepted an Iranian
shipment of 40 short-range rockets, 181 heavy mortars, 400,000
bullets and dozens of M-203 surface-to-air missiles bound for
Islamic Jihad in Gaza. According to Israel's head of military
intelligence, Hezbollah, an Iranian proxy, now has as many as
100,000 rockets pointed at Israel and is actively engaged on
the ground in Syria in support of the Assad regime. Iran has
spent billions of dollars on arms and members of its elite Quds
force in Syria. And now, despite the parameters set forth in
the interim nuclear agreement, statements reported out of Iran
this week indicate that Iran may now be unwilling to discuss
outstanding questions on the possible military dimensions of
their nuclear program. According to The Wall Street Journal,
Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister made clear that there is no rush
to discuss these issues, possibly in an attempt to force the
P5+1 to extend the interim agreement by showing adherence to
other parts of the Joint Plan of Action.
Please assure us that the United States and our allies will
not allow negotiations to extend beyond 6 months if Iran
refused to address the possible military dimensions of its
nuclear program.
And finally, Mr. Secretary, if you could just respond in
writing to this last point. I am increasingly concerned that
there is a presumptive bias against young Israelis seeking to
travel to the United States. Reports indicate that because of
widespread visa denials, many student-aged travelers simply no
longer apply to come to the United States. In fact, on Embassy
Tel Aviv's Web site, there are videos warning young travelers
about the risks of violating the terms of their visas. And
while I understand that there are cases where the terms of
tourist visas are violated, this does not mean that our policy
should be to profile young Israelis and to arbitrarily or, as
many have suggested, uniformly deny student-age Israelis,
citizens of one of our closest allies, the opportunity to visit
the United States.
I would ask if the policy of presumptive denials exists
with any other country, and I would appreciate you getting back
to us in writing with the refusal rates of tourist visa
applications by age from 16 to 30 over the past 5 years. And I
appreciate you being here.
Secretary Kerry. Happy to do so. Look, Israel is a vital
partner of ours, obviously. In the last year, over 100,000
visas of all ages were issued; 20,000 were issued to Israelis
ages 21 to 30 in each of the last fiscal years, issuance rates
about 83 percent, which is not different from other folks or
other places. So we will be happy to give you greater input on
that if you want it, but I can guarantee you that these
applications are treated fairly and similarly in all places.
With respect to the Gaza and Hezbollah, it is a huge
concern. I don't know if it is 100,000 or 80,000. A few years
ago everybody was throwing around the number 40,000; it grew to
60,000. Definitely an increase, huge increase. Huge threat.
Major problem. Based in southern Lebanon and in the Bekaa
Valley. And Assad has been transferring many of these weapons
to them, and they have come through Iran.
So it is a double-prong problem. It is one of the reasons
why, when I came before you months ago, I was arguing so
vociferously that we needed to pay attention to this overall
Syria picture, because it is bigger than just the question of
Syria. And this is an example of it.
And finally, on the Iran negotiations, we are working at
defining those components of the military aspects of the
program which we can legitimately fold under, and we are not
going to ignore them. Warheads, for instance, are an obvious
one. Certain kinds of R&D, other examples. And we believe we
interpret appropriately that the U.N. resolutions, as well as
the Joint Agreement--JPOA, as we call it--both allow for and
call for addressing of certain of the military aspects of this.
Now, some people assert that goes to every single class of
missile or something. I am not sure it would legitimately do
that, to be honest with you. But certainly warhead. And there
are military components of this that we are going to have to
address in it.
Chairman Royce. I would like to ask the members to be
cognizant of their time limit and leave the Secretary time to
answer their questions within that allotted 3 minutes, because
the Secretary is going to be forced to leave, as you know. He
is going to go overseas due to the Ukraine crisis, and we would
like to be able to recognize as many members here as possible
in our limited time.
With that, we will go to Mr. Chabot of Ohio.
Secretary Kerry. Mr. Chairman, would it help you--I want to
hear from as many members as possible, and if you like, I can
take the questions seriatim and so that we can answer them for
everybody.
Chairman Royce. May I suggest, though, if I just stick to
the clock, that might be the best way to go.
Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the Secretary for his continuing focus on
the Asia-Pacific region. I happen to be the chair of
Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, and as the chairman
knows, the chairman led a codel recently to that part of the
world with Mr. Sherman and a number of our colleagues here. I
think we learned a great deal and it showed our continued
engagement with that part of the world.
We have intended to hold a number of hearings about that
trip and some other issues. I am not holding you responsible
for this, Mr. Secretary, but we are having some trouble. I am
disappointed, to some degree, in the lack of cooperation we
have had with some of your folks. Despite repeated requests,
our staff has been unable to get a briefing on the Fiscal Year
2015 East Asia and Pacific budget, and we have also been unable
to schedule a hearing on North Korea because of lack of
cooperation--and I am hearing similar concerns from others. I
know you can't be involved in the day-to-day activities but if
you could check with your folks and if we could get some
assurance that they will cooperate on getting these things set
up, I would greatly appreciate that.
Secondly, a number of administration officials, including
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, have
recently made comments that the rebalance to Asia needs to be
reexamined. These statements come at a time when our regional
friends and allies articulate lingering concerns about the
sustainability of increased U.S. engagement in the region,
especially with the administration's recent push to cut back on
our military.
The East Asia and Pacific Fiscal Year 2015 budget request
states that one of the top strategic priorities is solidifying
key bilateral relationships, and I would like to know which
countries this applies to? How you are going to solidify that?
Finally--and Mr. Royce already mentioned this, but I think
it deserves another mention at least--it seems to me that from
a U.S. perspective that it would make sense for us to
ultimately be a net exporter of liquefied natural gas. We could
produce more energy to be exported to our strategic partners in
Asia and Europe and in the process, we could create more jobs
here at home and more energy independence and strengthen our
bilateral ties so that some of these important countries, and
our European allies, might not be so dependent upon the bully
Putin. I would urge the administration to look into that. You
already mentioned that. And I know you have got 27 seconds to
address all three questions.
Secretary Kerry. We will get the hearings done, or
briefing, whatever the issue is. We will take care of it.
With respect to a rebalance, the 2015 request is $1.4
billion, which is an 8-percent increase over last year. So I
don't know who is suggesting we are not going to do that. I
have made five trips already to the region. I was just there a
couple of weeks ago in Korea and China. The President is going
out there before very long. We are very focused, we are totally
committed, and we are going to continue the rebalance.
Now, that is not going to come at the expense of Europe or
the expense of other places. It is in addition to. We have to
do more. We are living in a world where we have to do more. And
it is a conflict, obviously, with where we are with our budget,
and you all are going to have to wrestle with that as we go
forward.
We all are going to have to do that. We have to talk about
that, because, you know, it is critical that we project and
remain active, and people want us to, particularly in Asia.
South China Sea issues, the challenge of a rising China and the
disputes in that area were critical to the free navigation and
the peacefulness of that area. So I just want you to know that
we remain completely committed to that.
On the LNG, all for it. The one thing people got to look
at, I don't have the answer to this, there is a point where our
exports could get to a level where it has an effect on your
folks at home in terms of price at home, and you have got to
look at what that differential is. I don't know where it is,
but at some point that could have an impact.
Chairman Royce. We will go to Mr. Higgins of New York.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, the President's budget includes a $350
million increase for worldwide security protection account,
which is obviously a good thing. I mean, protecting Americans,
diplomats and humanitarian workers across the globe should be a
major priority for our country.
However, for those who perished, more must be done to
secure justice. One such man, John Granville from Buffalo, New
York, was a diplomat with the United States Agency for
International Development. He was promoting and working toward
free elections in South Sudan at the time of his death 6 years
ago.
He was in the Sudanese capital of Khartoum. Four Islamic
extremists murdered John and his driver. They were captured,
and they were convicted; however, they escaped from prison. Two
remain at large, and the State Department has issued a $5
million reward for information leading to their capture.
Meanwhile in February, the Sudanese Government pardoned the man
who helped them escape.
The United States deserves better. John Granville and his
family deserve better. I have urged the President of Sudan to
repeal the pardon, and we will continue to oppose efforts to
delist Sudan from the state sponsors of terrorism.
Could you provide an update on the efforts to capture his
killers either verbally or through writing?
Secretary Kerry. Yes. The two individuals who were alleged
to have carried out this attack or carried out the attack have
been designated by us as specially designated global terrorists
designation. They have been fugitives since the June 2010
escape from prison in Khartoum, and despite Interpol notices
and efforts, they have not yet been captured.
We want to encourage their recapture, and with the
designation we are trying to emphasize to everybody everywhere
that we are going to pursue people, and that justice will be
done. And so we are committed that they be returned to prison
and serve out sentences, and that is what we are trying to do.
Mr. Higgins. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Okay. We go to Mr. Joe Wilson, South
Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for taking the time to speak with
us today about the President's budget for the Department of
State. Clearly, this is a chaotic and dangerous time for the
Department as America faces many challenges around the world
with the Benghazi murder still unsolved.
While we have you here, I share in everyone's concern about
the ongoing situation between Ukraine and Russia. Peace is
threatened by President Putin's regional aggression. I believe
it is of paramount importance that the United States exhibit
strength and determination toward the Russian Federation.
However, the disastrous decision by the President and his
budget to halt progress on the Mixed Oxide Fuel Fabrication
Facility, the MOX Facility, at the Savannah River Site will
allow the Russians the option to stop disposition of 34 metric
tons of excess weapons-grade plutonium.
Over the weekend USA Today ran a story in which Secretary
Ernest Moniz of the Department of Energy commented, ``At the
right time,'' the U.S. will have to reengage in plutonium
disposition discussions with the Russians. He went on to say,
``Now may not be the right time.''
My question is, when will we be able to have these
negotiations? If we back down on our end of the agreement, what
assurances do we have that Russia's excess material won't end
up in the wrong hands?
Secretary Kerry. Look, that is an excellent question. I
honestly need to get deeper briefed on exactly what that
decision was, how it was made and why. So let me find out, and
we will get back to you.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you so much, because this is
crucial. And, indeed, I was very grateful the Aiken Standard,
local paper at home, Derrek Asberry on Saturday, wrote from the
World Nuclear News that Russia is moving forward in
constructing a fast reactor that will dispose of the high-grade
weapons-grade plutonium; but at the same time, we are
apparently ceasing our activities with the closure of MOX. And
so this is just an issue that should be addressed, and I
appreciate you looking into that.
Additionally, in the past week we have had where the
Iranian Foreign Minister said that it was an illusion that
there would be the end to enrichment activities by Iran.
Additionally, we had Israel seize a ship which had long-range
rockets. It was an Iranian shipment to Hamas terrorists in
Gaza.
In light of that--and I agree with Ranking Member Eliot
Engel, you can't trust Tehran, and we know the young people of
Iran want to live in a nontyrannical society--why shouldn't we
be reinstituting and pushing for harder sanctions in light of
what has just happened in the last week?
Secretary Kerry. Well, as you know, we do sanction Iran for
other activities other than nuclear, and there is nothing to
suggest that we shouldn't take a step with respect to that. We
sanctioned them for state sponsor of terror, and they are
already sanctioned under that, and this fits under that banner,
obviously.
So we haven't said no. You know, we are still trying to
get--we have to get to the bottom of what is in it, how much,
all this kind of stuff, and where it came from and tracking,
because you have some fairly rigid standards that have to be
applied legally when you make that determination.
But that said, let me come back to a comment you made about
the ship and the overall issue of Iran and not trusting them. I
have said before, and I really want to emphasize to everybody
here, nothing that we are doing with respect to this
negotiation is based on trust. I have said, in fact I have
quoted, I said, ``Ronald Reagan said trust, but verify.'' Our
motto in this instance is verify, but verify.
We are asking for the deepest, most extensive verification,
inspection, accountability measures that have ever been put in
place with respect to ascertaining what they are up to. So I
can assure you, whether it is a ship or elsewhere, we are going
to be pressing very, very hard for the insights necessary to
grant to----
Mr. Wilson. We will have a study about the missiles and
have a determination about these missiles?
Secretary Kerry. Beg your pardon?
Mr. Wilson. We will have a study about these missiles and
have a determination----
Secretary Kerry. Well, we will make a determination. I
can't tell you what--you know, I haven't reviewed all the
options yet. I have not had a proposal put on my desk, and I
haven't put one on the President's, but absolutely this kind of
behavior is not appropriate and unacceptable.
Chairman Royce. William Keating of Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank the Secretary, and I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary Nuland for your leadership in Europe
and Eurasia, including Ukraine.
Now, I recently introduced a resolution with Congressman
Poe to encourage Georgia's inclusion into NATO's Membership
Action Plan. And I appreciate your efforts, Mr. Secretary, and
the administration's efforts to support this goal.
That being said, given what is happening in Ukraine, what
has already happened in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, do you
think that this is the right moment to actively push some of
our European partners toward this goal?
Second question, if I could. I am also concerned about the
often violent situation in Belfast over the past year and the
failure of the five parties to agree to a December 2013 draft
of the Northern Ireland peace accord. What are your thoughts on
the draft of the Northern Ireland peace accord and the
rationale leading the State Department's decision to eliminate
funding for both the Mitchell Scholarship Program, which I know
you have been a strong supporter of, and the International Fund
for Ireland?
Secretary Kerry. Well, we are going to look at--we are
looking at the fund for Ireland piece because I think that, you
know, we have our friends from Ireland coming in this Friday
for meetings tomorrow. I won't be here to take part in them,
but we are going to be reviewing where we are with respect to
the current impasse.
And things have come, unfortunately, to, you know, a little
bit of a standoff, stalemate, if you will, on further
implementation of the peace process. So we need to take stock,
renew our commitments, get back on track, and it may be that
the fund is going to be an essential ingredient for doing that.
We have got to make that determination.
On your question about Europe, pushing them toward the
goal, I missed that. I apologize, I didn't hear what goal you
were talking about.
Mr. Keating. About Georgia's advancement into the
Membership Action Plan with NATO.
Secretary Kerry. Oh. We are continuing--those are all under
review and under a constant process of helping those countries
to be able to meet those standards that are available. Now,
when you said pushing them, they have got to do their own set
of decision making in order to meet the standards, and they
know what they are. People are working with them.
But there are government reforms, there are
accountabilities, certain standards, different things have to
happen for that process, and that has been salutary for those
who have made the leap and joined, and it is very much open to
them at this point in time. There are a whole bunch of people,
Bosnia, Herzegovina, Kosovo, so forth, the Balkans, where this
is true, and other places like Georgia.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We will go now to Mr. Ted Poe of Texas.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I am concerned about a lot of things. In 3
minutes I am going to try to get a couple of them and let you
have the rest of the time to answer.
Pakistan, we give them money, they persecute the Baluch,
and they have for a good number of years. Mr. Rohrabacher and
myself and other members are very concerned about the
persecution of this group of people.
As Mr. Keating pointed out about Georgia, the Russians
first moved into Moldova; then Georgia, one-third of the
country is taken by the Russians; and now Ukraine.
And the third concern I have is about the MEK. When you
were here in April last year, since you were here then, I
talked, asked you questions about it, then again in December.
There have been 62 members of the MEK in Iraq that have been
murdered.
The question, twofold: Ukraine, were we surprised that the
Russians moved into Ukraine; if not, when did we know the
Russians were going to invade another country? And then on the
MEK, when is State Department going to make a decision to allow
members of the MEK that are stuck in Iraq to come to the United
States? When will that decision be made? Those are my two
questions.
Secretary Kerry. Well, that decision is under review right
now. As I said earlier, you may not have been here----
Mr. Poe. I know what you said earlier, that it is under
review, but when are you going to decide to make the decision
to either allow them to come in or not come in?
Secretary Kerry. Homeland Security and the White House and
other agencies, Justice, for instance, are engaged in an
analysis of, you know, whether or not that can be done based on
our judgments with respect to how many and whether it works.
So----
Mr. Poe. Are you going to require or not they renounce
their membership in the MEK as a precondition?
Secretary Kerry. I don't know the answer to that yet.
Mr. Poe. Okay.
Secretary Kerry. I think the key is to make certain that we
are following the standards and procedures by which people are
admitted to the United States, and that takes some vetting and
so forth.
Now, there are urgent circumstances here, and I have
acknowledged those. Their safety is as risk; no question about
it. And we want to move them out of Iraq as rapidly as
possible, and that is one of the reasons why I have appointed
somebody full time to be working on this. We have gone to a
number of countries.
And frankly, I will be very up front about it. One of the
reasons we are urgently now reviewing this is people sort of
say, well, how many are you taking? And that is an appropriate
question to ask, and it deserves an answer.
Mr. Poe. Excuse me, Secretary, reclaiming my time. In the
last 20 seconds, when did we know about the Russian's invasion
of Ukraine?
Secretary Kerry. Well, we knew about their movement of
troops in there the minute it began to happen. But they have a
basing agreement, and under their basing agreement, they are
permitted to have up to 25,000 troops there. They currently
have somewhere in the vicinity of 20,000 or so. That is
including the increase.
So they were perfectly within their limits of their base
agreement, and in the initial stages in the inquiries that were
made of them, that is what they said: We are moving because we
have threats against some of our people; we are not planning to
do X, Y or Z; we are not going into East Ukraine; it is not an
invasion. And obviously, that has evolved. And so, you know,
fait accompli.
We understand what it is, and we understand exactly, you
know, what they have done, which is precisely why the President
has already issued an initial set of Executive Orders and
created visa bans. And if we are not successful tomorrow in
finding a way forward, and the referendum which we all
anticipate which is going to take place on Sunday is done
without some path forward, there are going to be serious
repercussions. So that is where we are.
The President has made it clear we take this very, very
seriously, as do, I might add, all of our European partners. I
was on a conference call with my counterpart foreign ministers
this morning, and they are united and strong and determined
that there will be consequences if we cannot find some way to
diffuse this.
Chairman Royce. David Cicilline of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your extraordinary service to
our country and for your being here today with our committee.
I am going to submit a series of written questions that
relate to Armenia, Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan, to the
Lajes Air Force Base and the U.S. Consulate in Ponta Delgada in
the Azores, some questions relating to the Middle East peace
process, our national ocean policy, the importance of continued
attention to defense sales, and finally to State Department's
ongoing efforts to protect the human rights of LGBT individuals
around the world, especially in countries such as Nigeria and
Uganda. So I will do those in writing.
And I would just ask you in the time that I have to really
comment on two areas. One is U.N. peacekeeping functions. As
you know, we are at least $350 million behind in our
peacekeeping dues from Fiscal Year 2014. Your budget proposal
brings us closer to fulfilling our financial obligations to
U.N. peacekeeping. But if you could just speak to the
importance of this funding and how our arrears impacts on our
ability to pursue our interests at the U.N. and around the
world.
And the second issue I would like you to touch upon is, as
you know from certainly your long service in the Senate, we and
other developed countries jointly committed in the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to $30 billion
in assistance between 2010 and 2012 to help mobilize $100
billion in public and private funds by 2020 to address the
causes and the impact of climate change. After that the United
States elevated climate change as a development priority, and I
wondered if you would speak to how your budget reflects those
priorities and might help us realize those objectives, in 1
minute and 12 seconds. I apologize.
Secretary Kerry. Well, we are extremely focused--I will
take climate change first. We are extremely focused on the
climate change. We have money for research for mitigation
efforts. And we are gearing up--as you know, I just came back
from China where we agreed to jointly work together in order to
set the target dates for 2015, and the President is laying down
his climate action agenda. It is an all-government effort. So
the budget actually doesn't reflect everything because every
department is being called on to do things with respect to
climate change.
On the issue of the U.N. peacekeeping, the request that we
put in to you is $753 million above the 2014 request, and that
is primarily because of increases to meet our commitments for
Mali, Somalia, and South Sudan. In addition, we have to fund
all the missions at the U.N. assessment rate, which is 28.4
percent, not the 27-point-something percent we pay. So there is
a gap. And finally, we are adjusting for one-time offsets that
are being used to cover our bills. This time there is $218
million for that.
So we are pulling down on some of our peacekeeping, East
Timor, Liberia, Haiti, Cote d'Ivoire, several others, as the
troop levels decline and as the need declines. But we have
increased efforts in Africa in a number of different places,
the Central African Republic, the Great Lakes region, South
Sudan, and so forth. So the demands from the U.N. have grown,
and the money has gone the opposite way.
Chairman Royce. Matt Salmon of Arizona.
Mr. Salmon. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, it is my honor to serve on the subcommittee,
the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee, on this full committee,
and as such, I am deeply troubled by the lack of clear vision
and strategy in the region. Don't get me wrong, you have many
skilled diplomats operating throughout the region, but I fear
the lack of coherent strategy and appropriate engagement comes
from the top.
In the last year, Cuba has been caught red-handed violating
U.N. sanctions and shipping weapons to North Korea through the
Panama Canal. Venezuelan opposition leaders and students are
being imprisoned without charges, and demonstrators are being
beaten and even killed by government forces, all for opposing
Maduro's failed economic policies and the overall dismal state
of their economy.
Ecuador and Bolivia have booted out our USAID missions, and
our diplomats are inexplicably walking on eggshells for
constant fear of expulsion.
Drug trafficking and violence through Central America
continues to increase, and the Russians have docked a warship
in Havana's harbor. These are just a few of the events
happening in the Western Hemisphere.
Meanwhile, the administration's response to these regional
challenges has been muted at best. Attempts to utilize our
membership with multilateral organizations to hold these
regional bad actors accountable have not been successful.
In the case of Venezuela, the Organization of American
States--by the way, American taxpayers fund at least 40 percent
of their operating budget--issued a shamefully weak statement
on the violence happening in Venezuela and did nothing to
oppose the human rights violations happening there or to
support the demonstrators' right to freedom of expression.
Given the ineffectiveness of the OAS, I am not sure I can
justify to my constituents continued funding for such an
feckless organization. Furthermore, the U.N. has had to take
strong action to punish the Cubans for violating U.N. sanctions
and selling the North Koreans weapons right at our back door. I
was recently heartened by the U.N. report that was recently
released on this incident, but I strongly urge you to make sure
that Cubans pay a significant price for thumbing their nose at
international sanctions.
Meanwhile, as Central America struggles with increased
drug-smuggling activity and the corresponding violence, USAID
is helping Guatemala by buying them solar panels. Really?
To wrap up my point, Mr. Secretary, we need a better
strategy in the Western Hemisphere and a renewed engagement and
understanding that our national security is on the line if we
don't start paying attention to our hemisphere. I hope you will
take this on board and then share with us what that vision will
look like and how it advances our national security.
Finally, recently you stated in a speech that climate
change is increasingly a national security threat. With all due
respect, Mr. Secretary, given everything that is happening
around the globe today, do you really believe that? I would
submit to you that around the world, liberty and economic
freedom are being threatened by tyrants, and those yearning for
freedom are looking to the U.S. for leadership in defense of
liberty, but instead USAID is offering solar panels. I believe
that is an affront to the U.S. taxpayer and an insult to those
seeking freedom around the world.
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congressman, freedom also means the
freedom to be able to eat and live where you live. And we have
people who have just come back from meetings in the Pacific
Islands where they are losing that ability because of the level
of high tides that regularly destroy their homes and flood
their communities.
Freedom means the freedom to eat and have food, and
increasingly food security is at risk because of global climate
change. The fact is, our countries, they are going to run out
of water, and there are nations that might have wars over
water. There will be climate refugees in various parts of the
world. There already are people fighting over water in places
like Sudan and elsewhere.
You know, the fact is that everybody has a right to the
preservation of the ecosystem of the planet from which we live.
You wouldn't have life on this planet if it weren't for the
oceans. The oceans are increasingly at risk, at least the
ecosystem within them. Fisheries overfish, unbelievable
acidification taking place because of the pollution that goes
into the ocean.
So I just say to you, you know, there is a reason that
General Zinni, who used to be our CENTCOM Commander, stood up
and said climate change is a national security issue. There is
a reason that the Pentagon, until recently for budgeting, had
an office to deal with this issue, to make plans for the future
for the changes that are going to take place in terms of
security, you know? There are all kinds of implications.
So I strongly urge you to recognize that if the things
continue to happen that are already happening, as a matter of
scientific fact, not my imagination; when countless scientists
come together and all agree that X, Y and Z is happening, and
happening now, and happening to a greater degree than it was
before and faster than they predicted, you ought to step back
and look at it.
And, you know, the worst that can happen to everybody in
the world if I am wrong, and Al Gore is wrong, and scientists
are wrong, and the U.N. is wrong and countless communities are
wrong is that we make a decision to have cleaner air, better
health, you know, more jobs, new energy, energy independence.
That is what happens. But if the guys who say it isn't
happening are wrong, life as we know it on this Earth can
literally end.
So you have got a choice, and I think it is pretty clear
where the President and I are putting that choice. Is it an
instrument of destruction on a global basis? I was in the
Philippines where Typhoon Haiyan hit. And I will tell you, man,
I have never seen devastation like that wreaked in as few
minutes, and what happened to the trees stripped off the
mountaintops and the entire community, several hundred thousand
people displaced. So we have to pay attention to it, and that
is where I am coming from.
Chairman Royce. Let's go to Mr. Grayson of Florida.
Mr. Grayson. Mr. Secretary, if a free and fair election
were held in the Crimea between being part of Russia and being
part of Ukraine, what would be the result?
Secretary Kerry. A free and fair election? Well, that is an
oxymoron right now anyway, when you are invaded by 20,000
troops, and you know. I have no doubt that people would vote
for a greater affiliation with Russia. There is no question in
my mind about that. But you can't consider an election in the
face of troops, and hastily put together in a few weeks without
any debate, and also contrary to international law and contrary
to the constitution of Ukraine as a free and fair election.
Mr. Grayson. Well, hypothetically, if 90 percent of the
people in the Crimea wanted to join Russia, what does that tell
us about U.S. foreign policy in the region?
Secretary Kerry. It doesn't say anything about U.S. foreign
policy. It says everything about history and culture and
language and what they are believing. It is not a reflection of
U.S. foreign policy; it is a reflection of a relationship that
has existed for centuries.
Ukraine used to be part of Russia for centuries. It has
only been part of Ukraine--Crimea only part of Ukraine for 22
years, whatever, I mean, you know, formally. A little longer
than that, excuse me. It has only been formally--in 1954,
Khrushchev gave it to Ukraine as a ``gift'' but it was ratified
and approved and subsequently passed on by the Duma in Russia
formally accepting that.
So there is no doubt that they feel a huge tie to Russia.
That can be reflected and respected without invading, you know,
with your troops and having an election at the point of a gun.
Mr. Grayson. Does the U.S. have any vital national security
interests in seeing whether Crimea is part of the Ukraine or
Russia?
Secretary Kerry. I think we have a vital national security
interest in upholding international law, and in upholding the
norms for international behavior, and not allowing somebody at
the point of a gun to reverse settled lines of nations and to
reverse the Constitution of a Democratic country and a country
aspiring for greater democracy. Yes, I think we have a vital
interest in that.
But there is a difference as to whether it is an interest
that rises to the level of, you know, deploying troops versus
deploying economic measures and other kinds of choices that are
available to us.
Mr. Grayson. Well, tell us how you draw that line.
Secretary Kerry. Well, I draw that line--do we believe that
a nuclear war is worth fighting over Crimea? That would be a
very tough question to resolve. I think most Americans would
resolve it fairly fast. But on the other hand, most Americans
would also agree very quickly nations should not behave the way
Russia has, and they ought to pay a price if they choose to.
Mr. Grayson. Is the principle of self-determination in play
here?
Secretary Kerry. It could be if it were done properly. An
example of that would be what has taken place in--what is going
to take place in the United Kingdom, where the Parliament has
approved the right of Scotland to have an independence
referendum. But it has been done through the appropriate
mechanism. The Constitution of Ukraine requires that any effort
by any entity within Ukraine to secede be done through the
constitutional process.
If Russia were to say, we think they ought to have
additional autonomy, ought to be respected, the affiliation
with us ought to be more clearly defined, there are plenty of
ways for us, through the U.N., through multilateral efforts,
through Ukraine-Russia discussions, to find out if there is an
appropriate way to resolve that. You don't do it--I mean, in
the 19th century and 20th century, we learned the way to do it
is not by invading a country and forcibly arbitrarily changing
those lines.
Chairman Royce. Jeff Duncan of South Carolina.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, you have been clear about your opinion
regarding Iran's nuclear ambitions, but you haven't been clear
about your position with regard to Iran's activity in the
Western Hemisphere.
Specifically, there was a bill signed by the President in
late 2011 dealing with countering the Iranian threat in the
Western Hemisphere, and a report that was put out by the State
Department. And specifically, do you believe that Argentine
prosecutor Alberto Nisman's report on the AMIA bombings in the
1990s should be taken in consideration by the State Department
as they reevaluate the Iranian threat here in this hemisphere?
Secretary Kerry. Well, anything that is relevant to the
Iranian threat in the hemisphere ought to be taken into
account. And we have been looking at this issue of Iran in the
Western Hemisphere, and there is some evidence, obviously, of
that. And they have been playing for a certain period of time.
It is not clear if that has grown at this point or continuing
at the same level.
But this gives me a chance to come back to the question
earlier about the hemisphere and Venezuela and so forth. Look,
I have been in this job now for just over a year, and my
initial effort when I went down to the OAS meeting and have
engaged was to try to meet with the Foreign Minister of
Venezuela and sort of say, you know, what are we really
fighting about? We are for healthcare, you know, assistance for
your citizens; we are for economic transformation; we are for
freedom of speech, these kinds of things; we ought to be able
to find some means of cooperation. And there was an agreement
to sort of begin that tentative effort to try to see if we
could find common ground.
Next thing we knew, bad habits were being pursued again,
and the folks in Venezuela were simply lobbying grenades--you
know, figurative diplomatic and political grenades at us,
ideological grenades.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, sir, that is what concerns me about the
bad habits, because Mr. Nisman in Argentina points specifically
to Hezbollah and Iran's activity with being attributable to the
bombings there in Buenos Aires that killed Argentine and Jewish
and other lives.
So are you familiar with the report, and do you think the
State Department----
Secretary Kerry. I have not read the report, no.
Mr. Duncan. I appreciate it. And I would ask that the State
Department circle back up with me on that.
Let me just ask a question on a different line, because I
am concerned about Argentina. And they are seeking to reopen
the spigots of international aid without doing anything to
solve the bigger problem, and that is that its policies remain
hostile to meaningful private investment.
And so my question in the remaining time is what are you
doing to urge Argentina to meet its obligations and settle with
its creditors?
Secretary Kerry. We have been urging them to do exactly
that. And we have, as you know, been amicus briefed on a number
of different cases. We are pressing very hard to see that they
do that. They have a responsibility to do it. They owe about--I
think it is about $600 million are owed to us, our folks, and
we are working on a way to deal with their----
Mr. Duncan. Thank you. I appreciate that. And I hope the
State Department can continue to be more forceful with that.
Chairman Royce. Bradley Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you.
And, Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here. As you said
in your opening prepared remarks, what we do in the world
matters. And what you and people on your staff and team do here
and around the world are crucial.
We are here talking about the Fiscal Year 2015 budget;
however, global affairs don't necessarily follow a fiscal year
calendar, and there are three deadlines looming in the coming
months that I think are incredibly important. First, in the
spring, the current round of negotiations between the Israelis
and the Palestinians; June 30 is the deadline for the removal
of chemical weapons from Syria; July 20 we then see the
conclusion of the 6 months on the joint plan of action with
Iran.
At the same time, around that region, we have a series of
very concerning trends with Egypt and its government, the chaos
in the Sinai, the pressures on Jordan because of Syria, what is
happening in Turkey, even what is happening in sub-Saharan
Africa leading to refugees into the region.
So my questions in a very brief amount of time is all of
these deadlines, whether they are successful or unsuccessful,
and the assumptions are 50/50 in many cases, are going to have
serious implications and financial demands, fiscal demands on
the United States and the world. Do you believe that the budget
as proposed here for Fiscal Year 2015 provides the resources
and flexibility for the State Department, for you to do what is
necessary for a successful outcome?
Secretary Kerry. Congressman, that is a terrific question,
well thought through in terms of noticing the confluence of all
of those dates. You are absolutely correct; big things are
potentially going to happen all in short order, one way or the
other. And the answer is profoundly no, I don't believe we are
adequately resourced. But, you know, this is the best budget we
can get under the circumstances of the budget deal that was cut
up here. It is not the budget we need.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you.
Secretary Kerry. And I will just say to you, if we are
successful, if we can move forward on the Middle East, that is
going to require some real thoughtfulness up here about how we
are prepared to support the Middle East peace process.
Mr. Schneider. Let me extend on that. As we do move
forward, I hope, and I know I am joined by my colleagues here,
that with the negotiations of the Palestinians, paramount, as
has been said before, the security of Israel as the nation
state of the Jewish people, that the joint plan of action is an
interim deal that does not become a permanent deal; and that we
as a country, the United States, remains fully committed to
ensuring that Iran does not achieve its goal of a nuclear
weapons capability, and that all options remain on the table in
that respect; and that the status of chemical weapons in Syria
by June 30 is dealt with and dealt with directly.
And finally, if I can, my last second, echoing some of the
other things that have been said, ask for your follow-up on the
status of visas for young Israelis of student age.
Thank you. I yield back.
Secretary Kerry. Thank you very much.
Chairman Royce. And we will go to Mr. Kinzinger of
Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here. You keep up a very
intense schedule, and it is going to continue today, and so I
want to thank you both for your service in the past in uniform
and your long service as a civilian. So I want to say that.
I want to make a couple of points with a question. The
first point I want to make is remind everybody that to an
extent, the situation in the Ukraine was created by the
Russians a long time ago, and so now when they claim that they
have these interests of people in eastern Ukraine, that was a
situation created by them.
I was shocked to hear a colleague earlier actually
seemingly defend the actions of Russia, and actually my jaw
kind of hit the floor, and I wondered if the same colleague
would have defended the Iraq invasion of Kuwait on the basis of
Iraq saying that they have national interests.
One comment on Afghanistan. Karzai is gone soon. It is
probably a good development for the region, I hope, and I want
to say I hope that the United States is committed to the
bilateral security agreement. I think we are. Hopefully the new
President there signs that, and we can move forward.
I want to talk about Iraq. I obviously have been very
critical of the pullout of Iraq, but without revisiting that,
we are where we are today. I want to ask you, Mr. Secretary,
how you see the situation in Iraq today with ISIS.
And then specifically from your Department's perspective, I
know there is still a robust State presence in Iraq. What are
the challenges State faces there? What are some of the needs?
And as Members of Congress, what can we be aware of to ensure
that we can resist Iraq going in a place that we don't want it
to go?
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congressman, thank you very much.
Thank you for your service, which I really respect enormously.
And I am grateful to you for the question.
Iraq is in a fragile place, but it's not--Iraq would have
been in a fragile place no matter what, because it was--you
know, turned topsy-turvy through the war where you had a Sunni
minority that for centuries, I mean really for centuries, had
governed at the expense of the Iraq--of the Shia majority, vast
majority, and suddenly that was reversed. And all of a sudden
you not only had that reversal, but you had an Iranian nexus
that was accented in this connection, which raised the
suspicions of the rest of Sunni world, a lot of other nations
in the region, and it exacerbated a divide in terms of this
competition for influence, Iran and its influence.
And now with Syria, that has been even more complicated,
because you have the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant,
which is pulling people out of Iraq, and you have got a certain
amount of Iraqis in Syria as part of this sectarian conflict.
And so it is fragile. And that is what has happened in
Fallujah, and in, you know, Ramadi and so forth is this
resurgence of the sectarianism in its most violent form.
Now, that is complicated by the way in which,
unfortunately, the government has chosen to govern without an
inclusivity that is necessary, without resolving some of the
age-old issues of the Constitution, and the oil and so forth,
the oil revenues. Then, of course, you have the Kurds cutting
their own deals on the side with Turkey or elsewhere, and there
are just a lot of tensions pulling at each other. So it is very
fragile right now; it is a fragile moment.
You have flights coming out of Iran, which we continually
talk to the Prime Minister about, the need to be--that should
be stopped. They are not. There is an occasional inspection,
which is a phony inspection in which people are tipped off, and
it doesn't really do anything.
So we are pushing very hard. We have an outstanding
Ambassador, Ambassador Beecroft, on the ground. We have an
outstanding Assistant Secretary, Brett McGurk, who is
constantly out there, working very, very hard at this
personally. Vice President Biden is on the phone. I am on the
phone. We are deeply involved in trying to push these issues
into a place where they can be resolved, and where we pull the
government along to reach out and govern more effectively and
resolve some of these kinds of issues.
I am convinced personally every one of these issues would
be on the table no matter whether there were a few troops
there, 10,000, whatever. The troops aren't the difference. Iraq
has to resolve Iraq's future, and the Iraqis have to do that.
The same thing ultimately will have to happen in Afghanistan.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Joe Kennedy from
Massachusetts.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Secretary, good to see you again. Thank
you for your extraordinary service to our country in many
forms, as my colleague indicated.
I wanted to ask you, just follow up really on comments from
my colleagues in three areas if I can. First and foremost,
Egypt. We have heard some very troubling press reports even
just this week. The Washington Post had a very troubling
article, I believe it was on Monday, indicating thousands that
were arrested and thousands held without charge. It was
happening--I think a direct quote, ``They are just putting
people in jail, and it is happening all at once.''
Obviously, Mr. Secretary, this is an issue that strikes us
here at home. Congressman Smith referenced your former
constituent when you were a Senator in Massachusetts, now my
constituent, Colin Bower, and how that is affecting U.S.
interests. So if you can just give us a little bit of a
forecast as to what you see going on in Egypt and really how we
can be even more effective going forward.
Two, building off on Mr. Kinzinger's question about
Afghanistan and the BSA, if you can shine any light as to how
those negotiations are going, or if they are going at all at
this point.
And then three, this committee had a hearing about 8 months
ago or so after the conflict in Mali. And I was struck by, as
you are probably well aware, the median age in Mali is about
16; in Niger, it is 15. Throughout much of Northern Africa it
is in the late teens, early twenties. And as you move eastward,
including the area along the Mediterranean, you are getting
close to 200 million people with the median ages in the early
twenties or so.
What can we be doing from a long-term perspective to make
sure we are not having hearings about crises, whether it is
Algeria or Mali, whether it is the seizures over oil rigs or
attempted coups, to make sure that there is a long-term
strategy put in place for the long-term development of not just
this region, but the world.
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congressman, that last question is
the big question that all of us need to be dealing with and
coping with. President Obama is analyzing that now and has
asked us to look at it very, very closely and help to design
the agenda. I am pushing my people to do that. We are really
intensely focused on this question of huge populations in these
volatile areas under the age of 30; you said the median age is
15, but huge, 60 percent under the age of 30, 50 percent under
the age of 21, so forth, and were less--were more, excuse me.
Now, if they don't have jobs, and they don't have
opportunity, and they are disenfranchised, and the only thing
available to them is radical extreme Islam, religious
extremism, et cetera, we have got a long road ahead of us, all
of us. And therefore, we have to think carefully about how much
it is in our security interest as well as in our long-term
economic interest to be trying to get ahead of this and deal
with it in ways now, which we have done effectively in various
places historically, and we are not doing it there.
Just very quickly on Egypt--on the BSA, there is an article
today somewhere, you know, President Karzai has basically
attached conditions to the signing of it. It is not at issue.
The BSA is negotiated. He is not trying to change a word in it.
He is simply refusing to sign it unless X, Y and Z happens in
the country, and the things he has chosen to have happen are
not going to happen easily, if at all, and they are out of our
control.
So each of the candidates running for President has said
they support the BSA, they will sign it, and I expect it will
be signed at some point in time, if not by Karzai, by one of
them.
Egypt is very, very challenging right now. It is vital that
the interim government take measures in order to permit young
people to be able to demonstrate, people to be able to take
part in the political system. We cannot be arresting activists.
We cannot see journalists arrested. Those things need to
change. I hope they will.
We would like to see them be successful. It is vital to all
of us that Egypt be successful. And we need one-quarter of the
Arab world to find its footing now and get a government in
place, move to this democratic process, stabilize hopefully,
and begin to develop. But there are very troubling issues that
need to be resolved with in terms of people's rights and
protections in Egyptian society.
Chairman Royce. We have enough time for Mr. Holding. If you
take 2 minutes to ask your questions, and then Mr. Lowenthal
take 2 minutes to ask your question, we will allow the
Secretary to respond, and then we know he has his appointment.
George.
Mr. Holding. Yes, sir. Usually, by the time it gets to me,
Mr. Secretary, all the important topics have been covered at
least twice, but conspicuously, we haven't talked about the
world's largest democracy today. As you know, within a month or
so almost 800 million people are going to go to the polls and
choose a new government in India. Wall Street Journal recently
said that the Congress Party will suffer more than likely
overwhelming defeat, and more than likely the BJP Party will
form a government with Narendra Modi at the head of it.
What are you doing to put us in a good place with our
relations with India, with the BJP government; and how much do
you think we will have as a setback the issue with Modi's visa
status and us denying a visa to him; and where do you see that
we sit with that right now?
Secretary Kerry. Well, I am not going to comment on that
part of it, if you don't mind, simply because it is before the
election, and I don't want anything I say here to play into the
election in any way that it should or shouldn't.
We respect that democracy. We respect India. We have worked
hard to get over the hiccup we had recently with respect to a
diplomat in New York. Our Assistant Secretary has just returned
from a trip to India. We are very, very anxious, a very
important relationship, very, very vital country in terms of
the region and globally, and we have big issues to work on
together.
Mr. Holding. If I could ask you one quick question in the
last 16 seconds. Do you disagree with Israel's assessment that
the weapons recently intercepted were coming from Iran?
Secretary Kerry. No, I don't, based on superficial
evidence. But we want to pin things down in terms of legal.
But, no, I don't.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for joining us and
for spending so much time, and I will shorten my questions.
We sometimes provide assistance to countries with startling
human rights records. We have talked much about that today. For
example, I am most interested in that the Government of Vietnam
has been ranked as one of the 10 worst countries for press
freedom. In addition, Vietnam has undertaken authoritarian and
undemocratic assault, on Internet freedoms, on censoring, on
restricted usage of the Internet.
How do we balance, Mr. Secretary, our goals of stability
and prosperity for developing countries with our duty to
protect the human rights of all people? So, for example, what
are we doing to leverage what was in this budget, the increased
economic developmental assistance to Vietnam, with our goal
that they should begin to end human rights violations? Is there
a balance?
And the second question has to do with overseas security
for employee engagement. Post-Benghazi we had a hearing here.
The Department of State made a number of efforts to improve the
physical security of our Foreign Service employees overseas.
However, over the years our diplomatic presence, as we have
heard, has become more difficult, employees find that they are
less accessible, and employees working out of facilities are
finding it more difficult to actually engage in the contacts
with their locals.
What is the Department doing to ensure that employees can
continue to engage and do their work that they have really been
sent overseas to do? How can they raise and even challenge what
they feel sometimes to be overly onerous security requirements?
Secretary Kerry. Well, Congressman, that is a really good
question, and it takes a little longer to answer than I have,
so I am going to submit much of it in writing. But I will say
to you, we are constantly working this issue. We are deeply
concerned about it ourselves. There is a tradeoff and a balance
between security and the ability to get out and do the job. So
we are providing more security.
And I can't tell you, we have a number of Embassies where
people are working in very difficult circumstances, and we have
been--sort of receded to compounds in certain places rather
than people being able to live out in the community and so
forth. These are the risks that we live with today.
So we have increased Marine guard protection. We have
tighter rules about movement. We have certain restrictions in
certain places. It is very difficult, something the committee,
you know, might look at in detail at some point in time. It
costs more, and that is part of the budget challenge here, to
keep that presence out there and keep people being out there.
We have higher costs for security, higher costs for the
physical structures, higher costs for the deployments. Some of
them are now hardship deployments where the families don't
follow; you know, it is unaccompanied tour. Those are
difficult. So all of this is, you know, more expensive and more
complicated, administer headaches, and we need to talk throw
how we are going to manage it.
On Vietnam, we are deepening our relationship and working
hard, I just was there not so long ago, and working on a number
of initiatives together. President Obama and President Sang
announced a comprehensive partnership initiative. But the truth
is, and we are very clear about it, every meeting we have, we
talk about human rights and race cases and talk about the needs
to move forward. Vietnam still has authorities who are
excessively restrictive of political rights, excessively
restraining on freedom of expression and on the Internet and so
forth.
Now, there were some modest improvements during the year,
last year, 2013, including the release of the well-known legal
activist, Le Cong Dinh; and Vietnam signed the Convention
against Torture; and there was an increase in Protestant Church
registrations, church.
When I went there, most recently, I went to mass in Ho Chi
Minh City, and it was a pretty normal kind of event. It was
not--you know, didn't create the stir it might have some years
ago.
So we think we can make more progress. They have more to
do. To their credit, they are listening, and they are working
at it, you know. The pace, we think, could be picked up, but
there is a slow progress.
Mr. Chairman, I have got to----
Chairman Royce. Well, we understand, Mr. Secretary. We
thank you for your time today, and we wish you luck on your
trip. And let me share with the members here that the record
remains open for any members to submit questions. Again, we
thank the members for their participation.
Again, thank you, Mr. Secretary. We stand adjourned.
Secretary Kerry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Congressman Engel. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:50 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]

