- FIGHTING EBOLA: A GROUND-LEVEL VIEW

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FIGHTING EBOLA: A GROUND-LEVEL VIEW

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 18, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-229

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

91-452PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         ENI F.H. FALEOMAVAEGA, American
DANA ROHRABACHER, California             Samoa
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   BRAD SHERMAN, California
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
TED POE, Texas                       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MATT SALMON, Arizona                 THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          KAREN BASS, California
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
TOM COTTON, Arkansas                 ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                JUAN VARGAS, California
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina       BRADLEY S. SCHNEIDER, Illinois
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            JOSEPH P. KENNEDY III,
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania                Massachusetts
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                GRACE MENG, New York
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SEAN DUFFY, Wisconsin                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
CURT CLAWSON, Florida

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             KAREN BASS, California
RANDY K. WEBER SR., Texas            DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
STEVE STOCKMAN, Texas                AMI BERA, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Rabih Torbay, senior vice president for international
operations, International Medical Corps........................     4
Mr. Brett Sedgewick, technical advisor for food security and
livelihoods, Global Communities................................    18
Darius Mans, Ph.D., president, Africare..........................    24

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Rabih Torbay: Prepared statement.............................     8
Mr. Brett Sedgewick: Prepared statement..........................    20
Darius Mans, Ph.D.: Prepared statement...........................    26

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    48
Hearing minutes..................................................    49

FIGHTING EBOLA: A GROUND-LEVEL VIEW

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2014

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. Subcommittee will come to order.
The world community has known of the Ebola virus disease,
more commonly called just Ebola, since it first appeared in a
remote region near the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
1976. In previous outbreaks, Ebola has been confined to remote
areas in which there was little contact outside the villages at
which it appeared.
Unfortunately, this outbreak, now an epidemic, spread from
village to an international center for regional trade and
spread into urban areas in Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia
that are crowded, with limited medical services and limited
resident trust of government.
The unprecedented west African Ebola epidemic has not only
killed more than 5,000 people with more than 14,000 others
known to be affected, this situation has skewed the planning
for how to deal with the outbreak.
In our two previous hearings on the Ebola epidemic, an
emergency hearing we held on August 7 and then a followup on
September 17, we heard about the worsening rates of infection
and challenges in responding to this from government agencies,
such as USAID and CDC, and NGOs operating on the ground, such
as Samaritan's Purse and SIM.
Today's hearing is intended to take testimony from
nongovernmental organizations providing services on the ground
currently in the affected countries, especially Liberia, so we
can better determine how proposed actions are being
implemented.
In its early stages, Ebola manifests the same symptoms as
less-immediately deadly diseases, such as malaria, which means
initial healthcare workers have been unprepared for the deadly
nature of the disease that they have been asked to treat.
This meant that too many healthcare workers, national and
international, have been at risk in treating patients who
themselves may not know they have Ebola. Hundreds of healthcare
workers have been infected, and many have died, including some
of top medical personnel in the three affected countries.
What we found quite quickly was that the healthcare systems
in these countries, despite heavy investment by the United
States and other donors, remained weak. As it happens, these
are three countries either coming out of very divisive civil
conflict or experiencing serious political divisions.
Consequently, citizens have not been widely prepared to accept
recommendations from their own governments.
For quite some time, many people in all three countries
would not accept that the Ebola epidemic was real. Even now it
is believed that, despite the prevalence of burial teams
throughout Liberia, for example, some families are reluctant to
identify their suffering and dead loved ones for safe burials,
which places family members and their neighbors at heightened
risk of contracting this often fatal disease when patients are
most contagious.
The porous borders of these three countries have allowed
people to cross between countries at will. This may facilitate
commerce, which is a good thing, but it also allows for
diseases to be transmitted regionally. As a result, the
prevalence of Ebola in these three countries has ebbed and
flowed with the migration of people from one country to the
other.
Liberia remains the hardest hit of the three countries,
with more than 6,500 Ebola cases officially recorded, probably
a significant understatement. The number of infected and dead
from Ebola could be as much as three times that of the official
figure due to underreporting.
Organizations operating on the ground have told us over the
past 5 months that, despite the increasing reach of
international and national efforts to contact those infected
with Ebola, there remain many remote areas where it is still
difficult to find residents or gain sufficient trust to obtain
their cooperation.
Consequently, the ebb and flow in infection continues. Even
when it looks like the battle is being won in one place, it
increases in a neighboring country or region and then reignites
in the areas that look to be successes.
The United States is focusing on Liberia. The UK is
focusing on Sierra Leone. France and the European Union are
supposed to be focusing on Guinea. In both Sierra Leone and
Guinea, the anti-Ebola efforts are behind the pace of those in
Liberia. This epidemic must be brought under control in all
three if our efforts are to be successful.
Last week I, along with Congresswoman Karen Bass and
Congressman Mark Meadows of this subcommittee, introduced H.R.
5710, the Ebola Emergency Response Act. This bill lays out
steps that are needed for the U.S. Government to effectively
help fight the west African Ebola epidemic, especially in
Liberia, the worst hit of the three countries.
This includes recruiting and training healthcare personnel,
establishing fully functional treatment centers, conducting
education campaigns among populations in affected countries,
and developing diagnostics, treatments, and vaccines.
H.R. 5710 confirms U.S. policy in the anti-Ebola fight and
provides necessary authorities for the administration to
continue or expand anticipated actions in this regard. The bill
encourages U.S. collaboration with other donors to mitigate the
risk of economic collapse and civil unrest in the three
affected countries. Furthermore, the legislation authorizes
funding of the International Disaster Assistance Account at the
higher Fiscal Year 2014 level to effectively support these
anti-Ebola efforts.
I would like to now turn to my friend and colleague, Ms.
Bass, for any opening comments you might have.
Ms. Bass. As always, thank you, Chairman Smith, for your
leadership and, also, for taking the lead on the legislation
that we hope to have marked up soon.
I also want to thank today's distinguished witnesses and
prominent NGO organizations providing critical medical,
nutritional, and developmental assistance in the most adversely
affected nations in west Africa.
I look forward to hearing your updates on how your
respective organizations continue to combat this deadly
outbreak, what trends you are seeing, both positive and
negative, and what additional support is needed as you
coordinate with the governments of the impacted countries in
the international community.
I appreciate your efforts and outreach to help keep
Congress informed of this evolving crisis. The current crisis,
as has been stated, has been the largest and most widespread
outbreak of the disease in history, creating a particular
burden on the countries that are involved.
Since the beginning of the outbreak, U.S.-based NGOs have
made a significant and sustained effort to support the three
countries as they fought the disease. The United States has
committed nearly $1 billion to build treatment centers, train
healthcare workers and burial teams, supply hospitals with
protective gear, and ensure the safety and humanitarian
support.
I would, in particular, like to hear from the witnesses
what you think about the assistance that has been provided. And
then I have a particular interest in your thoughts around, when
we are past this crisis, what the U.S. can leave in place and,
also, your thoughts on how we move forward.
So we know that the reason why this hit so badly is because
of the weak health infrastructure in these three countries.
So out of this terrible crisis, is there a way for us to
begin to think long term about the future? How do we support
the infrastructure of countries? And your thoughts on that
would be appreciated.
The administration has asked Congress for over $6 billion
in emergency funds in order to sustain the progress that has
been made and to ensure an end to the crisis.
This request will expand assistance to contain the
epidemic, safeguard the American public from further spread of
the disease, and support the development of treatments.
Sustained U.S. financial support and involvement is essential
to support the stable governance of these nations, which is
jeopardized by the current crisis.
I also don't think that we have given much time and
attention to the fact that we are dealing with countries that
could actually be moved quite a bit backward, especially
countries that have recently gotten past civil war.
So I look forward to your testimonies, and I am interested
in hearing from you about what we can do to assist your
efforts.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Bass.
I'd like to now welcome our three very distinguished
witnesses who are extraordinarily effective and informed and
will provide this subcommittee a real insight as to what has
been happening and what needs to be done.
Beginning with Mr. Rabih Torbay, who is the senior vice
president for international operations and oversees
International Medical Corps' global programs in 31 countries
and 4 continents and its staff and volunteers numbering well
over 8,000 people. He has personally supervised the expansion
of IMC's humanitarian and development programs into some of the
world's toughest working environments, including Sierra Leone,
Iraq, Darfur, Liberia, Lebanon, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Haiti,
Libya, and most recently Syria.
As the organization's senior representative in Washington,
DC, he serves as IMC's liaison with the United States
Government.
We will then hear from Mr. Brett Sedgewick, who is a
technical advisor for food security and livelihoods for Global
Communities. He previously served as vice president for the
NASSCOM Foundation, for whom he built stakeholder relations
with government entities, donors, and NGOs, and oversaw
business development.
Prior to that, he served as Liberia country director for
CHF International, where he oversaw program design,
implementation, and monitoring for a range of donors. He also
served as Liberia technical advisor to Chemonics on a similar
basis.
We will then hear from Dr. Darius Mans, who is the
president of Africare, where he is responsible for the
leadership and growth of that organizations. Previously, he
fulfilled a number of roles at the Millennium Challenge
Corporation, including acting chief executive officer and vice
president of implementation and managing director for Africare.
In these positions Dr. Mans was responsible for vast and
diverse program portfolios in MCC compact countries. He also
has experience managing 45 country programs around the world as
director of the World Bank Institute, working as an economist,
teaching economics, and serving as a consultant on
infrastructure projects in Latin America.
We are joined by Mr. Weber, vice chairman of the
subcommittee.
Any opening comments?
Mr. Weber. Thank you for being here. Let's go.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you.
I turn to Mr. Torbay.

STATEMENT OF MR. RABIH TORBAY, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR
INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS, INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL CORPS

Mr. Torbay. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Bass, and
distinguished members of this subcommittee, on behalf of
International Medical Corps, I would like to thank you for
inviting me to testify today to describe the ongoing fight
against the Ebola virus outbreak from the ground level.
I have already submitted a lengthy written testimony to the
subcommittee. My remarks this morning will highlight key
observations and offer 10 recommendations for our Ebola
response experience.
International Medical Corps is a global humanitarian
nonprofit organization dedicated to saving lives and relieving
suffering through healthcare training and relief and
development programs. We work in 31 countries around the world,
and we have been working in west Africa since 1999.
Our response to the Ebola outbreak has been robust in both
Liberia and Sierra Leone. More than two-thirds of all Ebola
cases and over three-fourths of all Ebola-related deaths have
come from these two countries.
By the end of this month, we anticipate having a total of
about 800 staff in those two countries, and by year's end we
expect this number to exceed 1,000 working in four Ebola
treatment units, two in Liberia and two in Sierra Leone.
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the
dedicated and courageous international and African national
staff working in our treatment centers. They are from Liberia
and Sierra Leone, as well as many parts of the United States,
Europe, and other states.
Our staff is comprised of doctors, nurses, technicians,
specialists in water sanitation and hygiene, logisticians,
mental health professionals, custodial workers, and burial
teams.
In addition to the treatment units, we have established
several services for groups just now arriving to combat the
outbreak. One example is a training center on the ground of
Cuttington University in Bong County, Liberia. It will teach
and train staff from all organizations engaged in the fight to
contain Ebola and show them how to treat patients and stay safe
in a potentially dangerous workplace.
We are also responding to the upsurge of Ebola cases in
Mali. We will be setting up an Ebola treatment unit and
developing a health worker training program to help the country
fight the outbreak.
Our robust response to the Ebola outbreak has one
overriding objective: Contain the current outbreak at its
source in west Africa. To succeed, we have learned that several
key factors must be in place.
One of these is building and safely operating Ebola
treatment units staffed by well-trained health professionals.
Another key factor is using training programs to transfer into
local hands the skills and knowledge necessary to respond
effectively to the Ebola outbreaks.
We must also assure effective coordination among all actors
involved in the fight to contain the virus, including the U.N.,
international and national governments, and NGOs. To turn the
tide of this epidemic, we must all work together to maximize
the strength of all involved.
Finally, we need to conduct expansive data collection and
rigorous data analysis to build an accurate picture of Ebola
containment and spot any need for new responses. Once we
succeed to contain the current outbreak, we must remain
vigilant to assure that there is no resurgence of this
epidemic.
The fight to contain Ebola and prevent future outbreaks
will require a substantial investment. I would like to thank
the U.S. Agency for International Development, particularly its
Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, for the funding it has
provided to International Medical Corps for our Ebola response,
as well as the support of the U.S. military, particularly in
setting up a laboratory near in our Ebola treatment unit in
Bong County.
We welcome the President's emergency request to Congress to
combat Ebola in west Africa. And based on our on-the-ground
experience in fighting this epidemic, we would recommend that
the $1.4 billion allocated for international disaster
assistance be increased by an additional $200 million, to a
total of $1.6 billion, and we recommend that an additional $48
million be added to the Economic Support Fund, for a total of
$260 million.
Mr. Chairman, I conclude my testimony by offering 10
recommendations for effective treatment and eradication of
Ebola virus for the subcommittee's consideration.
One, ensure the availability of an adequate number of well-
trained, well-protected health workers. One of the most
critical lessons learned from this response has been the
importance of having sufficient human resources prepared to
address an outbreak of infectious disease.
Two, ensure that construction of new Ebola treatment units
fits the local needs. The work must be well-coordinated and
well-trained staff must be ready to work in each facility. We
need to remain flexible and nimble and adapt quickly to
changing demands to response to outbreaks in rural areas.
Three, ensure that the necessary quantity and quality of
personal protective equipment is available.
Four, improve data collection, surveillance, and referral
systems that will help individuals receive treatment faster.
Five, ensure that clear and understandable lines of
communications and divisions of responsibilities are
established, understood, and maintained among coordinating
bodies operating in the region. A smart and efficient
coordination system at the national level is critical for an
effective response.
Six, we welcome the advances made over the past few weeks
in establishing procedure to evacuate and treat expatriate
health workers who might contract Ebola. We recommend that the
systems being put in place now be institutionalized and made
part of the global preparedness planning in the future for
future epidemics.
Seven, we recommend that commercial airspace over Ebola
countries remain open so that personnel and resources can move
quickly.
Eight, accelerate and support the production of vaccines.
Nine, invest in emergency preparedness in west African
regions to ensure that these countries have the needed
resources, proper training, and systems in place to respond
themselves to possible future outbreak of infectious disease.
And, ten, finally, Mr. Chairman, basic health services need
to be re-established in west Africa. People are not just dying
from Ebola, they are dying from malaria, they are dying from
water-borne diseases. Women are dying from the lack of
facilities where they could go for safe delivery. And this
needs to be done as soon as possible. We cannot wait until the
Ebola outbreak is done before we restart these activities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Bass, for the
opportunity to present this testimony to the committee. I would
be glad to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Torbay follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Torbay.
Mr. Sedgewick, if you could proceed.

STATEMENT OF MR. BRETT SEDGEWICK, TECHNICAL ADVISOR FOR FOOD
SECURITY AND LIVELIHOODS, GLOBAL COMMUNITIES

Mr. Sedgewick. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Bass, members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on the ways we are working to stop the Ebola epidemic in
west Africa.
The following is an abbreviated version of the written
testimony provided to the subcommittee.
My name is Brett Sedgewick, and I am technical advisor at
Global Communities, formerly known as CHF International, and I
am currently on the Ebola Task Force.
From 2010 to 2011, I worked as Global Communities' Liberia
country director, and I returned to the U.S. 10 days ago after
spending 3 weeks in Liberia helping to lead our response on the
ground.
Global Communities has worked in Liberia since 2004. In
2010, we began a USAID-funded water and sanitation project,
working closely with the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare.
Through this program, we began to combat Ebola in April by
providing community education, protective equipment, and
hygiene materials to communities at risk.
In August, we partnered with USAID's Office of Foreign
Disaster Assistance, who have been excellent partners in this
fight, to scale up our response. Today we are also working in
safe burial and body management, contact tracing, and ambulance
services.
Safe body management is of the highest priority in stopping
the spread of Ebola. The bodies of Ebola victims are extremely
contagious. In Liberia, it is often customary for the family of
the deceased to say goodbye through traditions that involve
touching and washing the body. The CDC estimates that up to 70
percent of Ebola infections are originating from contact with
the deceased.
Global Communities is working in every county of Liberia,
supporting 47 burial teams and 32 disinfection teams. We work
in close partnership with the Ministry of Health. The ministry
employ the burial team personnel, and we provide training,
vehicles, logistical support, and equipment.
The work of burial teams is both backbreaking and
heartbreaking. I have accompanied burial teams and seen the
incredible professionalism with which they operate. These men
and women work covered in impermeable materials in high
temperatures, hiking hours through thick jungle, taking canoes
or assembling makeshift bridges over bodies of water.
They enter communities stricken with grief and fear and
carry out an incredibly sensitive task with the greatest care
for their health and for that of others. These men and women
are heroes of this crisis that deserve our gratitude for
assuming great risk and social isolation in order to stop this
epidemic. While risky, this work can be done safely. Not one of
our more than 500 team members have contracted the virus.
This work is not without challenges. Many resist
identifying their dead as infected. They fear they will not be
able to mourn their loved ones and they themselves will be
stigmatized. This is why the work of safe burial goes hand in
hand with community engagement. Many burial rites are safe, and
the teams let communities safely and respectfully say goodbye
to their loved ones.
Another challenge is cremation. In Montserrado County,
which contains Monrovia, cremation became official policy
during the height of the outbreak. However, this practice is
counter to traditional practices and is met with strong
resistance.
The idea of a deceased loved one being burned, in their
vernacular, upset many and increased stigma and contributes to
bodies being unsafely buried or the sick being hidden.
To combat this, Global Communities, USAID, and the Liberian
Government are exploring safe burials in Montserrado through
identifying land that can accommodate a large number of burials
and has space for families to safely gather and mourn.
Despite the challenges, safe burial is proving highly
effective. We began burial team support in August for Bong,
Lofa, and Nimba Counties. By the first week of October, we had
expanded to support teams in every county of Liberia. And last
month they were able to collect 96 percent of bodies within 24
hours.
We were also able to directly reach over 1,500 communities
through meeting and dialogue sessions, bringing together senior
government officials, county health teams, traditional chiefs,
religious leaders, community health volunteers, and other local
leaders.
Indeed, it is now being widely reported that we are seeing
the rate of infection slow throughout Liberia, which is cause
for optimism. However, it is not yet time for celebration. We
must maintain the level of vigilance that has proven effective
and beginning to control the spread of the virus. Significant
longer term investments must be made in the health systems of
the country.
In closing, Global Communities would like to express
profound gratitude for Congress, particularly members of this
committee, for your continued support of this work. The worst
Ebola outbreak in history can be stopped and will be stopped.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sedgewick follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Mr. Sedgewick, thank you very much for your
testimony and your recommendations and, really, some of the
good news, at least somewhat optimistic perspective, that you
have provided the subcommittee.
Dr. Mans, please proceed.

STATEMENT OF DARIUS MANS, PH.D., PRESIDENT, AFRICARE

Mr. Mans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start by thanking you and members of the committee
for your strong commitment to this issue. I also really want to
applaud my colleagues here for the tireless work that they are
doing on the ground. I am honored to be here with them.
If I may, I would like to start by describing what Africare
is doing on the ground in the fight against Ebola and then
describe to you what we at Africare believe are the most
important steps that need to be taken in order to win this war.
It will be won by Africans on the ground who time and again
have demonstrated that they can overcome disease and adversity.
And, finally, I would like to conclude with what we believe the
United States can do to stop Ebola in its tracks.
When the Ebola crisis began earlier this year, Africare
immediately swung into action. We mobilized more than $2
million in private donations to help break the chain of
transmission. We have shipped personal protection equipment and
essential health supplies to all three affected countries
through partnerships with Direct Relief and others. In
addition, we have been helping frontline health workers do
contact tracing.
Throughout the crisis, we have been very focused on
community mobilization and behavior change. That is at the
heart of what Africare does across the continent. We believe,
while aid from foreign governments and from organizations like
ours is vitally important, it will be Africans adopting changes
in behavior that ultimately will win the war on the ground
against Ebola.
So far, we have trained more than 300 local community
health workers. They, in turn, have educated more than 150,000
Liberians about Ebola prevention, detection, and care.
In addition, our team of nearly 100 staff on the ground,
all Liberian, are joined at the hip with Liberia's Ministry of
Health to keep health facilities open to treat non-Ebola-
related diseases, and that includes safe deliveries of babies.
We are taking into our maternal waiting homes women who have
been turned away from hospitals that are just overwhelmed by
the Ebola crisis.
And since we believe that measurement is absolutely
critical, we are also working with technology partners to find
ways to embed data capture within our delivery systems so that
we can provide good metrics to gauge our performance and real-
time information about what we are doing to contribute to the
war against Ebola. And I should tell you we are doing all of
this without any funding from the U.S. Government so far.
But let me describe what we believe in addition needs to be
done in the face of this challenge. Progress is being made, but
much, much more needs to be done.
We certainly strongly support the President's emergency
request and hope the rest of the G20 countries will step up to
the plate and do more. But it is not just more money that is
needed. It is important how that money is used.
There is a need for better coordination and planning of
these emergency treatment centers. We believe we clearly don't
need as many ETCs as were originally planned in Liberia, for
example.
Very important to take the efforts to control Ebola to the
community level. That is where the bulk of care is provided by
family members, by neighbors, by local health workers who
really are the first responders in this crisis.
We also hope that USAID will be given the flexibility to
allocate its resources as needed to ensure there will be an
agile response to what we have seen as a rapidly evolving
epidemic.
And, in addition, very important, we believe that it is
essential that civil society in the effected countries be given
the support and space needed to help ensure the best use of an
accountability for Ebola funding.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, let me say a few words about what
more we believe the United States can do.
One of the big lessons of this crisis is that donors need
to move beyond the old approach of vertical programming, of
targeting resources to specific diseases like malaria and HIV/
AIDS, as important that those are.
We need to invest in strengthening public health systems,
especially community-based management of diseases. We also need
to take advantage of this crisis to build the health
infrastructure that the affected countries will need for the
future. The investments being made now during the crisis need
to help them build more robust and resilient health systems.
As the Liberian President has said, we must ensure that
everything we do now is not just with the aim of ending the
outbreak, but to ensure that we come out with a stronger,
efficient healthcare system.
And, finally, Mr. Chairman, it is my hope that the U.S.
Government will commit to support long-term economic growth in
the region. I hope you will join me in urging the Millennium
Challenge Corporation to quickly finalize its programs in
Liberia and in Sierra Leone. Its significant investments in the
key drivers for growth will be what is needed to help these
countries get back on the higher growth path that they were on
before the Ebola crisis.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mans follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you. Dr. Mans, thank you very much for the
extremely valuable work you are doing, but, also, the insight
you provide our committee.
Let me ask you a couple of questions, to all three of you.
You mentioned, Dr. Mans, that you have 300 local volunteer
community health workers that you have trained who, in turn,
have educated some 150,000 Liberians about Ebola prevention,
detection, and care.
In your statement, Mr. Torbay, you talked about the need to
ensure the availability of adequate, well-trained, well-
protected healthcare workers.
How close are Liberia, Guinea, and Sierra Leone to having
an optimum number of healthcare workers who are adequately
trained? What is the deficit?
I mean, this is excellent information and very encouraging
information. Are you finding people have been scared away
because of the fear of contracting it themselves?
So if you could provide that information to us.
Secondly, Mr. Sedgewick--which I would point out
parenthetically we are both from New Jersey. Welcome.
You talked about how the safe body management is of the
highest priority to stopping the spread of Ebola, and you
mentioned the CDC number of up to 70 percent of cases
originating from contact from the deceased.
I think a lot of people are not unaware, but they have not
known how stark the transmission is at that period of time when
somebody has passed away. And you have very good information
about your teams reaching 96 percent of bodies within 24 hours
over the last month.
How many of the folks that should be reached are not being
reached, just to try to get a sense of the unmet need? And what
is the role that clergy and church are playing?
Obviously, when somebody passes away, we all turn to our
faith. The church plays a key role, obviously, in funerals.
What role are they playing from the pulpit and in any other
way of getting that message out about the contagious nature of
someone who is deceased from Ebola?
With regard to personal protective equipment, Mr. Torbay,
that is the third point that you made--how available is it,
especially to those volunteers and those indigenous individuals
who might not have access to it, as some of the NGOs do, going
in? If you could just speak to that. Are we where we should be?
Anywhere close to it? Because, obviously, that is one way of
protecting.
And then, Dr. Mans, you had mentioned, and rightfully so,
the deep concern of President Sirleaf. When I spoke to her, she
raised the concern, and you have echoed her concern here today,
about other diseases that continue to have a devastating impact
on people in the three affected countries, including Liberia.
Congratulations and good work on the safe delivery aspect,
to help both mother and baby have a venue where they can give
birth as safely as possible. You might want to expand upon
that.
How many women are we talking about who have gotten help
through your work?
I have other questions, but I will ask those first and then
yield to my friend and colleague and then come back for a few
others.
Mr. Torbay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your questions.
I will start with the health workers gap. What we are doing
at the International Medical Corps is focusing on training
health workers that will be working in Ebola treatment units.
That training is a 14-day intensive training that includes
hands-on training actually treating patients in an Ebola
treatment unit.
As you probably know, when you work in an Ebola treatment
unit, you cannot work for more than an hour or, maximum, 2
before you get out because of the heat, because of the
pressure, because of the stress, and we want to make sure that
those workers go out before they get tired and dehydrated
because this is when mistakes happen. So we are extremely
careful about that.
In terms of the healthcare gap, we are coordinating with
agencies that are doing community work, such as, you know,
Global Communities, Africare, Samaritan's Purse, and other
groups as well, and the idea is to combine and coordinate the
community-based approach with the treatment-based approach
because one cannot work properly or be effective without the
other.
As you know, Liberia and Sierra Leone, even before Ebola,
had very low doctor-per-patient ratios. We are talking 1 doctor
for 100,000 in Liberia, and that is before 324 health workers
have died from Ebola. So you can just imagine the gap.
One thing that is critical to the health gap, we cannot be
only reactive. Anytime there is an outbreak, this is when we
decide to train. We need to build a stronger healthcare system.
We need to build a stronger preparedness system in all of these
countries. And we need to focus on health workforce
development.
Again, it is not just the infectious diseases. It is the
malaria. It is the safe delivery. It is diarrhea. It is
vaccine-preventable diseases that children are dying from.
I think we are on track in terms of training health workers
for the Ebola response, but what we are doing in our Ebola
training facilities is that we will be turning it in the next
couple of months to an infectious disease academy that covers
much more beyond Ebola.
And this is the sustainability aspect that we are
encouraging all of our colleagues to look at, what comes beyond
Ebola.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Sedgewick.
Mr. Sedgewick. Thank you for your question.
To address your second question on unmet need, I would like
to point out that the 96 percent of bodies that are collected
within 24 hours, that is within 24 hours of the death of the
individual, not of the phone call. So much of that 4 percent is
because of a delay between the death and the phone call and the
assignment of the team.
That is a big effort that we are working on in terms of our
social mobilization and the social mobilization that all of the
other partners are doing to ensure that that phone call happens
very early on. Ideally, we are hearing about the status of the
individual well before they pass.
As much as possible, our success is made significantly
easier by our colleagues, like IMC, running ETUs and having the
volume and the beds available to treat those individuals. It is
much better for the individual to first get community care and
then get to the ETU, that allows our teams to do a lot less
work, which is a great situation to be in.
In terms of the larger question of unmet need, it is very
difficult to understand. We do a lot of work with the
communities, trying to understand if there are people dying
that are getting hidden, and it is all anecdotal.
I know that the African Union and the CDC have been working
on doing some studies on this and they found limited volumes of
people hiding, but any are devastating.
So we are really working on making sure that the stigma
goes down, which would encourage everyone to call and to reduce
that unmet need.
In terms of volume, we are completely mobilized and we are
able to respond very quickly. We have mobilized new teams
within a day. So we are able to make sure that, as hot spots
come up, the teams are positioned and available and responding
immediately.
On the second part of that question regarding clergy and
faith-based leaders, they are a core part of how we interact
with the communities. Our historical interactions in Liberia
have been focused on Bong, Lofa, and Nimba Counties. And so we
have really strong relationships not just with the religious
leaders, but with the traditional leaders and with the health
leaders.
That made our initial entry with burial teams fairly
straightforward. You can't drive one of our vehicles through
those counties without getting stopped and having them ask how
is so-and-so and how is so-and-so's baby. They are so engaged
there that it made it very, very straightforward.
When we moved to other counties, especially in the
southeast where we have less of a historical presence, we very
quickly realized that we had to do really extensive
interactions with religious, health, and traditional leaders,
and they have been incredibly helpful in making sure that the
communities know why we are there, that we are there for a good
reason, that we are helping, and that we are able to do our
work respectfully, closely, and rapidly. And so that has been a
core part.
The religious leaders have been really helpful, and the
traditional leaders, who also serve very important roles at the
community level, have been very important for making sure that
our teams are able to operate rapidly and safely.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Mans. On personal protection equipment, no, we are
nowhere near where we need to be. There are shortages of all
kinds of equipment, including gloves for medical personnel to
use.
So what Africare is doing is working with the private
sector here in the United States, the big suppliers of
equipment, like J&J and so many others, to be sure that we can
get a steady supply of consumables into all health facilities
in Liberia, working with all of the NGO partners, because we
are a big believer in collaboration, that no one of us can do
this alone.
And, second, on safe motherhood, you may know even before
the Ebola crisis Liberia had one of the highest rates of
maternal mortality in the world and headed in the wrong
direction, increasing.
So a big focus for us has been in building more and more of
these maternal waiting homes and working with the private
sector in Liberia to raise the money to do so. So far, I think
we are up to about 20.
And in these facilities, the point is to bring access to
communities because women who were expecting were not able to
get to these health facilities, which are so few and far
between. And that is something we intend to continue to do
post-crisis.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Ms. Bass.
Ms. Bass. I again want to thank all of you for your
testimony. I think it has been extremely helpful. And I have
questions for each of you.
Mr. Torbay, in your recommendations, the second one says
you wanted to make sure that the construction of the ETUs are
appropriate for the needs of each country.
And so I was wondering if you find what is going on now is
not appropriate. You know, are you saying this in response to
something that needs to be improved?
Mr. Torbay. Thank you for your question. That is actually a
very important question, and we have been discussing it over
the past week.
There had been plans to build a certain number of ETUs in
every country based on findings that are about 2 months old.
The situation is evolving rapidly, and we need to make sure
that, as it evolves, we do not stick to the old plans, that
actually we adapt and we are flexible enough so that if there
is no need for an ETU, let's not even build that ETU.
If there is a need for mobile teams that would go out and
get patients to an Ebola treatment unit that has empty beds,
let's do that, because we are seeing some Ebola treatment units
that have an overflow of patients and some Ebola treatments
units----
Ms. Bass. They are empty.
Mr. Torbay [continuing]. That actually have empty beds.
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Torbay. And we need to make sure that we balance that.
Ms. Bass. I heard about that, too, and I had thought that
one of the reasons was because the population was, you know,
afraid to come forward and the best case is that they are not
needed, but that that wasn't the issue.
So why do you have that discrepancy? And then I guess what
you are saying is why Dr. Mans was saying that maybe ETUs is
not the way to go right now.
But I will come back to you, Dr. Mans.
Mr. Torbay. Well, first of all, the virus is moving. It is
not staying in one county. So you build an Ebola treatment unit
in one county. You get it under control with the work between
the community-based approach and the treatment approach.
It is getting under control, but then it is appearing in
another country----
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Torbay [continuing]. In another county. So that is why
there are large numbers in certain areas and lower numbers. And
those need to be coordinated.
And we support the community approach because, at the end
of the day, Ebola started at the community level and this where
it should die, at the community level.
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Torbay. And we need to make sure that the community
centers are well equipped and the staff are well trained to
detect and isolate so they could refer to the treatment units
for further treatments and those that are negative could be
discharged back into the community. And this is what needs
strengthening, and this is the work that is being done now on
the ground.
Ms. Bass. So you know how I said in my opening that I was
interested to know if any of the things that we were building:
Should they stay? I have not been inside an ETU. I have just
seen them on TV.
Is there any value to the ETUs that were being built being
left there for either other infectious diseases or other health
needs?
Mr. Torbay. You know, some of those ETUs are not built to
last----
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Mr. Torbay [continuing]. Which is fair enough. They are
built with temporary material that would last for a few months,
and that is good enough.
But one of the approaches we are following is we are trying
to build a more permanent structure that could be later on
turned into something else. It could be turned into a training
center or a clinic. And that is the sustainable aspect of it,
and that is what we are encouraging.
There will be a need for isolation wards or isolation units
in west Africa that need to remain there even after we contain
Ebola because chances are there might be other diseases, or
Ebola might resurface, and there is a need for the facility as
well as equipment and trained staff there.
Ms. Bass. So it was the first time I have heard someone
talk about that the only time a healthcare worker can be with a
patient is 1 to 2 hours.
Now, I have seen the equipment and I have seen the stories
that talk about the heat, but that implies a large number of
healthcare workers.
So if you are only with the patient, you know, for an hour
or 2 and you leave, then do you have relief? Do you understand
what I am saying?
Mr. Torbay. Absolutely.
Ms. Bass. So how does it work?
Mr. Torbay. In our Ebola treatment unit in Bong County in
Liberia, it is a 70-bed treatment facility. We have 230 staff
members working there.
Ms. Bass. Wow. Okay.
Mr. Torbay. We work around the clock. So it is by shifts.
Ms. Bass. I got it.
Mr. Torbay. When a doctor goes out, another one will be in
to replace him.
Ms. Bass. And so, when the person leaves after being there
an hour or 2, they take a break of how long? And then I imagine
they go back for----
Mr. Torbay. Yes. It really depends on the level of
exhaustion and dehydration. Usually, it is not less than 3 to 4
hours. They need to recover before we bring them back in.
Ms. Bass. Wow. Okay.
And, Dr. Mans, maybe you could respond to this one if you
wanted to add anything about the ETUs. But, also, I know that
there was an issue around the healthcare workers at one point
and them being paid and them wanting hazard pay, and I was
wondering what the situation was with that, if that has
improved.
Mr. Mans. Sure. Thank you, ma'am.
You know, I agree completely with what Rabih has just said
about the ETCs as part of the strategy.
Ms. Bass. ETCs.
Mr. Mans. Emergency treatment centers. Sorry.
And there are some certainly challenges around planning and
coordination. For example, we have seen, you know, the United
States Government construct a 100-bed emergency treatment
center, you know, 3 miles from where MSF is operating one. The
Chinese Government has built one in between. And, yet,
communities where there are hot spots not very far away, but
not accessible easily by road, can't get into any of those. So,
again----
Ms. Bass. So how does that happen?
Mr. Mans [continuing]. The challenge of planning,
coordination----
Ms. Bass. How does that happen?
Mr. Mans [continuing]. Is what is very important.
Fundamentally, it is a responsibility of government.
And so I think finding ways, again, as Rabih, I think,
summed up so well, making sure that there is a more mobile
response to be able to get people into the facilities where
they need support.
Because what worries me in this is the gap that I see in
talking to Liberians about these big numbers that they hear
that has been committed to Ebola and the actual response that
is taking place on the ground.
And so I think it is extremely important to be sure that
the planning is done effectively, that that communication is
out there, so that citizens', in these countries, expectations
can be better managed.
The other thing I just wanted to add is about training,
which was discussed earlier, which I think is extremely
important. We think a lot about it; we work with community
health workers and, of course, there is a big challenge.
There are so few doctors in Liberia. Just take one example:
4 million people, 425 doctors. But it is a big challenge, I
think, to provide not just more training for medical personnel,
but some of this pre-service training at the technical level is
desperately needed and could be done pretty quickly.
And I think that there are institutions here in the United
States that can provide the kind of support that is needed to
ramp up pre-service training as well as supporting in-service
training by institutions in the affected countries.
Ms. Bass. Now, both of you or maybe all of you made
reference to we need to take it to the community and have the
community be involved. And I wanted to know if maybe you could
be specific about that.
I certainly understand the community piece in terms of the
contact tracing, identifying, people that are infected.
And then what? If there are not ETCs, ETUs, whatever, then
what? So you are taking it to the community, you have
identified a person. Then what? You follow me?
Mr. Torbay. I can try to answer that.
The role of the community is critical. As you mentioned,
contact tracing is critical. Informing the authorities is also
very important, informing burial teams so they could remove the
body.
But also very important is to educate the community about
what to do if they see someone presenting with symptoms, how to
isolate that person and make sure that also they have at least
gloves or things to protect themselves, but to make sure that
they isolate and inform the different authorities, be it the
health workers or the community health workers.
This is critical because what is happening is that there
are people that have Ebola that are staying in the same room
with five other people, and that cannot happen. The isolation
is critical and this is where the education at the community
level becomes very important because that is the only way we
can contain it.
Ms. Bass. So should there be smaller ETCs? Because I
understand isolating the person. But if you isolate the person
without treatment, the person is just going to sit there and
die.
Then you said that the ETCs are maybe in inappropriate
places or maybe they are not needed. But in the places where
they are not needed, then what happens to the person?
Mr. Torbay. That is a very valid question.
There are community care centers that are being
established, which are like mini Ebola treatment centers.
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Mr. Torbay. And the idea is those patients will be taken
there. They will be isolated. They will be cared for until the
test is done. Then they are referred. So the important thing is
for them to be taken out of their home.
And I would just like to add one thing as well that you
mentioned initially about the U.S. Government and the ETCs.
In our discussion with the U.S. military, as well as with
USAID, about the need for Ebola treatment units and where they
should be, we have seen that they have been extremely flexible
and receptive.
So if we tell them, ``Hey, there is no need for us to staff
this one. Let's move it there,'' they have been extremely
responsive to recommendations. And I would like to commend them
for that.
Ms. Bass. Okay. And, Mr. Sedgewick, you might want to
respond, but I wanted to ask you a series of questions around
cultural practices. But go ahead and respond.
Mr. Sedgewick. Yeah. I would like to catch up a little bit
and I would like to reiterate that flexibility on both the
designation of where the ETUs are and, in general, that
flexibility that, in particular, the USAID DART, and the
general response has been really fantastic and it has allowed
us to make sure that we are able to position resources as
quickly as possible.
On the issue of the community, we spend a lot of time and
have spent a lot of time since April going over what the best
way is to interact with the community, and that is a lot of
these dialogue sessions that I have been talking about.
It is really focused on making sure that we are not top-
down, we are not distributing leaflets and just doing radio
shows, though we are doing that, but really making sure that it
is a conversation with the community about what Ebola is and
what it is not and having them come up with their own solutions
that we work through.
And that has been able to allow us to make sure that the
communities, when they have a suspected case, that they put the
community member in a separate location, that the communities
are doing a lot of their own monitoring, and making sure that
they are making that phone call.
Really, that phone call is the most important thing, making
sure that that victim or suspected victim is isolated. Them
making that phone call is really huge.
In the long term, before we started, before this fire hit,
we were doing these water and sanitation activities with the
government and we were successful in working with over 350
communities in Bong, Lofa, and Nimba on proper sanitation and
proper hygiene. And that effort was incredibly successful.
In all 350 communities, in Bong, Lofa, and Nimba, which are
some of the hardest hit communities, none of them have been
affected by Ebola.
And it really goes to show that, if you make that long-term
investment, if you prepare the communities before it hits, it
has a huge impact and it really prevents that from happening.
And I only wish that we were able to hit all the communities in
Liberia before the virus hit.
Ms. Bass. So I wanted to ask if you would expand a little
bit more.
You were talking about the cultural practices. And I do
understand--first of all, it was really something when you said
that 70 percent of the transmissions were due to contact with
people who had passed away.
How long is a body contagious?
And then my colleague was asking about the role of the
faith community. And I was just wondering if faith leaders--
since, obviously, the traditions are a part of people's faith,
if they were taking the lead in getting people to deviate, to
divert, from traditional practices. And I would imagine that
would be really hard.
You said that they have come up with ways to safely say
goodbye, and I thought you said that they did that with all of
the protective gear on. And I was wondering if that is what you
meant.
And then, finally, I want to know what happened to you. You
were there. You came back. Did they hold you in a tent at the
airport? I mean, I am glad they didn't, if they didn't. But how
did you sneak back in?
Mr. Sedgewick. Great. Well, thank you. And that is a series
of great questions.
I will answer the last one first. I was met at the airport.
There was an ``X'' on my piece of paper as I was trying to get
out----
Ms. Bass. Seriously?
Mr. Sedgewick [continuing]. You know, that pulled me over
to the side. And so I conducted an interview with the CDC.
Ms. Bass. What airport?
Mr. Sedgewick. Dulles.
And they were really great. They streamlined the process as
quickly as possible, asked me about my potential level of
exposure, which was very limited, and took my temperature.
And, since then, I have been in daily contact with the DC
Department of Health. I live in DC, so that I am in contact
them every day. I self-monitor, take my temperature twice a
day, and monitor any symptoms, of which I have none.
But I would like to reiterate that they, the CDC and the DC
Department of Health, are really focused on the partnership
aspect of it and the fact that we are working together on this
and that they understand why I am there and why I went and that
it is not an antagonistic relationship, that we work together.
And that allows not just me, but everyone coming back, to
feel free and happy to discuss our health with the Department
of Health and with the CDC, and that really opens up that
dialogue. It makes it, I think, much more impactful in terms of
a monitoring tool.
On your question about safely saying goodbye, we don't
allow the community members to don PPEs as a prevention tool
because it requires a lot of training. We do actually, though,
allow them to don some PPEs to make them feel better because,
honestly, the burial teams are wearing full PPEs. It is fairly
intimidating.
And so, if it makes them feel better to wear some PPEs, we
allow them to do that, but we don't allow them anywhere near
the body. And they have to----
Ms. Bass. So it was the burial teams you were describing?
Mr. Sedgewick. Yeah. The burial teams are wearing the full
PPEs. The community members are allowed to attend the burial
and, if they want to, they can wear some limited PPEs, but,
really, they are not allowed close.
But that allows them to understand what is happening, where
the burial is, to watch the process, which is incredibly
important, to make sure that they are engaged and to make sure
that the next time there is a victim, that they make that phone
call.
So that interaction really takes the bulk of the time. The
way that the burial teams interact with the communities and
make sure the burial is done in a respectful and dignified way
is a huge part of their time.
The other small item that I wanted to respond to was on the
hazard pay, which is a really important aspect of the response,
actually. Because these are really brave people doing really
important work, but they do want to make sure that they are
being compensated.
And so that is a part of our efforts, is to make sure that
that pay is happening on time and really working to ensure
that. It is a small amount of money by our standards, but it is
incredibly important to make sure that they understand that
they are valued and that the work that they are doing is
important.
Ms. Bass. Just quickly to the two last questions, which
were how long is a body contagious----
Mr. Sedgewick. Oh. I'm sorry. Yes.
Ms. Bass [continuing]. And then if somebody could address
the abandoned children. Where are they? What is happening to
them?
Mr. Sedgewick. Sure.
On the length of time that a body is contagious, we don't
exactly know. And the CDC and the WHO are looking at this. And
so that is why we are just focused on--it is a long time.
It is on the order of weeks. And so that is why we make
sure that the body is, you know, covered in chlorine, placed in
a body bag, covered in chlorine again when it is buried.
It is alternating soil and chlorine so that there is no
risk. The virus doesn't last very long in water even. So it is
very low risk to the water tables. But we also make sure that
burials happen above the water table just to make sure.
Ms. Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Just a few follow-up questions.
At our September 17 hearing, Dr. Kent Brantly from
Samaritan's Purse spoke at length about a number of things,
having lived through it and having survived. One point that he
made was that the 120-bed isolation unit at his hospital, ELWA,
was turning away as many as 30 infectious individuals each day.
And I am wondering, with the ETUs, has that changed or is
the capacity growing? The military certainly is in the process,
and you might give an update on how well you think the United
States military is doing in creating that capacity.
He also made a very strong point about those who will stay
in their home and will be cared for by loved ones, husbands,
wives, children. He said, ``If we do not provide education and
protective equipment to caregivers, we will be condemning
countless numbers of mothers, fathers, daughters, and sons to
death simply because they chose not to let their loved ones die
alone.''
And I'm wondering, since, obviously, isolation is one of
the keys to breaking the transmission chain and many of these
infected people will stay at home, is the outreach to the
individual caregivers as robust as it should be?
Let me also ask, at the second hearing, Dr. Fauci from NIH
used the word ``exponential'' time and time again during his
testimony. We had a group of top people, including the head of
USAID, at a hearing last week of the full committee, and that
word wasn't uttered once. And I asked them, ``Are we seeing a
turn?''
You know, CDC had said that, if the rate of increase
continues at the pace in September, there could be as many as
1.4 million cases by late January. Where are we, in your view,
in terms of the estimations of how large this epidemic may
grow?
Let me also ask you about one of the 10 points that you
have suggested to us, Mr. Torbay, the importance of a capable
ambulance network.
And I am wondering, since so many people can't get to an
ETU or any other kind of health facility, where is Liberia, and
perhaps the other two countries as well, but I think you know
more about Liberia, in terms of ambulance capacity?
And, also, if I could, all of you might want to touch on
this. You know, Dr. Brantly may have been helped by ZMapp. We
still don't know. There are other drugs still in the pipeline,
vaccines and curative potential drugs.
I was amazed and positively shocked when you said, Mr.
Torbay, that the rate of fatality at your Bong County Ebola
unit in Liberia is approximately 26 percent. That is far lower
than the average fatality rate in the three affected countries.
And I am wondering, what is being done there to achieve
those remarkable results in terms of mitigating fatality? So if
you could speak to those issues.
Mr. Torbay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to start with the last question about the low
fatality rate at our Ebola treatment unit in Bong.
We are not using any miraculous drug or any testing drug
there. What we are doing is working with the community to make
sure that patients are referred to the Ebola treatment unit as
soon as possible. That has been one of the major factors in
lowering mortality rates.
And as you have seen even here in the U.S., those that were
caught early on and sent to the hospital, they survived, and
those that were late did not make it, unfortunately. And, for
us, that is extremely important.
Our treatment is very basic. It is palliative care. It is
hydration. It is balance of electrolytes. It is making sure
that people actually are healthy enough for them to fight the
virus on their own.
One very critical component of, actually, our success has
been the U.S. Navy lab that was set up right next to our Ebola
treatment unit. It used to take us 5 to 7 days before we would
get the test results for a suspect case. Now it takes us 5 to 7
hours.
So, basically, people are coming in. We are testing them.
If they are positive, they are put in the treatment ward. If
they are negative, they are sent home. And that cuts down on
the potential exposure as well. This has been critical for us
as well.
Mr. Smith. Excuse me.
That would be of people manifesting some symptom?
Mr. Torbay. Correct.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Torbay. Correct. They manifest symptoms. They are put
as a suspect case until they are tested. Then we decide whether
it is positive or negative.
Mr. Smith. And if they are not manifesting a symptom, no
testing is done?
Mr. Torbay. No.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Torbay. This actually ties into your question about the
Ebola treatment unit capacity. Actually, the lab facilities are
playing a critical role because the Ebola treatment units
accept suspect cases. And that is why they were turning a lot
of cases away, because they did not have the capacity to test a
lot of those patients. They have to keep them there until they
are tested.
So with the additional number of labs that are being
established in Liberia and Sierra Leone, that is helping out
and it is no longer the case. Hardly any unit is actually
pushing patients away. The situation in Liberia, and this is
something that Dr. Shah, I think, mentioned here in his
testimony, is looking better than it looked a couple of months
ago. The numbers are lower. The new cases are lower than it was
before. It is much better than what we estimated 2 months ago.
And if we continue on the right track--and we have to continue
with the same momentum, we cannot slow down--we will get it
under control.
And the same applies for the other countries. Liberia--now
we see the numbers in Sierra Leone, actually, are increasing at
a much faster rate than Liberia. So we need to work together--
community, the treatment, the host government, as well as
donors and other governments and the military--to contain it.
And Liberia could be a really good success story.
Now, we shouldn't start celebrating yet. We have to be very
careful. It is still not under control. It is looking positive.
If we continue, we will get it under control, but it is too
early to actually start celebrating.
On the individual family protection, this is something that
is definitely important. This goes back to educating the
family, but also giving them basic protection equipment,
gloves, mask.
But at the same time, we do not want to give them a false
sense of protection. We do not want them to think that, just
because they have gloves and a mask, they are okay to be near a
patient. We need to make sure that the education takes place
properly and that they are very well aware of the risks even
with the protection. And that is very critical.
Ambulance network. That is very important in all three
countries. And, you know, we turned pickup trucks into
ambulances. We turned anything that we could get our hands on
into ambulances. We are looking at different types of
ambulances, including air ambulances that could take patients
from faraway counties into our Ebola treatment units. It is
much better and much cheaper than setting up another Ebola
treatment unit in some of those counties.
There is a need to increase that capacity, and there is
also a need to train staff working in ambulances because that
is a very risky job when you are in an ambulance. It seems that
there is a move now to actually get ambulances in there. There
are a lot of ambulances being donated. We are buying a lot of
ambulances. Also, we look at alternative ways of
transportation.
Mr. Mans. Yes. If I may, I just wanted to add to Rabih's
point about getting to that inflection point on the Ebola
crisis.
I think this combination of getting both the hardware right
and the software right, hugely important. One, these ETCs and
getting many ETCs out into communities, getting community care
centers to improve access.
On the other side is what I see happening on the technology
front and very quickly so that we are in a position to do a
better job of testing, tracking, and treating the virus.
On the testing side, a number of rapid diagnostic tests are
becoming available, being tested out on the ground in the next
couple of months.
A lot of work is being done with U.S.-based technology
companies working with people on the ground to develop tools to
automate contact tracing, to bring the power of technology into
this to be able to do a much better job of tracking and doing
surveillance.
I think that, too, is coming in addition to what is
happening on the treatment side. So like my colleagues, I am
very hopeful, but we cannot be complacent or declare victory.
There is still a lot of work to be done on all these fronts.
Mr. Sedgewick. I would like to go through a few of your
questions because I think they are really interesting and show
the changes, especially in reference to Dr. Brantly's
testimony.
I believe there was sort of a vicious cycle that was going
on at the early stages where there was not enough testing. So
there were not enough beds. And so Ebola patients were being
turned away from the ETUs both because of the lack of testing
and just the simple lack of beds and healthcare workers.
And so then the victims are turned away. They go back into
their community and they infect others and they pass away. And
the burial teams at that point were overstretched.
And so both of those issues being addressed--the ETUs
having the available beds and then the burial teams being able
to collect all the bodies--really had a significant impact on
lowering the rate of transmission.
And then that cycle continued to bring down the number of
Ebola victims going into the ETUs. So that has been one of the
big flips that has happened since Dr. Brantly testified, which
is, you know, wonderful to hear, obviously.
And I would like to reiterate that, while the communities
do need protective equipment and do need education about how to
handle the sick, that risk of the false sense of prevention
that Mr. Torbay brought up is something that we are very
careful about, that just because they have got a mask and
gloves doesn't mean that they are going to be able to safely
handle victims.
And, you know, the ETUs are not at all wasteful in terms of
how they are put together. They are very straightforwardly put
together. As he mentioned, most are temporary structures. And
they are the fastest, lightest, high-quality treatment that you
can get.
And so, as you move down from that, you do incur some risk,
in terms of the community care centers, that have to be looked
at very carefully to make sure that the quality of care at
those ETCs are very, very high.
In terms of the projections that you mentioned, I think a
lot of those projections were if nothing happened, if we don't
do anything. So now that we are doing something--and I think we
are doing a lot--that is bringing down a lot of those
projections. And I think we will look forward to future
projections as they come forward.
On the ambulance network, it is something that we are
involved in in responding to. And we got into a lot of the
other activities that we are doing, such as contact tracing and
ambulance work and the community engagement work in the
southeast, because we are locating our teams at the county
health team. So we have a significant relationship with every
county health team.
And we make sure that the burial teams are run out of that
county health team. And so, when they say, ``Hey, our ambulance
broke down. Can you help us out?,'' we are able to immediately
respond and very, very quickly to make sure that they have
another ambulance or that their ambulance gets repaired. That
has allowed us to engage about 10 ambulances that are being run
out of different county health teams as they have requested it
from us.
And I think that aspect of it--to make sure that we are
hearing directly from the county health teams in some of these
incredibly remote counties--some of them take 2 days to get to
on a good, dry day--and we are able to hear from them
immediately when they have these needs--allows us to respond
very quickly.
I know Ranking Member Bass stepped out. But I think, on the
orphan issue, it is a pretty significant issue that is being
looked at by a lot of different NGOs. The entire question of
how you respond to the families that are affected--orphans,
widows, widowers--is really significant, and it is one of the
lasting effects of this virus.
Mr. Smith. Just let me conclude with these following
questions.
Who is really in charge, like in Liberia? Is it the
Ministry of Health? We know that WHO came under some withering
criticism in mid-October from a report about how they had
missed it and had inadequate staffing. I am just wondering, who
is truly in charge? UNMEER, what role do they play? We know CDC
is playing a very significant advisory and leadership role.
And, secondly, on the issue of training community
healthcare workers, could you just give a sense what their ages
are. Are they older, more experienced people who have come back
into the system? Are they young people who are stepping up to
the plate? I mean, what does that look like? And does USAID
provide any kind of salary support?
We know that, in catastrophic situations, very often that
kind of subsidy can be provided. I remember being in Sri Lanka
after the tsunami, and we were paying salaries to individuals
to do work, to do cleanup. And it not only was motivating, but
they were actively doing the cleanup of their own homes and
communities, and there was that significant subsidy to help
them get money in their pocket to get their businesses going
locally. And I am wondering if USAID or any other entity in
government is providing any salary support.
Mr. Torbay. The Liberian Government is in charge, and they
should be in charge. At the end of the day, that is their
country and we are just guests there. And we only work through
them and with them. And I don't think any of those countries
were prepared for such an outbreak and especially countries
like Liberia and Sierra Leone that have suffered from a long
civil war and they were trying to recover from that and they
still haven't fully recovered, in addition to the other
systemic issues within the health systems there.
The World Health Organization, CDC, and NGOs work to
support the Liberian Minister of Health and Social Welfare, and
they have people seconded to them. They have a body that
coordinates the Ebola response, and they have people from
different agencies supporting them.
One thing that we definitely--going back to your initial
question about what needs to be done to make sure that we do
not go back there, we cannot afford to go back to where we were
before the Ebola outbreak in terms of systems in those
governments. We need to build the systems much better than they
were before because, as we saw, they weren't that effective.
One way to do it is actually to support the Liberian,
Sierra Leonean, or the Guinean Government, the Ministries of
Health, build their systems, train their staff, give them all
the support that they need to move things forward. You know,
they are doing what they can, given the limited capacity and
capabilities that they have.
UNMEER is now playing a more robust role than they did a
while ago. As I mentioned in my testimony, there still needs to
be clarification in terms of who is responsible for what and
who is coordinating what. That is very important. And I think,
as discussions take place on the ground, that should be
clarified.
I will answer briefly about the health workers. And I am
sure my colleagues here would give you a more detailed answer.
Most of our health workers that are working with us, the
majority of them are younger. They are college kids or people
who went to school or are working in the market, but they are
younger. And those are the ones that have been working with us
mostly.
In terms of USAID support, USAID has been very generous
with us and other NGOs working on the ground. Whatever we ask
them for, including salaries for staff working at the community
or at the Ebola treatment units, there hasn't been any
hesitation.
I do not know what is going on in terms of support for the
Liberian Government, who should be paying--or who is paying the
incentives. But as far as we are concerned, they have been
extremely generous and effective and very pragmatic in their
approach.
Mr. Sedgewick. I would like to reiterate that the
Government of Liberia, in general, is leading the effort and
the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare in particular.
Tolbert Nyenswah, who is the Assistant Minister of Health
and has been leading the incident management system, has been a
really great coordinator of the effort in those meetings, which
happen, I think, about three times a week, makes sure that
everyone is on the same page.
That has been our approach, is to make sure that we are
leveraging the resources that they have and supplementing what
they have to make sure that we are successful and that they are
successful. And doing so has allowed us to move very, very
quickly and be very responsive, as I mentioned before.
That said, the other actors, especially the USAID DART,
have been incredibly responsive and excellent at coordinating
their efforts and their various arms. The DART has been a
really incredible partner for us to make sure that, as the
situation changes on the ground, we are able to move very, very
quickly.
On the community health workers, the system in Liberia that
existed before was for all the community health workers to
actually be community health volunteers. So they were unpaid
volunteers that received supplemental support in some way or
other occasionally. And I believe that, depending on what the
activity is, they are getting some limited level of support.
Certainly from our side, when we do activities, they do get
some incentive payments. If they are able to bring--if they are
able to achieve certain deliverables, then we do give them some
payments occasionally. I don't know if they are receiving
large-scale salary from the Ministry of Health at this point
during the emergency.
Mr. Mans. The only thing I would add, again, as I said
earlier, is the great frustration that exists within Liberia,
this crisis and the gap between what people perceive is
actually happening on the ground and these very big numbers
that the public hears about.
The Government, the President in particular, has been very
forceful in demanding that the Government be very focused on
this agenda. As you may know, she just had a shakeup in the
cabinet. She replaced the Minister of Health to be sure that
she has the leadership in that ministry to see this thing
through.
So there is no sense of complacency. Quite the opposite.
They are leading and working very hard to ensure that there is
a joined-up government approach on their side, just as the
United States Government has taken a joined-up whole-of-
government approach.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Just to conclude, I mentioned in the outset that we had
just introduced H.R. 5710, the Ebola Emergency Response Act,
and many of you have provided insights as to what ought to be
in there.
I would ask you to take a look at it to see if it covers
all the bases, if you will, and if you could see your way
clear, after you look at it, you know, to perhaps support it,
because I do think we are talking about a sustainable problem
that needs a sustainable response.
And, you know, the good work that our House Appropriations
and Senate Appropriations Committees have done, particularly
when the DOD asked for a reprogramming request that was huge,
it was done without the slightest bit of hesitation.
But we need to have the authorizers, I think, as well
making sure that we leave no stone unturned as well in
mitigating and, hopefully, ending this crisis. So please take a
look at the legislation, if you would.
Anything you would like to say before we conclude?
Mr. Torbay. I would just like to thank you for your
leadership and the leadership of the U.S. Government. We are
very proud of what has been achieved so far and the continuous
focus on resolving this issue. And, again, thank you for having
us here today.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Sedgewick. I would like to reiterate that thanks.
And the efforts that you see on the ground in Liberia in
particular are really incredible, and a large volume of that is
due to the leadership of the U.S. Government and the leadership
of the subcommittee to make sure that it happens.
So it is truly inspiring when you are in Liberia seeing the
response happen and seeing the effort, the impact that we are
all having. So thank you.
Mr. Mans. And I want to thank you for your continued
leadership long after these headlines fade, and they will, to
be sure that everybody is focused on how to rebuild in Liberia
the health sector and get these countries back on track. So
thank you for your leadership, sir.
Mr. Smith. Thank you so very much.
And, again, I want to thank you for your expertise, your
tremendous leadership, the three of you. It is just remarkable.
And, that said, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:32 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[all]
