- MARKUP OF H.RES. 512, H.R. 5408, H.RES. 742, H.R. 5664, H. RES. 720, H.R. 2166, H.R. 2847, H.RES. 723, H.RES. 809, H.RES. 458, AND H.R. 1611

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF H.RES. 512, H.R. 5408,
H.RES. 742, H.R. 5664, H. RES. 720,
H.R. 2166, H.R. 2847, H.RES. 723,
H.RES. 809, H.RES. 458, AND H.R.
1611
=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 4, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-101

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-920PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York               Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey      CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
KAREN BASS, California      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      TED S. YOHO, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California      LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas      JIM SENSENBRENNER, Wisconsin
DINA TITUS, Nevada      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York          BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California      FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania      BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLPS, Minnesota              JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota      KEN BUCK, Colorado
COLIN ALLRED, Texas      RON WRIGHT, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan      GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       GREG PENCE, Indiana
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
DAVID TRONE, Maryland      MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director

Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

AMENDMENTS AND BILLS EN BLOC

Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.Res. 512, Calling
for the Global Repeal of Blasphemy, Heresy, and Apostasy Laws..     3
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H. Res. 512 offered by
Mr. Lewis......................................................    11
H.R. 5408, Ukraine Religious Freedom Support Act.................    16
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 5408 offered by
Mr. Wilson.....................................................    21
H.Res. 742, Recognizing the Continued Success of the Food for
Peace Act......................................................    26
H.R. 5664, LIFT Act..............................................    38
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 5664 from
Representative McCaul..........................................    45
H.Res. 720, Expressing the Sense of the House of Representative
that the International Olympic Committee Should Correct Jim
Thorpe's Olympic Records for His Unprecedented Accomplishments
During the 1912 Olympic Games..................................    47
H.R. 2166, Global Health Security Act............................    51
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 2166 from
Representative Connolly........................................    71
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
2166 from Representative Houlahan..............................    87
H.R. 2847, No Passport Fees for Heroes' Families Act.............    88
Amendment in the Nature of Substitute to H.R. 2847 from
Representative Wilson..........................................    90
H. Res 723, Encouraging All Nations to End Sexual Violence
Against Girls Through In-Country Data-Driven Reforms as
Demonstrated by Multiple African Nations.......................    91
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.Res. 723 from
Representative Wild............................................   100
Amendment to the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to
H.Res. 723 from Representative Houlahan........................   108
H.Res. 809, Expressing the Importance of the United States
Alliance with the Republic of Koreaand the Contributions of
Korean Americans in the United States..........................   109
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.Res. 809 from
Representative Engel...........................................   110
H.Res. 458, Reaffirming the Strong Partnership Between Tunisia
and the United States and Supporting the People of Tunisia in
Their Continued Pursuant of Democratic Reforms.................   114
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.Res. 458 from
Representative Deutch..........................................   122
H.R. 1611, Robert Levinson Hostage Recovery and Hostage-taking
Accountability Act.............................................   130
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 1611 from
Representative Deutch..........................................   146

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................   179
Hearing Minutes..................................................   180
Hearing Attendance...............................................   181

INFORMATION FOR THE RECORD

Information for the record.......................................   182

MARKUP SUMMARY

Markup summary...................................................   183

MARKUP OF H.RES. 512, H.R. 5408, H.RES. 742, H.R. 5664, H. RES. 720,
H.R. 2166, H.R. 2847, H.RES. 723, H.RES. 809, H.RES. 458, AND H.R. 1611

Wednesday, March 4, 2020

House of Representatives

Committee on Foreign Affairs

Washington, DC

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Eliot Engel
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
The Chairman. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess of a
committee at any point pursuant to Committee Rule 4, the chair
may postpone further proceedings on approving any measure or
matter or adopting an amendment. Without objection, all members
may have 5 days to submit statements or extraneous materials on
today's business.
As members were notified yesterday, we intend to consider
11 bipartisan measures and a number of amendments en bloc.
Pursuant to notice, for purposes of markup, I now call up the
en bloc package consisting of 11 measures which are: H.Res 512,
Calling for the Global Repeal of Blasphemy, Heresy, and
Apostasy Laws, the 11th amendment in the nature of a
substitute; H.R. 5408, Ukraine Religious Freedom Support Act
with a Wilson amendment in the nature of a substitute; H.Res.
742, Recognizing the Continued Success of the Food for Peace
Act with an Engel amendment in the nature of a substitute; H.R.
5664, LIFT Act, with a McCaul amendment; H.Res. 720, Expressing
the Sense of the House of Representative that the International
Olympic Committee Should Correct Jim Thorpe's Olympic Records
for His Unprecedented Accomplishments During the 1912 Olympic
Games; H.R. 2166, Global Health Security Act with a Connolly
amendment in the nature of a substitute, and a Houlahan
amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute; H.R.
2847, No Passport Fees for Heroes' Families Act with a Wilson
amendment in the nature of a substitute; H. Res 723,
Encouraging All Nations to End Sexual Violence Against Girls
Through In-Country Data-Driven Reforms as Demonstrated by
Multiple African Nations with a Wild amendment in the nature of
a substitute and a Houlahan amendment to the amendment in the
nature of a substitute; H.Res. 809, Expressing the Importance
of the United States Alliance with the Republic of Korea and
the Contributions of Korean Americans in the United States with
an Engel amendment in the nature of a substitute; H.Res. 458,
Reaffirming the Strong Partnership between Tunisia and the
United States and Supporting the People of Tunisia in Their
Continued Pursuant of Democratic Reforms with a Deutch
amendment in the nature of a substitute; H.R. 1611, Robert
Levinson Hostage Recovery and Hostage-taking Accountability Act
with a Deutch amendment in the nature of a substitute.
[The Bills and Resolutions en bloc follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. At this time, I recognize myself to speak on
today's business. I am pleased to support all of the bipartisan
measures before us today and I thank our members for their hard
work. I will keep my remarks brief and highlight just a few of
the 11 bills in resolution.
First, I will start with Mr. Connolly's Global Health
Security Act. We can see clearly right now just how important
it is to invest in smart, effective global health policy.
Pandemics, like coronavirus, do not stop at borders, so it is
critical that our government effectively coordinates the
response to outbreaks here and abroad. We used to have a key
coordinating body in the White House charged with that task.
Under the Obama Administration, these experts directed our
responses to the Ebola and Zika outbreaks. Their work showed
just how important it is to invest in preparedness to buildup
our capacity to respond quickly so we can prevent an outbreak
from snowballing into a bigger crisis.
Unfortunately, this administration dismantled that
coordinating group so I am pleased that Mr. Connolly's measure
will get those best practices back up and running, requiring a
global health security coordinator to manage our response in
emergencies like this and help us to prepare rather than just
react. It is a good bill I strongly support.
Next, I will turn to the Leveraging Information on Foreign
Traffickers Act, or the LIFT Act, the bill authorized by Mr.
McCaul. I was pleased to join the Ranking Member introducing
this good measure to ensure that the State Department has the
right tools to combat human trafficking, a heinous crime that
has ensnared over 25 million people around the world.
I am also proud of the work that this committee has done on
this matter on this matter and I especially want to thank Mr.
Smith for his leadership on this issue for over two decades.
Today's measure continues that legacy for our committee.
The LIFT Act enhances the State Department's ability to gather
information on his horrendous practice and engage the survivors
in our policymaking process. We must continue to fight modern
day slavery and work to enact legislation that brings us to a
brighter future, free of his horrific injustice. Today's
measure is a step in that direction and I hope all of my
colleagues will join me in supporting it.
Next, I will turn to Mr. Deutch's Robert Levinson Hostage
Recovery Act, named for one of the many Americans being
unjustly held captive abroad.
It is critical that our government take every step possible
to get our citizens home safely. President Obama made important
policy changes on this matter, creating a special envoy
position to be the point person on these efforts and proving
transparent, open lines of communication with the family
members of these American hostages. The Robert Levinson Hostage
Recovery Act puts those initiatives into law, building to a
more thorough and effective approach to helping these people
and their families. It is a good bill I am pleased to support.
I also want to recognize two family members of Americans
being held in Iran here with us today, Sarah Moriarty and Babak
Namazi. Thank you for your dedication and strength.
Next, I want to address House Resolution 809 by Mr. Suozzi
reaffirming the United States' commitment to our alliance with
the Republic of Korea. At a time when we face an increasingly
aggressive China, a dangerously unhinged North Korea, and a
host of other challenges including the coronavirus outbreak, it
is imperative that we stay in lockstep with our partners in the
region.
Right now, the Trump Administration is working on
finalizing a cost-sharing agreement with South Korea regarding
our forces on the Korean Peninsula. The Trump Administration
started out by asking our allies to pay 400 percent more than
they did before. While it is important for our partners to
shoulder more of the burden over time, it is important that the
final agreement reflects our close partnership with the
Republic of Korea and advances our shared goal of preserving
security and prosperity in the Asian Pacific. I support this
measure and urge all of our members to do the same.
Finally, I will say a few words about House Resolution 512
from Mr. Raskin. Freedom of religion is a fundamental human
right. No one should face oppression because of their religious
beliefs or lack thereof. It is hard to stomach this today in
2020. There are still more than 70 countries with criminal
blasphemy laws on the books that target people for their faith.
Today's resolution calls for repeal of these dangerous
laws. I hope my colleagues will join me in supporting. I
strongly support all of the measures we are considering today
and I urge all members to join me and do the same. And I will
now recognize our Ranking Member, Mr. McCaul of Texas, for his
remarks.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for your cooperation and leadership on these 11 measures. As
you know, our committee has its greatest impact when we operate
on a bipartisan basis as we are doing so today.
Let me start by thanking the chairman for working with me
on the leveraging information on foreign traffickers or LIFT
Act which continues this committee's 20-year tradition of
bipartisan work to combat the scourge of human trafficking
which affects greatly our Nation and my home State of Texas.
U.S. law currently requires the State Department to deny
U.S. visas to human traffickers, but when the Department denies
visas to traffickers, it does not tell its own anti-trafficking
officials where and how often those denials occur. This bill
ensures that appropriate State Department officials leading the
fight receive this important information on a timely basis.
Modern slavery affects millions around the world, but it is
not just a problem in the developing world. It is happening
right now in our backyards, in our neighborhoods. A month ago,
I was proud to stand with my inspiring constituent, Courtney
Litvak, at the White House Human Trafficking Summit.
We need to keep the voices of survivors at the center of
the policy conversation. And for that reason, this bill also
re-authorizes the survivor-led U.S. Advisory Council on Human
Trafficking through 2025. My amendment also makes sure that
survivors who otherwise could not afford to take time off from
work, are able to serve on this council, such as Courtney
Litvak.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent also to place into
the record a letter of support for the LIFT Act from the U.S.
Conference of Catholic Bishops.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you. And I want to thank you again for
joining me on this important bill. I hope we can move it
quickly to the floor.
As we fact the growing challenges of the novel coronavirus,
I also want to commend Mr. Connolly and Mr. Chabot for their
Global Health Security Act. That bill, this bill, will help
ensure that our interagency and international efforts to
address global health emergencies are as coordinated and
efficient as possible.
I also want to thank Mr. Wilson for his Ukraine Religious
Freedom Support Act. When deciding whether to designate Russia
as a country of particular concern for religious freedom
violations, U.S. officials must also consider Russia's
persecution of religious groups inside those areas of Ukraine
that it occupies or controls.
And finally, I also support the No Passport Fees for
Heroes' Families Act. In cases where our service members are
severely wounded abroad, this bill waives passport fees for
family members traveling to assist in their recovery.
So I am very glad, Mr. Chairman, once again we worked on
both sides of the aisle to get this work done. I hope the
remainder of this Congress will be as cooperative as the first
markup of this year. With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Thank you, Mr.
McCaul.
Does anyone seek recognition for the purpose of speaking on
the en bloc package?
I now recognize Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am, of course,
in favor of the en bloc approval of these bills.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your support, in
particular, of the Global Health Security Act. And I also want
to thank the ranking member and his staff for working with us
to make this happen. I also want to thank my partner in crime,
Steve Chabot, who has been a wonderful partner in so many
enterprises including this one. We have a number of Democratic
and Republican co-sponsors. I also want to congratulate and
thank Ms. Houlahan for her thoughtful amendment that I think
adds clarity to this bill.
We are in the midst of what may very well turn out to be a
pandemic, the coronavirus. It is running at a lethality rate
that is 20 times that rate of normal flu. We have already had
nine deaths here in the United States. We have no vaccine
against this virus and even our best medical interventions are
not 100 percent efficacious. And we have to be prepared.
Two years ago, the administration dismantled the apparatus
that had been put in place 5 years before in the face of the
Ebola crisis. I think in retrospect that was an unwise move.
This bill would restore that and institutionalize it. This is
not a criticism about this President or this administration. It
is a recognition, however, that just as happened 5 years ago,
we did not have the apparatus in place which is why an Ebola
czar had to be named.
We cannot go from pandemic to pandemic. We know throughout
human history pandemics are going to be part of our history. We
need to be prepared. We need to have a locus in the National
Security Council in the White House that is charged with that
responsibility, monitoring, intervention, collaboration,
networking, and of course, taking measures to protect the
American people in the event of a possible pandemic.
It should not take a crisis for us to act. And the American
people, I think, do expect us to act. And I think this gives us
an opportunity as a committee to make our contribution and it
will be a substantive contribution.
I am very pleased that the Global Health Security Act is
endorsed by the ChildFund International, Global Health Council,
the International Medical Corps, the IntraHealth International,
Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, Nuclear Threat
Initiative, PAP, the American Society of Tropical medicine and
Hygiene, Management Sciences for Health, the Sabin Vaccine
Institute, the Borgen Project, and the American Society for
Microbiology.
I think we can move this bill and I hope we will bring it
to the floor swiftly in suspension so that we can get this
institutionalized structure in place so never again do we have
to move from crisis to crisis.
Again, I thank my colleagues for their bipartisan support
and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. Are
there any other members seeking recognition?
I now recognize Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Move to strike the
last word.
We have a number of very good bills before us this morning,
but I want to focus on H.R. 2166, the Global Health Security
Act, bipartisan legislation that my Democratic colleague and
friend, Gerry Connolly, who has just spoken, and I introduced
at the beginning of last year to strengthen U.S. and global
preparedness for and capacity to respond to pandemics or what
may be a pandemic like the coronavirus.
With coronavirus spreading across the globe, our
consideration of this legislation is timely and our decision to
introduce the legislation in the first place over a year ago
was prescient. Over 90,000 cases have been confirmed worldwide
with over 100 in the United States at this time. As this is
proving once again, diseases do not know borders and a deadly
virus is just a plane ride away. That is why the United States
must continue to lead the world's efforts to advance global
health security.
This act has two main goals. First, it codifies our
commitment made by both the Obama and Trump Administrations to
the global health security agenda, a multi-lateral partnership
that aims to strengthen health systems and laboratories in
countries around the world so that they might meet the
international health regulation standards. Folks back home
might wonder why we should bother about other countries' health
systems, but as coronavirus shows, a weak health system in
another country, in this instance, China, can directly threaten
us here in America.
Second, our bill makes sure that we have the personnel. The
personnel is in place to prepare for when the need arises to
respond to pandemics like the coronavirus. Specifically, we
need someone preferably at the NSC to quarterback the U.S.
Government's response since that response inevitably involves
several agencies across the government from the State
Department to the CDC, Centers for Disease Control.
Several Republicans, including then Chairman Ed Royce,
called for the appointment of a single point person with a
health background during the Ebola outbreak back in 2014. The
Obama Administration got it half right with the appointment of
a political appointee as the singular lead. It seems that the
Trump Administration has now followed a similar course to what
Republicans wanted in 2014 with an appointment of Ambassador
Debbie Birx, a universally respected health expert as White
House coronavirus response coordinator under Vice President
Pence.
In any event, our bill would make this position permanent,
so that when the next pandemic comes and we know it will
eventually come, we are ready to go. As coronavirus continues
to sweep the globe, we need to take this opportunity to
recommit this Nation to leadership on health security and
prepare ourselves for the next pandemic. Protecting our
Nation's health must be a national security priority. Now is
not the time to politicize this issue.
The Global Health Security Act provides a bipartisan
endorsement for this critical priority and elevates it within
the U.S. Government. Today's passage of our legislation will
help America and the world for the next outbreak. So I would
urge my colleagues to support the bill and I again want to
thank Mr. Connolly----
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Mr. Chabot. I would be happy to yield.
Mr. Connolly. I am remiss in praising members and I also
want to praise our staff on both sides of the aisle for making
this happen, and particularly my staff member, Molly Cole, for
shepherding this, this bill to this point. Thank you.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. Then I have to thank Mark
Erste, my staffer, who principally worked on this who is
sitting behind me. We appreciate his work and all the work, as
well as Mr. Engel and Mr. McCaul also who both supported this.
We appreciate it. With that, I urge my colleagues to support
the bill and yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman yields
back. I now recognize Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. I commend the leadership of the committee and
the staff for putting together 11 excellent bipartisan bills
for the markup today. I first want to commend Jim Costa for his
bill recognizing the continued success of the Food for Peace
Act. And I want to congratulate Jim who is not here because he
just had a very tough race in California which he won by a very
nice margin and I look forward and I think we all look forward
to serving with Jim for many years to come.
I want to commend Jamie Raskin for his work on condemning
laws against blasphemy, heresy, and apostasy. And in our
hearings in the Asia Subcommittee on Pakistan, we saw how these
laws can be used to just make something up about a neighbor and
lead to capital charges being filed and people coming even
close to execution.
I want to commend Tom Suozzi for his bill recognizing the
U.S.-Republic of Korea Alliance. The chairman and ranking
member should be commended for their bill dealing with the
Trafficking in Persons report and I will make sure that the
information from that report is used effectively.
I commend Susan Wild for her bill to focus our attention on
ending sexual violence against girls. Gerry Connolly for his
bill on Global Health Security and there is not a more
important time for that than right now. Deb Haaland for her
bill recognizing Jim Thorpe. Ted Deutch's bill on our
partnership with Tunisia. Paul Mitchell, I think, found a good
point. We should not be charging passport fees for visiting our
heroes. And finally, I have like all these bills co-sponsored
Joe Wilson's bill on Ukraine Religious Freedom. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Are there any
other members seeking recognition?
Mr. Wilson. Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Eliot Engel and Republican
leader Michael McCaul, for bringing these important bipartisan
measures before us today.
I am grateful to recognize the leadership of chairman of
the Middle East, North African, and International Terrorism
Subcommittee, Ted Deutch. I was glad to support and work with
him on two important bills before us today, H.R. 1611 and
H.Res. 458.
Chairman Ted Deutch has a long history of advocating for
Americans wrongfully detained abroad, including his
constituent, Robert Levinson, who disappeared in Iran 13 years
ago this month. H.R. 1611, the Robert Levinson Hostage Recovery
and Hostage Taking Accountability Act will go a long way to
ensuring the United States does all it can to fulfill and bring
home Americans wrongfully detained abroad back home. The bill
will set up a special Presidential envoy for hostage affairs,
as well as a hostage recovery fusion cell to facilitate efforts
to return these Americans back to their families.
Thank you, Chairman Deutch, for your steadfast commitment
to this issue and I am grateful to work with you on this
important initiative.
Additionally, I support Chairman Deutch's House Res. 458,
reaffirming the strong partnership between Tunisia and the
United States and supporting the people of Tunisia in their
continued pursuit of democratic reforms. I had the opportunity
to travel to Tunisia this past September with the Helsinki
Commission and see this budding democracy up close as
parliamentary elections were taking place across the country.
I am deeply impressed by the extraordinary people of
Tunisia and their commitment to the democratic institutions of
their country which I saw firsthand of this vibrant democracy.
They stand as a hope for the entire region. And I appreciate
working with Chairman Deutch on this resolution.
I am also grateful to be an original cosponsor with
Congressman Paul Mitchell's H.R. 2847, the No Passport Fees for
Heroes' Families Act. This bill should be supported by everyone
of our committee's members here today. It waives passport fees
for family members of U.S. Armed Forces traveling abroad to
visit their enlisted loved ones in the hospital. This is a very
basic respect of our grateful nation that we can give to these
families who put everything on the line for our country's and
families' safety.
Last, I would like to thank Chairman Engel and Republican
Leader McCaul for marking up my bill, H.R. 5408, the Ukraine
Religious Freedom Support Act. Since its illegal invasion and
occupation of Crimea and parts of the Donbass region in eastern
Ukraine in 2014, killing over 13,000 Ukrainians, Russia has
perpetrated egregious violation of religious freedom in those
territories. This has included imprisonment, torture, forced
psychiatric hospitalization, and more, again, with 13,000
citizens dead. Undermining laws of armed conflict including the
Geneva Convention, the Russian Federation is responsible for
religious freedom violations in territory it occupies or
otherwise controls. This bill would give the President the
ability to take into consideration Russia's violations to
religious freedom, not just within the Russian Federation, but
also within the territory of Ukraine that Russia occupies or
controls through armed groups it directs when determining
whether to designate Russia as a country of particular concern
under the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998.
Marking up this bill today sends a strong and clear message
to Moscow. The United States will hold you accountable for your
violations of human rights and religious freedoms in Ukraine.
We will continue standing side by side with the brave people of
Ukraine and freedom-loving people everywhere against the
tyranny and evil perpetuated by the Kremlin.
Additionally, I would like to join in the praise of the
bill by Congressman Suozzi, of our relationship and alliance
with the Republic of Korea. What a dynamic country, what a
symbol it is to Asia of the success of free-market democracy.
Thank you, again, to the chairman and Republican leader. I
encourage all my colleagues to support these bipartisan bills
today. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. I thank the
gentleman.
Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
Ranking Member for holding today's markup and for so many good
measures that I am proud to support, especially given what we
are facing globally, the Global Health Security Act.
I want to thank you as well for including two of my bills,
H.Res. 458 and H.R. 1611 and I want to thank Joe Wilson, the
Ranking Member of the Middle East and North Africa
Subcommittee, for being such a strong leader and partner in
these efforts and so many others.
I was honored to introduce H.Res. 458, a resolution
reaffirming the strong partnership between Tunisia and the
United States and express the support for the people of Tunisia
in their continued pursuit of democratic reform. I am a strong
supporter of the U.S.-Tunisia partnership. Of all the Arab
States touched by revolutions since 2010, Tunisia has emerged
as the most stable and democratic. And I would like to
congratulate the Tunisian people on the success of their recent
elections.
Tunisia continues to face many challenges including the
security threats posed by both extremists and the conflict in
Libya, high inflation, and high unemployment especially among
young Tunisians, and the need to develop inclusive and
transparent and responsive political institutions. Congress
will remain committed, a committed partner to Tunisia as it
confronts and overcomes these challenges and continues down the
democratic path.
Mr. Chairman, next week, March 9th, marks 13 years since
the disappearance of my constituent, Bob Levinson. Bob
disappeared from Iran's Kish Island. Most of you know Bob's
story if no other reason you have heard me tell it many times.
Bob spent 25 years serving his country with the FBI.
For the 10-years that I have been a Member of Congress, I
have urged every U.S. Government official I meet to help bring
Bob home. I have raised Bob's case with allies and partners and
capitals around the world. And those efforts pale in comparison
to the 13 years that the Levinson family has spent tirelessly
advocating for Bob's release.
For 13 years, this family, led by Bob's incredible wife,
Christine, and his 7 children, Susan, Stephanie, Samantha, Dan,
David, Doug, and Sarah who is on the Hill this week meeting
with many of you, they have traveled to Washington hundreds of
times. In the early days of Bob's disappearance, Chrstine and
Dan traveled to Iran on their own to try to find answers. They
met with presidents and secretaries of State, officials of the
United Nations. They are not public officials, professional
lobbyists, or media strategists. They are just a family
figuring out how to get the world to help them get their
husband and father back.
The Levinsons are far from the family that found
themselves, the only family who found themselves facing the
daunting task of advocating their loved one. Babak Namazi is on
the Hill today. His father Baquer and his brother Siamak are
still unjustly held in Iran. Babak, too, spends his time and
energy advocating for his family's release including this week
as he desperately tries to get his family released from Evin
prison, where coronavirus is spreading rapidly.
Today, we have the opportunity to help these families as
they go through one of the most challenging and painful
experiences imaginable. No family should be faced with the
overwhelming task of navigating government bureaucracy and
deciphering mixed messages from their own government.
H.R. 1611, the Robert Levinson Hostage Recovery and Hostage
Taking Accountability Act will create a support structure
within U.S. Government for hostages and unlawful or wrongfully
detained Americans. The bill formalize the 2015 Executive Order
issued in the aftermath of the tragic deaths of James Foley and
Steven Sotloff by ISIS terrorists which created an interagency
response structure at both the operational and the policy
level.
I would like to acknowledge the James Foley Foundation's
work and its president and founder, Diane Foley, as well as
Arthur and Shirley Sotloff, for their continued work in pushing
forward this important effort.
The bill mandates the position of special envoy for hostage
affairs at the State Department and requires families be given
guidance on how to manage their interactions with the U.S.
Government. The bill will also formalize consistent family
engagement. And finally, the bill provides the authority to
sanction those who are responsible for or who assist in the
unlawful detention of Americans because we will not and cannot
tolerate rogue regimes or actors that engage in hostage taking.
Passing this bill will not provide relief to the Levinsons or
the other families suffering without their loved ones. But by
passing this bill today, we can at least give these families
one less thing to worry about. No family should have to face
this situation without the proper resources and support from
their own government. And today, we can also take steps to hold
those responsible for the unlawful detention of Americans
accountable.
Next week, Christine Levinson will mark 13 years without
her husband. Bob's children will mark 13 without their dad.
Thirteen years is too long. I hope, I hope that this is the
last time that this committee hears me tell Bob's story. And I
am grateful, so grateful, to all of my colleagues who have
supported the Levinsons and all of the other families and I
urge your support for the Levinson Act today.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. I now recognized
Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, for the
opportunity to speak before the committee this morning. There
is often quite a bit of partisan rancor in these settings, but
I am happy to witness a lot less of that today.
Almost all of the pieces of legislation before us represent
Congress at its best, working together in the interest of the
American people and leading the way on critically important
issues facing the world today. These bills accomplish a variety
of essential policy goals, goals that reflect our values as a
Nation. They take a stand against the violation of religious
freedom. They ensure we are better prepared to eliminate the
scourge of human trafficking off the face of the earth, and
they provide succor to families visiting their wounded service
members overseas. They reaffirm the intrinsic worth and dignity
of every human life by confronting the evil practice of female
genital mutilation. They reaffirm long-lasting partnerships
with key allies, particularly South Korea, and they guarantee
that those foreign actors who would take American citizens
hostage will be forced to pay to pay for their crime. These
bills, several of which I have cosponsored, demonstrate that
Congress still has the capacity to set aside partisan
differences and work together on measures all Americans can be
proud of.
The LIFT Act, offered by the ranking member improves the
State Department's preparation of the trafficking in persons or
TIP report and extends the survivor-led U.S. Advisory Council
on Human Trafficking through 2025.
The Ukraine Religious Freedom Support Act ensures that we
hit back against the tyrannical Russian regime that regularly
violates the human rights of religious institutions in Russia
occupied Ukrainian territory, territory stolen from Ukraine
following the invasion of Crimea in 2014.
I was also proud to co-sponsor H.R. 2847 which eliminates
passport fees for family members visiting military service
members in overseas military medical facilities.
The Robert Levinson Hostage Recovery and Hostage Taking
Accountability Act authorizes the President to establish an
interagency framework aimed not only at ensuring that those
Americans unjustly imprisoned overseas are released, but that
the offending party is punished accordingly.
House Resolution 809 focuses on the strategic importance of
the U.S.-South Korea Alliance and emphasizes just how much our
partnership contributes to the cause of peace. It further
highlights our Nation's commitment toward a mutual defense
treaty between our two countries and I applaud its passage out
of this committee.
I would also be remiss if I did not mention H.Res. 720
which calls on the International Olympic Committee to restore
Jim Thorpe's Olympic records as they restored his medals in
1982. As you know, Jim Thorpe was the first Native American to
win the Olympic Gold Medal for the United States. He attended
the Carlisle Industrial School in Carlisle, Pennsylvania and
was a two time all-American for the school's football team. The
Carlisle Industrial School is now located on the grounds of the
U.S. Army War College barracks in Carlisle, Pennsylvania.
There is much to praise in these bills before us today, but
I am particularly grateful to be able to speak on the issue
impacting hundreds of millions of girls and women worldwide,
the evil, barbaric practice of female genital mutilation or
FGM. I thank Congresswoman Wild and Congressman Sensenbrenner
for introducing House Res. 723, a resolution encouraging all
nations to end sexual violence against girls through data-
driven reforms. This resolution explicitly encourages nations
to implement multi-disciplinary evidence based response plans
to end sexual violence against girls. I am pleased to co-
sponsor this legislation and join them in their efforts.
The practice of FGM has affected nearly 200 million girls
worldwide. Three million girls are at risk every year and most
endure the procedure before they turn 15 years old. In many
countries, the majority of girls who survive this horrific
procedure are between zero and 4 years of age. Ninety-one
percent of Egyptian women between the ages of 15 and 49 have
undergone FGM. That figures is at 98 percent for women in that
age range in Somalia, 89 percent in Mali, 88 percent in Sudan,
74 percent in Ethiopia, 96 percent in Guinea, and 88 percent in
Sierra Leone.
I am thankful to my colleagues for their advocacy on this
issue, coupled with this committee's demonstrated commitment
toward combating such human rights abuses as human trafficking.
We are demonstrating an unmistakable fidelity to the cause of
justice and peace.
And I thank the committee and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move to strike the
last word.
I want to start by thanking Chairman Engel and Ranking
Member McCaul for working with me to bring my bipartisan
resolution, H.Res. 723, to markup. I also want to thank my
friend, Representative Lois Frankel, for her tireless work and
support on this issue and all issues affecting women and
children.
Sometimes lost in this era of hyper partisanship is the
good work that Democrats and Republicans do in this Foreign
Affairs Committee every day. Today's slate of 11 bills is a
perfect example of the good that we can do when we work
together.
My resolution, endorsed by the American Academy of
Pediatrics, CARE USA, UNICEF USA, and many others, recognizes
that sexual violence against girls spares no culture, country,
race, religion, or ethnicity. Globally, 50 percent of all
sexual assaults are committed against girls who are under the
age of 16. The life-long impact that these assaults have on
young girls cannot be underStated. They decrease the number of
years spent in school. They increase the rates of suicide,
early high risk pregnancy, and HIV/AIDS, and they perpetuate
inter-generational poverty hurting families, communities,
entire countries, and our global economy. And worst of all,
these assaults rob children of their youth and of their belief
that there is good and decency in this world.
But there is a path forward, once that is adaptable and
considers the unique challenges, legally and culturally, that
local communities face. Violence Against Children Surveys, or
VACS, were designed by the Centers for Disease Control. VACS
are data gathering household surveillance tools employed by 22
nations across the globe and have reached 60,000 individuals in
conjunction with INSPIRE, a program developed by the World
Health Organization to help establish and enforce new laws and
victim response and support services. These surveys guide
reforms for each participating nation with great success. For
example, in Kenya, Malawi, Uganda, and Zimbabwe, VACS resulted
in a significant decrease in sexual violence against children
and adolescents.
My resolution applauds the leadership of those countries
that have implemented data driven, in country, multi-sector
reforms to put an end to sexual violence against girls. It also
urges all countries to put into place VACS and INSPIRE in
keeping with the United Nations' sustainable development goals
which included specific goals to end abuse, exploitation,
trafficking, and all forms of violence against and torture of
children, and to achieve gender equality and empowerment of all
women and girls. Through this resolution, we can help establish
integrated systems that protect girls and create survivor
advocacy centers that make mental health services more
accessible worldwide.
To victims of sexual violence, we see your struggle. We
hear your cries for help, and we stand in solidarity with you
all. I urge passage of this resolution out of committee and I
urge leadership to bring this to the floor of the House as
quickly as possible. And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. I now recognize Ms. Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to thank
Mr. Connolly for introducing H.R. 2166 as a very timely piece
of legislation. Right now, we are facing an international
health crisis that is threatening the economic stability and
more importantly the lives of so many people around the world.
My amendment urges the President to appoint an expert to
lead the management of crises like this one, someone who is
experienced in public health or crisis management, who can
better help us navigate an outbreak like the coronavirus.
The original intent of this bill was to explicitly direct
the President to designate an employee of the NSC to coordinate
interagency processes who are responding to the global health
security emergency. However, part of being an effective Member
of Congress and this committee often means making very
deliberate compromises. With that in mind, this committee
worked together to amend the bill text to encourage, rather
than to direct.
Regardless of the legal jargon, let me make it clear the
urgency of this particular matter. By failing to mandate a
permanent NSC position to manage pandemics, we are opening
ourselves to the risk of yet another outbreak for which we will
be woefully unprepared. Given that both Republicans and
Democrats support this amendment, I expect the President to
sign this legislation and to appoint a qualified person to the
advisor position with haste. We simply cannot afford to wait
for the next coronavirus.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
The Chairman. OK, I thank the gentlewoman. I now recognize
Mr. Malinowski. I will give him 3 seconds to catch his breath.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
everyone, for your patience.
We have a number of good pieces of legislation here which I
am very happy to support. I want to take my time to speak about
one bill which I will support, but which I do find in some ways
disappointing and I want to just express some thoughts about
it. And that is the resolution of our relationship with South
Korea.
I agree with what it says. I am disappointed by what it
does not say, and I think we need to be honest about that. Let
me start by expressing what I think all of us pretty much agree
on. We agree that South Korea is our ally. We agree that South
Korea is worthy of being our ally. It is a democracy, a country
that shares our values and our burdens in the world. We agree
that North Korea is a horrific dictatorship, an adversary of
the United States, and a threat to peace and security in Asia.
I believe all of us agree that our military commitment to
South Korea is something that serves America's national
security interests. We are not just there to protect the South
Koreans. We are there because South Korea offers us a platform
to protect our interests in Asia, to protect our other allies
including Japan, and to counter the threat of a rising China,
not to mention deterring aggression from North Korea.
I think all of us understands that South Korea pays a
significant share of this joint partnership. Recently, South
Korea paid about 90 percent of the construction of Camp
Humphreys, a major military base, 90 percent of $11 billion
cost. South Korea spends 2.6 percent of its GDP on defense,
more than most of our European allies. South Korea contributes
about half of the cost of stationing U.S. military personnel in
that country. I think all of us understand it would cost us
more money to bring those troops home than it does to keep them
there.
And yet, we have a President who does not agree with that
consensus, who has repeatedly questioned why we have troops in
South Korea in the first place, a President who treats this
alliance with South Korea the way he treats so many of our
other alliances in democratic countries around the world. He
treats it as if it is a protection racket. He has repeatedly
said and argued that we should not be there unless we are paid
to be there. He treats our troops in South Korea as if they are
mercenaries.
Right now, as we are passing this resolution, expressing
our support for this partnership, the President is demanding
that the South Koreans pay us four times what they currently
contribute to meeting the shared costs of this alliance, a 400
percent increase, a shake-down. After a year, 2019, in which
North Korea shot off more than two dozen missiles in violation
of U.N. Security Council resolution.
I think all of us here, Republicans and Democrats,
understand that this is crazy, the shake-down of an ally in the
middle of an ongoing national security crisis in the Korean
Peninsula is absolutely crazy. I am confident that Secretary
Pompeo believes it is crazy. I am confident that Secretary of
Defense Esper believes it is crazy, that our military leaders
believe it is crazy. But we are not willing to say so in this
resolution.
For the sake of bipartisan comity, we are going to pass a
resolution that contains, honestly, a bunch of platitudes about
the importance of this relationship and of this partnership,
but that does not express the concerns of the U.S. Congress
which I believe they are shared on both sides of the aisle,
that it is wrong in the middle of a crisis to be shaking down
an ally and we do not stand with that.
I think this is because our Republican colleagues, even
though most of them would agree with most of what I have just
said, do not want to get into an argument with the mad king in
the White House and that disappoints me. I think it diminishes
the importance of our committee, diminishes the value of this
resolution, and other similar resolutions that we may have.
So I will vote for it, but with a heavy heart, with great
disappointment and with the hope that in the future we are
willing to be a little bit more edgy, that we are willing, even
as we strive for bipartisan consensus, to do things that may
require a vote from time to time and a little bit of
disagreement. And with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. I thank the chairman and the ranking member of
this committee's work this morning. I think it reflects the
bipartisanship that we like to see as it relates to our
Nation's foreign policy.
I would like to speak on part of the en bloc measures that
we are considering on voting this morning on this specific
issue and that is the Food for Peace Act. And that is the
support of House Resolution 742 which I have introduced.
This has been a successful bipartisan program for decades.
Since 1954, Food for Peace has provided lifesaving food
assistance for some of the world's most vulnerable people and
it has already saved millions of lives. Clearly, there is more
work that can and should be done.
Tens of millions of children suffer from the effects of
malnutrition, while disasters that we know of, civil strife,
and other crises put food supplies at risk every year and that
doesn't begin to talk about the challenges of climate change in
which we know many places around the world that are on a
subsistence diet are going to be further impacted as their
ability to produce food in those regions because of the impact
of climate change will diminish sadly.
I have introduced House Resolution 742 to mark these
important achievements and call for continued appropriation and
prioritization for Food for Peace. The resolution has strong
bipartisan support. It has the support of a number of
interested organizations and trade groups that reflect the
breadth and width of our country, as well as other
international organizations. The support should remind us that
Food for Peace is not only an important reminder of the
generosity of the American people, the America farmer, but a
critical aspect of our national security policy. I mean this is
smart policy. And when we do these kinds of work, we build
relationships in the most positive ways.
I often say that food security, I think, translates into
national security for our country. So our nutrition assistance
for the world's most vulnerable people is not only the right
thing to do, but it is clearly in our interest and so therefore
I ask my colleagues to stand with me and affirm the importance
of the Food for Peace program, support this measure, 742, and I
yield back the balance of my time. And I will find my voice
somewhere.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Are there any
other members seeking recognition?
Hearing no further requests for recognition and without
objection, the committee will proceed to consider the noticed
items en bloc. Without objection, each measure is considered as
read and the amendment to each are considered as read and are
agreed to.
The question occurs on the measures en bloc, as amended. If
amended, all those in favor, say aye.
[Ayes.]
All those opposed, no.
[No response.]
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. The measures
considered en bloc are agreed to and without objection each
measure is ordered favorably reported, as amended, and each
amendment to each bill shall be reported as a single amendment
in the nature of a substitute. Without objection, staff is
authorized to make any technical and conforming changes.
This concludes our business today. I thank Ranking Member
McCaul and all of the committee members for their contributions
and assistance of today's markup. The markup is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:59 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

INFORMATION FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MARKUP SUMMARY
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
