- THE END OF ONE COUNTRY, TWO SYSTEMS?: IMPLICATIONS OF BEIJING'S NATIONAL SECURITY LAW IN HONG KONG

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE END OF ONE COUNTRY, TWO
SYSTEMS?: IMPLICATIONS OF
BEIJING'S NATIONAL SECURITY
LAW IN HONG KONG

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 1, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-122

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-196PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York               Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey      CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia      STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
KAREN BASS, California      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      TED S. YOHO, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California              LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas      JIM SENSENBRENNER, Wisconsin
DINA TITUS, Nevada      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York      BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California      FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania      BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLPS, Minnesota      JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota      KEN BUCK, Colorado
COLIN ALLRED, Texas          RON WRIGHT, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan      GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      GREG PENCE, Indiana
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
DAVID TRONE, Maryland      MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Lee, Cheuk Yan, General Secretary, Hong Kong Confederation of
Trade Unions...................................................     8
Petersen, Carole J., Professor of Law, William S. Richardson
School of Law, Graduate Chair, Matsunaga Institute for Peace,
University of Hawai'i at Manoa.................................    10
Leung, Brian, Ph.D. Candidate, University of Washington..........    12
Law, Nathan, Former Hong Kong Council Member, Yale University....    14

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    60
Hearing Minutes..................................................    62
Hearing Attendance...............................................    63

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM CHAIRMAN ENGEL

Statement for the record from Chairmane Engel....................    64

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY

Statement for the record from Represenative Connolly.............    77

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record..................    79

THE END OF ONE COUNTRY, TWO SYSTEMS?: IMPLICATIONS OF BEIJING'S
NATIONAL
SECURITY LAW IN HONG KONG

Wednesday, July 1, 2020

House of Representatives
Committee on Foreign Affairs
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Eliot Engel
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Mr. Sherman. The Committee on Foreign Affairs will come to
order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any point. And all members will have
5 days to submit statements, extraneous materials, and
questions for the record subject to the length limitations in
the rules.
To insert something in the record, please have your staff
email to the previously mentioned address or contact the full
committee staff.
I see that we have a quorum. And before I go forward, I
understand the Speaker of the House Ms. Pelosi will be stopping
by this hearing. And I ask unanimous consent that she
participate at any point she arrives during the hearing.
So ordered.
And there she is. Madam Speaker, would you like to make
some remarks?
Speaker Pelosi. Thank you very much, Mr. Sherman. I thank
you and Mr. McCaul, and Mr. Eliot Engel for having this hearing
today.
It is with great sadness that I come here because we had
such optimism and such hope. The U.S. Congress has always
spoken in bipartisan House and Senate, Democrats and
Republicans, with one voice in defense of those who are pressed
by Beijing and in support of freedom, justice, and real
autonomy for the people of Hong Kong.
We continue to urge President Trump to hold Chinese
officials accountable for abuses, including taking steps under
the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act. We must consider
all tools available, including visa limitations and economic
penalties.
But here today I am very honored to join Cheuk Yan Lee,
General Secretary, Hong Kong Confederation of Trade Unions;
Carole Petersen, Professor of Law, University of Hawaii; Brian
Leung, a Ph.D. university candidate, University of Washington;
and virtually, electronically, Nathan Law, Legislative Council,
former member Leg. Council of Hong Kong, and former chairman
Demosisto.
Again, for years the world has watched in horror as Beijing
has accelerated its campaign to dismantle the rights and
freedoms of the people of Hong Kong, from its brutal response
to peaceful protest, to the introduction of the horrific
extradition law that we condemned.
So many times this committee, Mr. McCaul, Mr. Eliot Engel;
in the Senate, Marco Rubio, Mr. Cardin and others, have put--
now Chris Van Hollen, Mr. Toomey over there, Democrats and
Republicans, have put the bright spotlight on what is
happening. The Executive Commission on China, chaired by Mr.
McGovern, and co-chaired by Chris Smith, Vice Chair Chris
Smith, have worked very hard with hearings, et cetera, as has
this committee, to call attention to all of this.
The Lantos Commission on Human Rights, the former chair of
this committee, in a bipartisan way has called attention to all
of this over the years, since Tiananmen Square, and then in
terms of Hong Kong more specifically, leading up to 1987, and
including that.
And what is so sad about it is that the Chinese just think,
the Chinese regime just think that they can act with impunity
in repressing the spirit of democracy. Two million people
turned out against the extradition law. Two million people.
That is a big crowd in the United States. But when you
understand it was 25 percent of the population of Hong Kong,
that is just almost anybody who could go out, showed up against
what the Chinese regime was going to do.
And what they want, they want, the most horrible form of
horror--just keep using the same word--for someone who is
fighting for democracy or is imprisoned because of it, it is
for the regime to say nobody cares, they are not even paying
attention to what you are doing. Nobody remembers you, that you
were in prison and--or why you are even there.
Well, we know why they are there. Something deep in the
soul of all of us, something that the young people commemorated
in Tiananmen Square, having the Goddess of Democracy as their
symbol, something that we have led the way on and that we
cannot turn our backs on.
When Beijing announced its intention to pass the so-called
National Security Law--so-called--we were concerned. It was
frightening. It is nothing short of an all-out effort to negate
the rights of the people of Hong Kong in violation of the
agreements made under the One Country, Two Systems. We were
concerned of what it might be. And it exceeds even those
horrors.
The law is a brutal, sweeping crackdown against the people
of Hong Kong, intended to destroy the freedoms they were
promised. Thank you to the committee for holding this hearing
which asks the question: is this the end of the One Country,
Two Systems? It seems as it is.
As I have Stated, Beijing's so-called National Security Law
passed on the eve of the 23d anniversary of the handover of
Hong Kong from the U.K. to China signals the death of the One
Country, Two Systems principle. The purpose of this law is to
frighten, intimidate, and suppress the people of Hong Kong who
are peacefully demanding the freedoms they have long been owed.
All freedom-loving people must come together to condemn the
law, which accelerates Beijing's years-long assault on Hong
Kong's political and economic freedoms.
Many of us have been working for--Mr. Smith and I have been
working for three generations, Martin Lee another generation,
now Nathan Law and Joshua, to see the courage of these people
speaking out as they have done, and to see matters just getting
worse in terms of the regime. Of course, right now we are also
concerned about the Uyghurs in China, the Tibetans in Tibet.
The list goes on.
In terms of the Uyghurs, what we are finding out this
morning is not only are they putting Uyghurs in concentration
camps, they are, by social media and the rest, tracking Uyghurs
throughout the world and what their communication is with
people inside. So this reaches into our own, reaches into our
own country.
Again, I will say all freedom-loving people must come
together to condemn this law. We must work together in a
multilateral way to monitor the implementation of this law and
hold Beijing accountable for its violations of the Joint
Declaration and the basic, Basic Law.
As I have said many times over, I have said this over and
over again, if we do not speak out for human rights and
democratic freedoms in China, let's just talk about here, if we
do not speak out for human rights and religious freedom in
China, we lose all moral authority to speak out anyplace if our
silence is because of commerce. If we refuse to speak out on
human rights in China because of commercial interests, we lose
all moral authority to speak out for human rights anyplace in
the world.
Again, Mr. Chairman, Acting Chairman Mr. Sherman, thank you
for the recognition. Thank you to Mr. McCaul and to the members
for the opportunity with unanimous consent to express some of
the views which I hold to be bipartisan, bicameral in support
of the people of China, in this case Hong Kong.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your
decades of fighting for human rights, particularly for the
people of China. And your presence here underlines for the
world the importance that America puts on the subject of this
hearing. So thank you. Thank you very much, and thank you for
mentioning the Uyghurs as well.
Speaker Pelosi. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sherman. As a reminder to members, staff, and all
others physically present in the room, per the guidance of the
Office of Attending Physician, masks must be worn at all times
during today's proceedings, and are strongly advised when a
member is speaking from their microphone.
Please also sanitize your seating area. The chair views
these measures as a safety issue, and therefore an important
matter of order and decorum of this proceeding. Please keep
your video function on at all times if you are participating
remotely, even when you are not recognized by the chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves. And
please remember to mute yourself after you finish speaking.
Just a few minutes before the hearing was scheduled to
begin, I learned that our distinguished chair Eliot Engel could
not attend, or at least could not attend for the first portion
of this hearing. He has done an outstanding job of chairing
hearings year after year, and I will try to fill in for him
here today.
I do not have--I am scurrying around trying to put together
an opening statement. And so I will first recognize the ranking
member to deliver his opening statement, after which I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Speaker, for being here today. That shows how important this
hearing is. You have been a steadfast champion of human rights
and democracy around the world. And if we do not--you are
right, if we do not have moral authority here, we have it
nowhere.
And just I think it means a lot to us on both sides of the
aisle that you have taken the time from your busy day to be
here and to be in our presence.
Today is the 23d anniversary of the handover of Hong Kong
to the Chinese Communist Party. Under the Sino-British treaty
that set up this handover, the people of Hong Kong were
promised One Country, Two Systems so they could be allowed some
level of autonomy. The One Country, Two Systems approach worked
well for many years. But recently the CCP began to rapidly
erode this system by peeling away the rights and freedoms
guaranteed to the people of Hong Kong.
And then yesterday the CCP took a sledgehammer to One
Country, Two Systems by passing sweeping so-called national
security legislation that strips away the autonomy of Hong
Kongers, violating the terms of the Sino-British treaty. They
view democracy, individual liberty, and free markets as a
threat, and have declared war on each.
Unfortunately, this wasn't the CCP's only act of brutal
suppression we learned about this week. On Monday, the world
was made aware the Chinese Communist Party is using forced
sterilization, forced abortion, and coercive family planning
against ethnic minorities, including the Uyghur Muslims. It is
clear the CCP does not care about the people of China; they
only care about preserving their own power. And by brutally
suppressing democracy in Hong Kong, the CCP is challenging the
underlying assumptions that have guided the world since the end
of the cold war.
We sit here, as the Speaker said, not as Republicans or
Democrats, but as Americans united in our strong support for
Hong Kong. This is a battle between democracy and dictatorship,
between liberty and tyranny, and between freedom and
oppression, and it is a battle that the world must win.
I would like to take this opportunity to speak directly to
the people of Hong Kong. America stands with you, and America
will always support you. Last year when we heard you sing our
national anthem, and when we saw you carrying our American
flag, we knew and we know that you were telling us we are not
two people but one, both united in our belief in freedom and
democracy for all.
Today is not just the anniversary of the first handover of
Hong Kong to the CCP, it is also the 1-year anniversary of a
heroic act by one of our witnesses here today, Brian Leung. One
year ago today during demonstrations in Hong Kong, Mr. Leung
gave a moving speech where he revealed his identity,
subjectingly--subjecting himself to significant prosecution.
I have met another one of our witnesses, Nathan Law, last
year when we passed the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy
Act. He is an incredible young man who, along with other
democracy activists, like Joshua Wong, are risking their safety
and security every day to fight for freedom. They are all
commendable, and I am grateful to have them with us here today.
As Chairman Engel and I said in a letter earlier this year,
quoted as critical to the United States using available tools
under the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act and other
authorities, to make clear Beijing--to Beijing that its
violations of international commitments and its commitments to
the people of Hong Kong will have consequences.
And I urge the Administration to issue the sanctions
authorized by this Congress. With this hearing today, we have
this opportunity. America stands in solidarity with the
freedom-loving people of Hong Kong, and will continue to be a
beacon of hope for all those fighting for democracy around the
world.
And so with that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you and I yield
back.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Consistent with House Resolution
965 and the accompanying regulations, staff will only mute
members and witnesses, as appropriate, when they are not under
recognition. And they will do that for the purpose of
eliminating background noise.
Pursuant to notice, we meet today to discuss the new
National Security Law that the Chinese Government has forced on
the people of Hong Kong on the 23d anniversary of the handover.
This is Beijing's latest and most aggressive challenge to Hong
Kong's autonomy. I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes as
an opening statement.
It is important to know how we got here. In 1997, we had
the adoption of the One Country, Two Systems arrangement that
guaranteed 50 years of relative autonomy to Hong Kong: freedom
of expression, independent judiciary, strong democratic
systems. And over the past two decades Hong Kong's unique
status has allowed it to flourish, to prosper. Human capital,
privileged financial position as a gateway to China, with a
trusted common law system of law and courts, have turned Hong
Kong into a hub of finance and trade.
Historically, in Hong Kong corruption is low, contracts are
honored, judges can rule fairly and independently, journalists
and academics enjoy freedom of expression, and human rights are
generally respected. Hong Kong has seen its success create a
vibrant society.
This is a glaring embarrassment to the Chinese mainland.
One Country, Two Systems is an embarrassment if the smaller
system is working much better. Now this does not mean that Hong
Kong was perfectly free, or that the system it had in place
last year was perfectly democratic. But compared to the
government in Beijing, it shows the people of China what can be
done by moving in the direction of freedom.
In December, as chair of the Asia Subcommittee, I hosted a
hearing titled ``Authoritarianism with Chinese Characteristics:
Political and Religious Human Rights Challenges in China.`` And
that hearing featured the vice president of the City University
of Hong Kong Students' Union, Joey Siu. The committee passed a
resolution at my suggestion, by unanimous consent, last year
supporting the right of Hong Kongers to protest.
No one should face life in prison for going to the street
to voice their opposition, not in this country, not in Hong
Kong, not anywhere. The One Country, Two Systems was designed
to safeguard Hong Kong's role in thriving--as a thriving
financial center. Now Hong Kongers are fleeing Hong Kong out of
fear for their safety, and we should support their right to do
so, though the right we really want to support is the right of
all Hong Kongers to the level of autonomy promised in the One
Country, Two Systems agreement.
We have witnesses in the last 24 hours, nothing short of
terrifying events in Hong Kong. We need to reject this Chinese
violation of China's own international commitments and the
commitments they have made to their own people.
The peoples of Hong Kong expected China to honor the
commitment under the Two Systems part of the agreement, but
over the past few years Beijing has chipped away at Hong Kong's
freedoms. In 2014, when officials in Beijing curtailed voting
rights for the people of Hong Kong, a new generation of
democracy activists under the banner of the Umbrella Movement
came to the forefront.
Year after year, injustice after injustice, a broadening
coalition of Hong Kongers from all walks of life have taken to
the streets to protest their rights. Now Chinese President Xi
Jinping has launched an unprecedented attack against Hong Kong.
Beijing's National Security Law undermines the very essence of
Hong Kong's autonomy by introducing a new range of offenses and
punishments for so-called crimes against the State. The
legislation will compromise Hong Kong's independent judiciary,
and severely curtail freedom of expression, and criminalize
dissent.
So why is China willing to break these commitments?
Unfortunately, when we look down Pennsylvania Avenue we see an
Administration willing to, in effect, tell China that its
obligations to human rights, whether it be in Hong Kong or
whether it be the Uyghur people, will simply not catch the
attention of the American Administration. We have squandered
months without speaking out at the executive level.
Hong Kong has been on the back burner in an effort to sell
soy beans, and we haven't even sold the soy beans. President
Trump spent January and February of this year praising Xi
personally for how he handled the coronavirus. Now, you know,
he has taken the exact opposite approach. We need consistency
in the White House, and we need a consistent adherence to our
own standards of human rights.
I am grateful to our witnesses for the insight and
experience they bring us. And I will now move toward
introducing the witnesses.
Our first witness is Mr. Lee Cheuk Yan, a former member of
the Hong Kong Legislative Council. He is the General Secretary
of the Hong Kong Confederation of Trade Unions, and Vice
Chairman of the Hong Kong Labor Party. And why do not we hear
from----
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sherman. Yes?
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Smith would like to make a few opening
remarks, if that would be acceptable.
Mr. Sherman. Were your opening remarks less than 5 minutes,
Mr. McCaul?
Mr. McCaul. I wasn't keeping time, but it was three--three
minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I think that would open it up to everyone
here. Is there----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sherman. Yes?
Mr. Connolly. I ask unanimous consent that Mr. Smith be
recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Hearing unanimous consent, I want to hear from
a champion of human rights. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. And thank you, Mr. McCaul.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to my good friend from
Virginia.
Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your very elegant statement
and for we have worked together for well over three decades on
combating human rights abuse by China. During the Tiananmen
Square, during the MFN battles, and all the others, we were
joined in a very, very bipartisan way. Frank Wolf, you might
recall, Tom Lantos, and all of us speaking very aggressively
against aiding and abetting this horrific dictatorship which
has only gotten worse under Xi Jinping. So thank you for your
leadership.
Mr. Chairman, the great freedom-loving people of Hong Kong
have just had another draconian, anti-democratic law imposed
upon them. And that is called the so-called National Security
Law. It severely penalizes democracy activists. And even terms
like ``collusion`` are outlined in the new law.
And it defines that any contact with external actors, like
human rights organizations, journalists, Members of Congress,
those great people like Joshua Wong and others who have come
here and said, all that we are asking Xi Jinping is for
freedom. That is it. And to live up to your own promises made
in the Basic Law and in the joint communique between Hong Kong
and China which facilitated the transfer or the conveyance of
Hong Kong to China.
They have broken their words. You know, words matter. And
it is a matter of international law that they committed for at
least 50 years to having these two Chinas, Two Systems, One
China. And now they are breaking it with impunity.
Let's not forget that Xi Jinping continues to commit
pervasive human rights abuse against the Chinese people,
including the use of torture, which has been documented over
and over again by the Special Rapporteurs for the United
Nations, forced abortions, forced sterilization. Mr. McCaul
rightly pointed out that they are using those tools of
repression as a means of genocide to eliminate the Muslims in
the Xinjiang region, 10 million strong. They are going after
them to destroy their children, to destroy their families. And
of course, one to two million are in concentration camps.
The crushing of the Tibetan people continues unabated. And
of course, there are no labor rights. And under Xi Jinping
under what he calls sinicization, there is an all-out effort to
end all religious practice unless it comports with Marxist
principles. It is called sinicization, and it is going from bad
to worse.
The Hong Kong Human Rights Act, and I was the House sponsor
of it, it is a bipartisan bill obviously. Mr. Suozzi was our
principal co-sponsor, 130 co-sponsors or so, backed by just, by
everybody on this committee, that is now law. And the President
did sign it. And pursuant to that law, on schedule, he did make
the statement that the loss of autonomy has happened.
So we are, we need to unite now, Democrats, Republicans. We
have done it before. We have got to do it, with the President.
And the world needs to unite against this pervasive human
rights abuser Xi Jinping and this draconian law that they just
put into effect.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you for those comments and for decades
of dedication to human rights. I am going to introduce all of
the witnesses and then call on them in turn.
Our second witness is going to be Professor Carole J.
Petersen, Professor of Law at the William S. Richardson School
of Law, and Graduate Chair in the Spark M. Matsunaga Institute
of Peace at the University of Hawaii at Manoa.
Next we will have Mr. Nathan Law, the founding chairman of
the pro-democracy organization Demosisto, and the youngest ever
elected lawmaker when he won a seat on the Hong Kong
Legislative Council in 2016.
Last we will have Brian Leung Kai-Ping, a Hong Kong
democracy activist known for reading a statement on behalf of
the protesters at the Legislative Council that crystalized the
Five Demands for the 2019 Anti-Extradition Movement.
I would like to thank our witnesses for being here today. I
will recognize each witness for 5 minutes. And without
objection, your prepared written statement will be made part of
the record.
I will first call upon Mr. Yan for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF CHEUK YAN LEE, GENERAL SECRETARY, HONG KONG
CONFEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS

Mr. Lee. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you for the invitation
to talk about the situation of Hong Kong at this very, very
critical moment.
The passing of the National Security Law by the National
People's Congress yesterday has sounded the death knell for One
Country, Two Systems. The people of Hong Kong were not shown
any wordings of the law when it was passed, showing the
contempt of the Chinese Communist Party on the rights of the
people of Hong Kong. This represents a second handover for Hong
Kong, and for me personally, my third handover.
On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was handed over to China by the
British Government under the promise of One Country, Two
Systems, guaranteed by the Basic Law. The imposition of
National Security Law on Hong Kong represents the second
handover, with a promise of high autonomy for 50 years all
broken. And Hong Kong was handed over back to China as One
Country, One System.
For me personally, it is my third handover. Why is that? I
was arrested on June 5th, 1989, just after the Tiananmen Square
massacre for bringing support to the democracy movement in
Tiananmen Square for support of the people of Hong Kong. Thanks
to a strong outcry in Hong Kong, I was released after 3 days.
And since that day, I devote my lifetime to work toward
democratic changes in China as one of the leaders in the Hong
Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movement in
China.
After the passage of National Security Law, will people
like me be tried in Hong Kong or handed over to China for trial
because of our condemnation of Tiananmen Square massacre and
our candlelight vigil every year, or the setting up of June 4th
Museum, and our continued support for human rights in China?
Will there be a fourth handover awaiting me?
The new law just promulgated 11 p.m., 30th of June, 2020,
is a complete destruction of the rule of law in Hong Kong and
threatens every aspect of freedom the people of Hong Kong enjoy
under the International Human Rights Standard or the Basic Law.
When I read through the detailed description of four
methods to create a crime--subversion, secession, terrorism,
and collusion with foreign powers--the net is spread very, very
wide. And I believe in the drafting of law, what goes into the
mind of the Chinese Communist Party is all the actions taken
over the past protest movement. So they are so angry with the
protest movement, so they come after it and try to criminalize
actions in the past and try to cover it this time under the
National Security Law, so that it can be a revenge against the
people of Hong Kong for what they have done in the past years.
To give you an example, you know, waving of foreign flags
or flags for independence may come under the crime of
secession. Actually, today on July 1st, there are already
people, just because they waved something like the flag, and
they, you know, they are arrested. And even the police have
sort of now made a banner warning people that if you wave a
flag or shout a slogan, you may be cast under the Law of
Letters, the Law of Secession or Subversion.
And, you know, other things also included in the law is to
attack or damage Hong Kong government facilities randomly, and
illegal dysfunction or severely interfere with the legal
functioning of the State apparatus by violence or illegal
means, can be caught by subversion. And with no apology, we do
not like to see damage of government facilities. But is that
subversion?
Or damaging public transport can fall under terrorism. And
collusion with foreign power through illegal means and
promotion of hatred toward the central government. You know, no
one wants to promote hatred. We just want freedom.
Or severely draft the Hong Kong government or the central
government from implementation of laws and policy with serious
consequences. So collusion will include drafting of policy?
So the law will--and also enforcement of the law, the law
will be enforced by National Security Agency with personnel
from China and Hong Kong, with a special unit of the Hong Kong
Police, and the power to search, conduct secret surveillance,
interception of communications which actually, you know,
everyone know this is the operation of like the secret police.
And applying this law in Hong Kong, many people have asked
where did Hong Kong Alliance, you know, our organization, find
this platform of end to one-party rule/State, or our past
support of human rights defender in China seems to be
subversion. And people of Hong Kong shout a slogan: Down with
Carrie Lam or defund the police. And they call it subverting
the Hong Kong government?
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Yan.
Mr. Lee. With the media reporting the----
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Yan.
Mr. Lee [continuing]. Aiding and abetting. Yes? Oh, sorry.
Mr. Sherman. Your 5 minutes is expired. If you could give
us one or two----
Mr. Lee. OK, sorry.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Just a couple of sentences, then
I need to move on to the next witness.
Mr. Lee. OK. So with the destruction of One Country, Two
Systems and rule of law in this case, rule of fear, Hong
Kongers now have to learn and survive in a very, very
suppressive environment. And still, we must maintain the will
to resist. And for us, we will continue our past activities and
not be deterred by the new authoritarian law. We will fight on
for freedom and democracy.
Thank you.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. I now recognize Professor Petersen
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CAROLE J. PETERSEN, PROFESSOR OF LAW, WILLIAM S.
RICHARDSON SCHOOL OF LAW, GRADUATE CHAIR, MATSUNAGA INSTITUTE
FOR PEACE, UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI'I AT MANOA

Ms. Petersen. Thank you for the opportunity to testify this
morning. I am testifying personally this morning and not on
behalf of my university or any organization.
I taught law in Hong Kong from 1989 to 2006. And I co-edit
a book on the local government's first attempt to enact
national security legislation. Although I now teach in Hawaii,
I continue to visit Hong Kong for research. And I have spent
most of my academic career writing about Hong Kong.
My initial written testimony submitted 2 days ago was based
on the limited summary of the law that had been published at
that point. Now that the actual law has been published, I have
no doubt that it violated China's obligations under the Sino-
British Joint Declaration.
The Joint Declaration makes it clear that Hong Kong is to
operate a separate criminal justice system. It shall maintain
its common law legal system, control criminal prosecutions free
from any interference, and exercise independent judicial power.
Unfortunately, this law destroys that firewall. It allows
mainland Chinese security personnel to operate openly in Hong
Kong, and in some cases to remove individuals entirely from the
protections of Hong Kong's legal system.
As Mr. Lee said, it establishes numerous institutions in
Hong Kong, which will be directly under the authority of the
Chinese central authorities.
The Office for Safeguarding National Security will be
functioning in Hong Kong to collect and analyze information, to
guide, coordinate, support, and generally supervise all of the
relevant authorities in the Hong Kong government.
Although Article 50 States that the staff shall abide by
Hong Kong laws, there is no mechanism for enforcing local laws
against them. They are subject to national supervisory
authorities only, and not to the jurisdiction of the Hong Kong
SAR.
There will also be a special branch of the police and a
special branch of the prosecution authority. And they will be
primarily accountable to the central authorities.
If these mechanisms do not give Beijing enough control, it
can also take complete jurisdiction over a case and remove it
from Hong Kong's legal system under Article 55. The conditions
that allow for this to happen are very broad, and there are
very limited procedures. A simple request from the chief
executive, which she will surely give if directed to do so, can
be approved by the central government.
At that point Hong Kong's legal system simply does not
apply. The mainland Chinese criminal procedure will take over,
and the person will be prosecuted and tried under mainland law,
presumably in the mainland.
The extensive involvement of China's central security
officials in the enforcement of this law is particularly
worrying when we combine it with the broadly defined offenses.
Time does not allow me to explore them all with you today, but
one example is ``Collusion with a Foreign Country.`` That is
defined so broadly that if a person merely testifies today and
asks a foreign government to impose sanctions, that could be
considered a violation of Article 29(4).
Moreover, it applies regardless of whether you are a Hong
Kong national or a Hong Kong resident. Anyone can be prosecuted
so long as they commit the offense in Hong Kong, or the
consequences of the act occur in Hong Kong.
For individuals who are permanent residents of Hong Kong--
and thousands of American citizens are in that category--the
coverage of the law is even broader. If a permanent resident of
Hong Kong who is now living in the U.S. merely requests
sanctions against Hong Kong or China, that person could be held
criminally liable, even if the requested sanctions were never
ordered. Moreover, if a person wanted to prosecute that person
in the mainland, it might decide to invoke Article 55.
The remainder of my testimony discusses a number of vague
provisions in the law and raises the question of who will be
interpreting it. We do know that the NPC Standing Committee has
the power, the overriding power to interpret vague clauses, but
the law is silent as to whether the courts of Hong Kong also
have the power to interpret the law. This is significant
because the courts of Hong Kong will probably try to interpret
this law to comply with the ICCPR, so long as there are no
direct conflicts.
Where there is a direct conflict, then this law will
prevail. And that means that China will be in breach of its
obligation under the Sino-British Joint Declaration to ensure
that the ICCPR continues to be enforced in Hong Kong.
One of the examples of a clear conflict is Article 42,
which says that no bail shall be granted unless the judge has
sufficient grounds for believing that the criminal suspect or
defendant will not continue to commit acts endangering national
security. Not only does this violate Article 9 of the ICCPR,
but it also violates the presumption of innocence because it
assumes that the person has already committed acts threatening
national security.
These and other conflicts with protected human rights
violate the commitments that China made under the Sino-British
Joint Declaration. Incidentally, the U.N. Human Rights
Committee will be reviewing Hong Kong's compliance with the
ICCPR beginning this summer when the fourth periodic report is
reviewed. Traditionally----
Mr. Sherman. Professor.
Ms. Petersen. Yes. I will finish.
Mr. Sherman. Professor, it appears that you--just sum up in
a couple of sentences please.
Ms. Petersen. Certainly. Traditionally, the review process
before the U.N. Human Rights Committee includes extensive
shadow reports filed by non-governmental organizations.
However, this year I fear that NGO's will be afraid to file
those shadow reports for the fear that just asking the U.N.
Human Rights Committee to declare that there has been a
violation of the ICCPR might bring about the threat of criminal
prosecution.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Ms. Petersen. Thank you.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Professor Petersen.
We now recognize Mr. Nathan Law. Mr. Law? There seems to be
a technical difficulty. Can we unmute Mr. Law?
At this point I am going to go on to our fourth witness and
then try to circle back to Mr. Law. We have Brian Leung who is
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN LEUNG, PH.D. CANDIDATE, UNIVERSITY OF
WASHINGTON

Mr. Leung. Congressman Sherman, Ranking Member McCaul, and
members of this committee, I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to address the critical development in Hong Kong,
and also thank Speaker Pelosi and Congressman Smith for the
opening statements.
China's NPCSC has unilaterally imposed a national security
law on Hong Kong, which I submit fundamentally breaches the
Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. There is no
longer a meaningful distinction between the system of Hong Kong
and that of China.
The legal firewall between two places has been utterly
dismantled. The Chinese party-State has engulfed our government
system. Our civil society is under full assault and is pervaded
by a sense of political fear, self-censorship, and legal
persecution. We have to reckon with the reality that China
itself has relegated One Country, Two Systems to the dust of
history.
It is perhaps instructive to situate the enactment of the
law in the first anniversary of the 2019 Anti-Extradition Bill
Movement. On this very day last year, I read out, on behalf of
the protesters, a statement that crystalized the ``five
demands`` of the movement inside the Legislative Council.
Rather than responding to those very modest demands, the
Chinese and Hong Kong governments have chosen to ramp up their
relentless repression, continue its isolation of Hong Kong from
the world, and ultimately, the self-destruction of One Country,
Two Systems.
Since last year, 9,000 protesters have been arrested; 600
of them are being charged with rioting. The police continue to
be unaccountable, and instead see their budget increased by 25
percent compared to last year. These trends of gross violation
of civil liberties will only worsen under the new National
Security Law, which I will explain.
Above all, the supposedly withdrawn Extradition Bill has
now morphed into a Chinese agency set up in Hong Kong capable
of extraditing defendants to China. And the Chinese Communist
Party has muffled the public outcry for full democratization
that is guaranteed in the Basic Law, and now respond with a
resounding assertion of the party dominance inside Hong Kong's
judicial and political system.
In this light, the grave dangers of the new National
Security Law are not limited to its legal ramifications. The
new criminal offenses will no doubt be used as legal weapons
against dissidents and send them to life prison. No one in Hong
Kong can be certain about their legal definitions. And in fact,
their different definitions will remain forever elusive as the
National People's Congress has the sole authority to interpret
the law, strike down any conflicting local legislation, and
Beijing can advise our chief executive to hand pick judges to
adjudicate cases according to the party line.
But the newly enacted law is also about institutionally
asserting the party's dominance in Hong Kong. The NPC
forcefully inserted the National Security Law into our legal
system. Not only has the local legislature been completely
circumvented, even our top local officials were utterly
clueless about the details of the law. Hong Kong people ruling
Hong Kong, as part of the original formulation of One Country,
Two Systems, proved to be a mirage.
More importantly, a set of parallel institutions will be
set up and funnel the influence of the CCP into Hong Kong.
First and foremost, the ``Office of National Security
Commissioner`` will be established in Hong Kong and will
directly report to the Communist Party and Xi Jinping himself.
Not bound by the Basic Law, this office is vested with the
power to supervise and guide the Hong Kong government with
jurisdiction over the cases pertaining to national security.
This jurisdiction involves the power to extradite
defendants to China where there is no respected rule of law. It
constitutes a fundamental intrusion to our judicial
independence that is the cornerstone of One Country, Two
Systems.
This set of parallel organs marks the institutionalization
of the CCP's dominance over our political and judicial systems,
as national security becomes the springboard for the CCP to
tighten its grip, normalize its secretive operations, and
extradite people to China. And what we are witnessing is the
crumbling of One Country, Two Systems.
Since last year's movement, I have been asked numerous
times, is the fight worth it, given the tremendous sacrifice
borne by Hong Kong people for such an almost irreparable
system? In fact, many young protesters have to make the same
distressing decision that I had to, which is either be
imprisoned for life, or to be exiled and forced to seek refuge
elsewhere, maybe possibly never seeing a chance of safe return.
But my answer is always this: once we have tasted and
breathed freedom, we can never be forced to kneel again. The
false promise of partial freedom often made by the CCP will 1
day devolve into no freedom at all, as the case of Hong Kong
well illustrates. What is happening in Hong Kong will soon
spill over to the world. And that is why I believe the United
States must hold China accountable for its continuous
encroachment on Hong Kong's autonomy and freedom. China should
not be allowed to disregard its international obligations while
benefiting from Hong Kong's special economic status.
We must act now to add considerable pressure on China,
including the use of range of instruments provided by the new
Hong Kong Autonomy Act just passed, and to provide substantive
assistance to Hong Kong protesters, such as favorable
immigration and refugee policy, or it may soon be too late.
So thank you. And I welcome any questions.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Leung.
And now we will see if we can hear from Mr. Nathan Law,
whether we have got the technology working.
Mr. Law. Hello. Can you hear me?
Mr. Sherman. Yes, we can.
Mr. Law. Hello. Is it working?

STATEMENT OF NATHAN LAW, FORMER HONG KONG COUNCIL MEMBER, YALE
UNIVERSITY

Mr. Law. Yes, thank you very much. Sorry about the
technical issues.
Thank you, Chairman, and all the members of the committee
inviting me to this hearing. In a little over 1 year I have
testified twice on Capitol Hill regarding the situation in Hong
Kong: first before the CCP in May 2019, and then before the
Pacific and East Asian Subcommittee of the SSRC in September
2019. Both times I did not have to worry about going back to
Hong Kong afterwards to continue my street activism.
But this time is different. Merely speaking about the
plight of Hong Kongers on an occasion like this contradicts the
new National Security Law. Under this legislation Beijing just
passed 24 hours ago, anyone who would dare to speak up would
likely face imprisonment once Beijing targeted you. So much is
now lost in the city I love: the freedom to tell the truth.
In typical Chinese fashion, none of us knew what was in the
bill until it was actually effective, which had left us very
anxious. Now that we can finally read it, we are far from
assured. In addition to closed trials in Hong Kong, or even the
possibility of extradition to China, offenders could be barred
from bails and a jury trial, with their rights trampled on
during interrogation.
The Beijing-appointed chief executive has absolute power to
determine whether an act constitutes a violation of national
security, whether any information constitutes State secrets,
and whether covert surveillance, like wiretapping, can be
deployed.
Judges assigned to handle these cases must pass prior
screening by the Chinese Communist Party. One absurd clause
even dictates that inciting hatred toward either the Hong Kong
or Chinese Government is illegal, terms so vague that they can
easily be abused and the whole set of law left so much room for
interpretation.
Directly funded by Beijing, a new Hong Kong-based national
security agency will have sweeping power requiring the
cooperation of all local government departments. We used to
think of secret police as something abstract; now it is a very
real fear. The kind of cross-border action that Beijing once
had to hide, such as the Causeway Bay Books publisher incident,
may well become a new legalized norm. China is in claiming de
facto direct rule of Hong Kong, in clear violation of the 1984
Sino-British Joint Declaration that promised One Country, Two
Systems.
Even before the National Security Law, the price of
resistance in Hong Kong has always been high. I have been--I
have seen far too many young faces beaten, detained, tortured,
prosecuted, and jailed just for protesting our basic human
rights. Over 9,000 arrests have been made in protests over the
past year alone.
There have also been numerous incidents of mystery suicide
deaths. Still against these odds, brave Hong Kongers keep the
movement alive for the sake of our future generations, as well
as a more democratic world free from the threats of Chinese
imperialism and expansionism.
The British flag lowered for the last time and the Chinese
flag rose for the first time on this very date 23 years ago in
Hong Kong. While its people were understandably worried in
1997, there was at least a sense of optimism that, given the
success of our city, people could contribute positively to the
rise of China, which would in turn embrace freedom and
democratize. This came to be a little more than wishful
thinking.
Over time, China has not followed Hong Kong's lead, but
has, in fact, made Hong Kong more like itself, erasing our
unique way of life, while reaping the economic benefits we
provide.
Perhaps the National Security Law reveals the true nature
of what Beijing thought One Country, Two Systems was all along,
comprehensive autocratic control. Increasingly we have seen
Chinese leaders less and less willing to honor the One Country,
Two Systems part, while more stressing on the dominance of one
country. They have shown no regard for the separation of powers
and democratic accountability, which are long taken for granted
by Hong Kongers, and enshrined in the Basic Law.
Through fear, intimidation, and heavy-handed governance,
Beijing turned Hong Kong into just another Chinese city while
trying to keep its outer shell. In doing so, it helped to
preserve the illusion that the city is still autonomous.
The international community must not be confused. Carrie
Lam and her entire cabinet are puppets who have no power to
make meaningful decisions. The high degree of autonomy once
promised is just another blatant lie.
It takes decades, if not longer, to build a city, but it
takes just weeks to destroy it. This is what we have all seen
lately. What now lies ahead of us is not just the personal
safety of my friend Joshua, or other leading oppositional
figures like Martin Lee and Jimmy Lai, but the survival of Hong
Kong as an idea.
Therefore, it is vital that while our friends in the
international community, including----
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Law.
Mr. Law [continuing]. Policymakers in Washington, do not
pretend that everything is still normal, they do not look away.
Even though this----
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Law.
Mr. Law [continuing]. Could be conceived as a violation of
the National Security Law, I wish to say it out loud on behalf
of my beloved Hong Kong people.
[Speaking Cantonese.]
Let's keep fighting in different sectors. And I wish Hong
Kong and all of the world the very best.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you for your testimony. And I want to
thank our witnesses not only for their testimony, but given the
risk of Chinese retaliation, I want to thank them for their
courage.
I will now recognize members for 5 minutes each. And
pursuant to House rules, all time is yielded for the purposes
of questioning our witnesses. Because of the hybrid format of
this hearing, I will recognize members of the committee by
seniority, alternating between Democrats and Republicans,
although I will first recognize the Speaker.
If you miss your turn, please let our staff know, and we
will come back to you. If you seek recognition, you must unmute
your microphone and address us verbally. I will start by
recognizing the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Speaker Pelosi. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am
going to yield back to you so we can hear questions from the
members. But, again, I want to thank you for the opportunity to
be here.
I spend--Mr. Smith and I talk about the 30 years that we
have worked together on this issue, but we always want to be
current--and I spend about an hour a day on China issues to be
current, none of them more valuable than the one I just spent
here hearing what is happening in Hong Kong in terms of this
law.
The concern that I have, which there may not be an answer
to here--we will see--is does this law, is it retroactive? Will
they go back to any flying of flags or making of statements, or
is it from now forward, which would be horrible enough? But
that is a fear that I have.
I want to thank our witnesses, Mr. Lee, Ms. Petersen, Mr.
Leung, and Nathan once again. And again he has courageously
testified. And say to them that I think the highest compliment
they could receive is to see this is an overflow crowd of
Democrats and Republicans in this committee honoring the
spatial distance, overflowing into the audience. This is quite
remarkable and a real expression of this bipartisan concern
that we have for democracy, democratic reform, and the so-
called--no, I do not want to identify it by the name they use
because it does not have to do with security, it has to do with
repression.
But I thank all of you for turning out for this because
when we talk to the people of Hong Kong about what they want to
see from us, they want to see our support. This committee in a
bipartisan way has done that very significantly.
So with that, I thank you for the opportunity to spend my
very valuable hour here to hear our witnesses and to compliment
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. McCaul. Thank you
all.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you for being here, Mrs. Madam Speaker.
That demonstrates a lot to the world.
And as you point out, although this room does not look
full, we have limits on how many members are allowed to be in
the room, and virtually all the other members are participating
virtually.
With that, I am going to recognize the ranking member for
his questions and then I will go on to the others members.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Speaker, for honoring us with your presence.
Speaker Pelosi. You are welcome.
Mr. McCaul. That is how important this issue is to all of
us. I guess, you know, my first question, I met with the
secretary. He did decertify the autonomous nature of Hong Kong.
They are, the Chinese Communist Party is in violation of the
Sino-U.K. treaty. And my question to both Mr. Leung and to
Professor Petersen, in addition to the sanctions that I believe
are forthcoming under the law that we passed in Congress, what
else could be done to remedy and address the violation of this
historic treaty?
Mr. Law. Well I think--yes, thank you for the question--I
think it is important for us to understand the implementation
of National Security Law is not just about a piece of law, but
is confirmation that Beijing for now they are openly and
blatantly to repressive order, suppression of human rights.
So I think the international community should enact
mechanisms to hold them accountable because that is what they
are going to do, they are going to erase the unique culture of
Hong Kong and also all the human rights protections now we have
had. And while there are hundreds of thousands of people
flowing down to the street today in protest of the
implementation of the National Security Law, and we have
already seen there are lots of obvious human rights violations
afterwards the implementation of the National Security Law.
So I think the international community, while other than
these sanctions which are very difficult, well to hold it
together, but I think we need a new guiding principle going
against the expansionist China, which we have to hold them
accountable in whatever human rights violations happen inside
their border.
So I think this is what the international community should
do, and should do it jointly.
Mr. McCaul. And I agree with you. Professor Petersen.
Obviously, you----
Ms. Petersen. Yes, thank you.
Mr. McCaul. Yes. Go ahead.
Ms. Petersen. Thank you for the question. First, I do want
to respond to the Speaker's question. You are correct, the law
is not retroactive. There were rumors that it might be, but it
will not be. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that
actions taken before the law went into force may contribute to
decisions to target people for investigations or prosecution.
Regarding what can be done, I would like to suggest that we
focus on the United Nations and the international community as
a whole, because I do think it is important that we try to
avoid things that could hurt the Hong Kong people, and try to
focus more on the international human rights monitoring
mechanisms.
And that is why I was mentioning in my testimony that the
Human Rights Committee will be reviewing Hong Kong's report
under the ICCPR, commencing this summer with a list of issues,
and going on into 2021.
I do think that the international community can help
participate in that. And although China likes often to react
badly to international monitoring, the truth is that the
Chinese Government voluntarily agreed to this process when it
agreed that the ICCPR would continue to apply to Hong Kong, and
that Hong Kong would continue to report to the U.N. Human
Rights Committee. So that committee, and also the U.N. Human
Rights Council, and the other expert mechanisms in the United
Nations I do think can help to shine a light on violations of
the Sino-British Joint Declaration. Thank you.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you. And I think that is our next course
of action. I see Chairman Engel has arrived. And with that, I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Engel [presiding]. Good morning, everyone. I
apologize for running a little behind this morning.
Let me thank the Honorable Speaker for having joined us
today. Her presence underscores the importance of this issue.
She has always been in the forefront of this issue. We have had
many, many discussions about Hong Kong.
And as we look to the uncertain future of Hong Kong's
autonomy and democratic system, we see that our Speaker has
been a tireless champion of human rights, for the rights of the
people of Hong Kong and China.
So thank you to our witnesses as well for your, for your
time this morning. And thank you to Mr. McCaul, our ranking
member, and other members of the committee.
As the Chinese Government escalates its aggression toward
Hong Kong, I am proud that the Congress has spoken again with a
bipartisan voice, again and again in support of the people of
Hong Kong, in support of their struggle to preserve their
rights, rights that have been guaranteed by treaty and
international law. But at the end of the day, it is the White
House that sets policy. And I fear that our policy has gone
astray, perhaps emboldening China.
We should be focused on two major elements in our policy
toward Hong Kong. One is: does it support autonomy and
democracy in Hong Kong? And second, does it advance American
interests?
We hear lots of tough talk about Vietnam from the
Administration, but I fear that months of this attitude of
heaping praise on Xi, looking the other way as the Chinese
Government violently cracked down on protests in Hong Kong,
sidelining any concerns about human rights in the hopes of
getting a good trade deal that has set the stage for what we
are seeing today.
Nothing the Beijing government does would surprise me, nor
should it surprise anyone. And if there is one thing I think
all Americans should be united on, it is this.
I remember when the agreement was signed with the U.K. It
was going to be two different types of government, one China
but two different types, two systems. Of course, the Chinese
Beijing Government does not abide by that at all. And did
anybody ever think that they would?
So let me say that one of the more unanticipated provisions
in this National Security Law is Article 38, which States that
the law applies to persons who are not permanent residents of
Hong Kong and commit crimes under the law outside of Hong Kong.
When combined with Beijing's increased use of hostage
diplomacy, such as the case of the two impeached Canadians,
this law could have far-reaching implications for anyone
visiting Hong Kong, including U.S. persons who are studying,
doing business, or working with government officials or
diplomats.
So how safe should I or any other American feel about
visiting Hong Kong in the future? Many are talking about--OK.
So let me have the witnesses respond, any of you who care to.
Ms. Petersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I can
respond to that. It is true that China intends to apply this
law extra-territorially. And I do not think anyone should feel
particularly safe, particularly not if you have been involved
at all in any sort of campaign for sanctions or other actions
against the Chinese Government or against Hong Kong. Because
when you combine the provisions, Articles 36 to 39 together
with Article 29, the definition of collusion with foreign
forces, it creates an incredibly broad potential net for legal
liability.
So while I would have said up until a few years ago that
Hong Kong is one of the safest places in the world to visit,
because I lived there for 17 years and I always felt very safe,
I do not think it is so safe for you to visit now. Thank you.
Mr. Leung. Thank you, Chairman Engel. And I also would like
to add on that.
You know, Article 38 is certainly very clear that even if
you have no Hong Kong residency and your conduct is conducted
in, you know, places outside of Hong Kong, you will still be
subject to the law. And I think it adds a lot of pressure on
rights of journalists, academics, NGO's who might, you know,
have criticized Chinese abuse of human rights before. And if
they can come to Hong Kong for international conference or
their daily operations, they could be subject to that law.
So I think it is extremely draconian, sweeping. And I think
the international community should be very concerned about this
law.
Mr. Lee. One more point to come in, yes. You know, as
Carole and Kai-ping had already mentioned about that law
applied to a person who is not yet permanent resident of the
region. And I would want to also point out that apart from, you
know, foreigners, you know, if mainland Chinese support Hong
Kong, which in the past from the Umbrella Movement to the
Process Movement, there are lots of, there are so many Chinese
who are already objected by China. But now, you know, with this
law passing also, the National Security Law will apply to, you
know, mainland Chinese who try to support human rights in Hong
Kong. So it is not just applying to, of course, foreigners, you
know. So it is really catching on.
Today, of course, our last Governor Chris Patten had made
some statement about the National Security Law. And I was
wondering actually, as the last Governor of Hong Kong can he
come back to Hong Kong to visit us? No. Maybe he will be, you
know, labeled as, you know, foreigner in collusion with foreign
power, and then in breach of the National Security Law. So once
he comes in, then he maybe have--he may have a problem.
So this is really a very wide, you know, you know,
application of law to anyone in the world. Or so, you know,
anyone in the world can be caught by this law. This is a, you
know, you can see the attitude of the Chinese Communist Party
wanting to affect everyone.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much. Let me, let me ask you
another question.
Many are mentioning risks to personal safety for those who
have been involved in the Hong Kong democracy movement from the
days of the handover until now. Several of you speaking to us
today have repeatedly put yourselves at great personal risk.
You are very courageous. And I really take my hat off to you.
We have seen announcements in the United Kingdom and in
Taiwan regarding safe havens for Hong Kongers. So my question
is: what can the United States do, steps to ensure that we are
doing our part to welcome those in Hong Kong who face
persecution under these new laws?
Mr. Law. Well, thank you for your question, Chairman Engel.
And first of all I would like to express my gratitude. I
understand that the U.S. Government has also proposed a safe
boat plan for lots of human rights defenders in Hong Kong,
including those who could have been indicted or have criminal
records regarding the protesters. I think this is indeed a
great way to support Hong Kong protesters on the ground.
For Hong Kong people, well, one thing I would like to
mention is that after the day implementing the National
Security Law, that day, there were more than 100,000 people
marching down to the street facing extreme, extremely high risk
and, well, police brutality, and also the risk of being
imprisoned for more than 10 years, on the street, and then to
challenge Hong Kong in support of freedom and democracy.
I think this fearless, fearless attitude toward the
autocracy is, well, very admirable. And I think not only
offering safe boat plan for these people, but also we should,
the international community should join hands to implement more
and more mechanics to hold China accountable, so that we could
let those people fighting on the ground feel more safe, and let
the Chinese Government be more scared to implement more, well,
draconian, draconian execution of these laws again.
Mr. Leung. Thank you, Chairman. If I may speak on the issue
in addition to Nathan. I think it is a reality that we have to
face. Some of the best and brightest Hong Kong protesters,
intellectuals, academics, had to flee the city because of their
involvement in the democracy movement since 2019. It is very
saddening and it is unfortunate that many people are forced to
seek refuge elsewhere, but it is a reality that we have to
face.
Many of my friends, myself included, have to make that same
tough decision.
So, I know that in America now two bills has been proposed,
have been proposed. The first is Hong Kong Safe Harbor Act, and
the other one is Hong Kong Freedom and Choice Act. Those will
provide the immediate refugee safe boat policy to Hong Kong
people. I think those will be a very good mechanism to ensure
the safety of those who are really in danger and in great need.
So, I think those acts, I hope that they will be passed
soon and will, you know, create much more discussion around the
human rights abuse situation in Hong Kong. Think about Hong
Kong as an international financial city that produced a
generation of exiles, a generation of political refugees. This
is unacceptable. But we need to help them.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much.
Anyone else care to answer the question?
If not, then we will go to Mr. Smith of New Jersey. Chris.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
for calling this important and extraordinarily timely hearing.
Thank you to all of our witnesses. And thank you, Mr. Lee
and Mr. Nathan Law, for the tremendous sacrifices you have made
years to date, and the risk that you face now.
You know, just a couple of points. You know, unless Xi
Jinping reverses course, I think everyone has to be on notice
in the world that every treaty obligation, including those with
the WTO, that China has added its name to, its voice, its
signature, are worthless. They made solemn, solemn obligations,
freely entered into, and now they are breaking it with
impunity.
You know, we often talk about the rule of law. In China it
is the rule of unjust law.
And I would say to Ms. Petersen--and I thank you for your
testimony--your point on the retroactive, because I was
thinking that as well, I think that is a technical omission in
the law. Nothing, nothing precludes this dictatorship from
looking back and holding people to account. It is just their
way.
Let me just ask a couple of questions.
One, do you have a sense that the world will unite,
particularly world leaders? There needs to be, I think, a very
serious sanctions regime.
You know, mention was made about the Secretary of State. He
did, on May 27th, pursuant to the Hong Kong Human Rights and
Democracy Act language, make a--he made a very strong statement
that Hong Kong does not continue to warrant treatment under
U.S. law in the same manner as before its handover. Of course,
that is because of the autonomy issue as well as human rights.
He Stated that the Administration could eliminate different
and special treatment for Hong Kong, including export controls
on dual-use technologies and more.
And then a month later, on June 26th, Secretary Pompeo
announced the imposition of visa restrictions, which we all
were calling for, for those Chinese officials who are
undermining the high degree of autonomy as guaranteed in the
1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration.
Obviously, more now has to be done that they have pulled
the trigger. My hope is that they will revisit it. Maybe our
witnesses could speak to whether or not they think there is any
possibility of that. But I would hope that the people around Xi
Jinping realize that he has--he is dishonoring the Communist
Party, he is dishonoring the Government of China. When all the
world can see in the light of day that they make a--they give
their word and they break it, and they break it with impunity.
And that is exactly what they are doing right now.
I would also ask our witnesses, maybe they want to speak to
corporations. Obviously, the reach of this law is far beyond
just people physically residing in Hong Kong. They have put
language in this decree, this law, that reaches beyond that.
And let me just say there are a lot of members of this
House and Senate--I was briefed by the FBI--I am a target. That
is what they did, they put this out and I am a target, whatever
that means. And I think that this campaign of intimidation
against the world, against people, especially the Hong Kongers,
we need to meet this as never before.
We didn't do it after Tiananmen Square. George Herbert
Walker Bush didn't do it, nor did Bill Clinton. We acquiesced.
And they took note of that and said, you know, give it a little
time and people will just let it go.
And I think, as the Speaker pointed out before, there are a
whole lot of us on both sides of the aisle who really realize
the nefarious nature of this dictatorship, and we need to
really draw that line. And, hopefully, there are some people
within the Xi Jinping government who will say, wait a minute,
time out, you have gone too far, President Xi. You are doing it
with genocide against the Uyghurs, as we all talked about, and
now you are doing it here.
So, if any of the witnesses would like to speak to any of
those points.
And let me just say to Nathan Law--you said do not look
away. We will not look away. We will further engage.
Thank you.
Mr. Leung. Thank you, Congressman.
I think, first--again, we have talked about the Article 38.
That is explicitly an intimidation against the global community
who are speaking up on Hong Kong. That is the first.
And the second one I think it is important to recognize CCP
strategy of political control is always about
compartmentalizing politics that, you know, assuring the
business community you should not concern yourself with
politics. You will not be affected by the new law.
But just recently, HSBC and Standard Charter, the two
biggest banks in Hong Kong, were forced to kowtow explicitly to
the National Security Law and show the partition between
business and politics is only a political expediency in the
eyes of China. And it can always resort and force the business
community to obey this law or to align themselves with the
party interests.
So, I think it is really important to send a message that
we should not fall into the divide and conquer tactic by CCP.
So that is why I think not only U.S. has to take a much tougher
position, you also have to unite different nations in the
world, such as the EU, which is the biggest exporter of China,
or United Nations, different platforms that Professor Petersen
mentioned.
So I think we have to come up with a counter united front
to China's own united front that wants to conquer and divide
the world.
Chairman Engel. Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Mr. Lee, on May 29th Trump announced that there would be
targeted sanctions against Chinese and Hong Kong officials, but
he didn't provide any names or lists. They are just an illusion
at this point.
As you may be aware I, along with the ranking member of the
Asia Subcommittee, Mr. Yoho, introduced a House version of the
Hong Kong Autonomy Act, introduced in the Senate by Senators
Toomey and Van Hollen to impose mandatory sanctions on entities
that violate China's obligations to Hong Kong under the Joint
Declaration and the Basic Law, and also the banks that do
business with them.
What are Hong Kongers' positions on the U.S. implementing
targeted sanctions, particularly targeted visa bans, in light
of the National Security Law decision?
Mr. Lee?
Mr. Lee. Yes, thank you.
I will fall into the--let me read the article on collusion
of foreign power. You know, I will fall into that, but
definitely for our perspective. I think this is the problem
now. You know, with that law in place, when you read through
the law, you know, and anything, you know, suggesting anything
to the international community maybe, you know, sort of catch
you as collusion of foreign power.
And one of the things that is very specifically tied into
that is to some of, you know, that article, that article on
this inviting sanctions. I think that is exactly, you know,
once they really have in light of what has happened in the past
and they were fighting, you know, strong people of Hong Kong,
or anyone in the world from sanctioning of the Chinese
Communist Party.
So, I think I have to be, have wisdom to how to, you know,
go about in the future to support Hong Kong.
But one thing I want to mention is that when you look at
the special United Nations mechanism, usually that is a very
powerful United Nations Special Rapporteur, and join together
on a joint statement on China and Hong Kong.
Mr. Sherman. I am going to ask you to wrap it up.
Mr. Lee. And so they are suggesting also that there----
Mr. Sherman. I do need to go on to another question.
Mr. Lee [continuing]. Will be a Special Rapporteur on Hong
Kong and China.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Taiwan--I will build on the
comments of our chair, Mr. Engel, as he points out that Taiwan
and the United Kingdom are talking about opening their doors to
hundreds of thousands or even millions of Hong Kongers. We want
freedom for Hong Kong, not immigration from Hong Kong. But we
have to deal with the practical situation as it stands.
I will be joining our colleagues Mr. Curtis and Mr. Castro
in introducing House--introducing in the House the Hong Kong
Safe Harbor Act to designate Hong Kongers as Priority 2
refugees. This is necessary because Priority 2 allows the
individuals to access our refugee system without going through
the UNHCR, which does not have an office in Hong Kong, and does
not without a referral from an NGO that China could block.
Do Hong Kongers generally support the effort to make it
easier for Hong Kongers to be classified as Priority 2
refugees? I wonder if Mr. Law could answer that question.
Mr. Law. Well, thank you for the question.
I think it is important for us to provide a way out, not
only for the ordinary protesters but for those who have been
heavily targeted. And especially under the National Security
Law that people who may face lifelong imprisonment, the
political, the targeted individuals, they are likely, well, the
assistance for them are likely needed.
So, I think for now, yes, indeed it is valuable offering
helping hand to them, that would be a better result for them.
And they are not necessarily leaving, but at least they are
offered choices for them to make, and for them that will ease
other sources of their pressure.
Mr. Sherman. I would point out that political activists
from China dedicated to freedom have had a major and positive
impact on the world, including, of course, Mr. Sun Yat-sen.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Engel. Thank you, Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Perry.
Mr. Perry. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank our
guests.
The first question I think I have is regarding the
agreement for people that are unfamiliar with maybe the
specific tenets and the text of the agreement. What are, since
obviously China and the Communist Party in Beijing have decided
that they are not going to honor any of the commitments in the
agreement, what are, if any, the remedies?
And before you answer, before anybody answers, I will just
remind everybody that is listening, watching, that breathes the
breath, this is the reason that you do not make agreements with
nations or criminal organizations that have no intent on
maintaining their side of the bargain that are known liars,
organizations and countries like North Korea, like Iran, like
China, like Russia. This is why you do not make agreements with
them, you demand action and then you have a reaction to their
action.
But, with that, what are the remedies?
Mr. Lee. May I comment? Yes, the question about the Sino-
British Joint Declaration, I think in that particular situation
it was registered with the United Nations. But one problem with
the whole Joint Declaration is that they do not have any so-
called remedy for a violation.
No mention of the European Parliament resolution when you
read through the text. There is one particular text that says
that encourages the member States to go to the International
Court of Justice and to seek remedies over the breaching of the
Sino Joint British Joint Declaration. But, of course, this is a
suggestion.
But whether legally you can do that we still do not know.
And, of course, I say the U.K. Government has the
responsibility to make sure that the Sino Joint British Joint
Declaration that they agree on should be respected. And now
when it is breached, what they--they should be the ones that
really, you know, go to United Nations and ask for respect of
the Joint Declaration.
But we hope that we will see something in the future about
the Sino Joint British Joint Declaration.
Ms. Petersen. Can I add something to that?
Mr. Lee is correct that there is no clause in the Sino-
British Joint Declaration providing for dispute resolution. But
the General Assembly of the United Nations can always seek an
advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice. And
there is nothing that China could do to prevent them seeking
that non-binding advisory opinion as long as the majority of
the General Assembly voted to seek it.
Just recently in 2019 the ICJ issued an advisory opinion on
whether decolonization was lawfully completed with respect to
the Chagos Islands. And although the U.K. wasn't very happy
that that request was made, it was made because a majority of
the General Assembly voted for it.
Now, even though advisory opinions are non-binding, they
can be very influential. And I think even a campaign to seek a
vote in the General Assembly, to seek that advisory opinion
would put some pressure on the Chinese Government to be a
little more careful about living up to the letter of the Sino-
British Joint Declaration.
Thank you.
Mr. Perry. Hey, I sure appreciate your comments. And I have
got a news flash for everybody: public pressure and opinions,
non-binding, et cetera, have, as you can see, little effect on
the Communist Chinese Party. So, that is all just tilting at
windmills, in my opinion.
But let me ask this question: with the advent of this
security law in Hong Kong, what are the ramifications of this
for--what do you see the ramifications for Taiwan?
Mr. Leung. Obviously--first, I thank you for the question.
Obviously, the law actually applies to Hong Kong residents,
including Taiwanese residents. And there, on the one hand they
have been very active in supporting for Hong Kong. On the other
hand, their long pursuit of democracy is also branded
subversion of the State power. Right?
So, I think it also will be a very good signal about how
China will actually treat Taiwan, given if Taiwan were 1 day to
be succumbed to the so-called One Country, Two Systems. Right?
So, I think it shows how ambitious China will be 1 day once you
fall into their agreement, that they would not honor, as you
point out.
And I think, you know, it may shift the discussion, you
know, what is happening in Hong Kong, will shift tremendously
the discussion in Taiwan that they know that the CCP is not
trustworthy, and their so-called political arrangement, high
degree of autonomy, et cetera, et cetera, are mere lies.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much.
Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The National Security Law that Beijing drafted in secrecy
and imposed on Hong Kongers will be swiftly used to suppress.
Fact of the matter, it is already happening.
I woke up this morning to reports that the police in Hong
Kong have made at least one arrest today of a demonstrator for
``violating the National Security Law.''
As I read the testimony of our witnesses this morning I
felt a deep connection to the struggle for democracy described.
I would be remiss if I didn't say right here in America I am
part of the continued struggle of Black Americans to realize
the promise of democracy in this great nation. And I can
identify with the lifelong nature of this kind of struggle.
It is because of the history and present challenges for my
community in America that I know we both care deeply about what
happens in Hong Kong. History has shown us that the push for
freedom, equality, and human rights, is always connected
anywhere it exists.
It reminds me of the words of Dr. King when he said,
``Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.'' And
while I thank this committee and the House of Representatives
for standing up, I am so deeply disappointed in the faltering
of the White House when it comes to its U.S. global standing.
This is a moment for strong U.S. leadership. But it is also
a moment where the President's geopolitical failures are
emboldening China and other nations that now seek to press
their agenda unchecked. It is no coincidence that China has
chosen this point in time to blatantly disregard commitments it
made decades ago to grant Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy.
Congress has given the Trump Administration the tools to
address Chinese human rights violations. We have shown strong
bipartisan support for Hong Kong and the resolve to hold China
accountable. Instead of using these authorities, the President
of the United States chose early on to praise Beijing's
handling of protests in Hong Kong and did worse than nothing as
the China Government vigorously oppressed the Uyghurs.
As I have traveled to meet with world leaders since the
45th President of United States took office, I have heard
resounding concern about the increasingly erratic nature of
American foreign policy. Our closest allies continue to see
this as a problem. But others see it as an opportunity.
China has emboldened to take the actions it has in Hong
Kong, just as it is similarly emboldened on its borders with
India, in the South China Sea, and increasingly to pressure
Taiwan.
So, with that I ask, Ms. Petersen, in what ways can the
United States redeem its credibility and work with the global
community to get China to honor its international commitment?
And what role, if any, can multilateral organizations play in
this inflection point--at this inflection point? Ms. Petersen.
Ms. Petersen. Thank you very much for that question.
We could start by becoming more active in the U.N. human
rights monitoring mechanisms, particularly the U.N. Human
Rights Council, because since the United States has ceased to
be active in that council China has gained more influence on
the council. And it has now served three terms on the Human
Rights Council, and it recently secured an appointment to a
very influential panel, plays a role in nominating independent
U.N. human rights experts.
So, the United States needs to become active again in the
U.N. Human Rights Council. The U.N. Human Rights Council has
been asked by a group of independent human rights experts to
establish a special rapporteur on human rights in China. And it
would be nice if the United States would play a more active
role in that campaign.
The United States could also, of course, ratify more human
rights treaties because that would mean that we would be able
to elect members, independent experts to sit on those
monitoring committees.
Thank you.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. And also I have a concern in regards
to Hong Kong's status as a financial hub. And I am concerned
with the lack of strategic thinking by the Administration that
could limit Hong Kong's access to American dollars and markets.
I am wondering, Mr. Leung, do you anticipate any slippage
in Hong Kong's financing system and trade standing? And what
might that effect of that slippage be on the One Country, Two
Systems doctrine?
Mr. Leung. Thank you, Congressman.
China has always taken advantage of Hong Kong's special
economic status. That is globally recognized. That is treated
separately from China. But that recognition is conditional upon
the fact that Hong Kong is sufficiently autonomous.
So, I think in future the discussion around sanctions is
actually not so much about sanctions, it is about withdrawing
the privilege that the international community conferred on
China if it has honored its side of promises. Now it has
completely ruined its side of promises and do not want to allow
Hong Kong to enjoy high autonomy nor civic freedom.
So, I think withdrawing the privileges and negotiating
until China is willing to honor its promises, I think we have
to think about, you know, that economic privileges, does that
warrant international recognition that China enjoys now and
keeps everything from actual economic status.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much.
Mr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chinese Communist Party and Xi Jinping have blatantly
disregarded the agreement between Great Britain and China. The
international agreement to allow for the self-rule and
independent governance of Hong Kong has been washed away. The
rioting going on today in Hong Kong is a direct result of
Communist Beijing's lack of respect for rule of law and
international agreements.
It also shows the Communist Party is intimidated by people
with free thought. Chinese communism cannot survive in a free
society. Unfortunately, Xi's communists have brought shame to
the Chinese people once more as he leads them into their second
century of shame.
It is agreed that Hong Kong is a province of China. The
United Kingdom agreed in 1997 to cede its claim of the
territory and return full control to China 50 years into the
future, 2047. The Chinese leaders of the time accepted these
terms in good faith. The rioting in Hong Kong, approaching a
year now, is solely the results of Xi and the Communist Party
breaking those agreements, and is driven by the lust for
authoritarian power and fear, the fear of, again, free-thinking
people.
In modern civil societies there must be a mechanism or
forum for people to address grievances to their government
peacefully, without fear of reprisal from the government. This
is exactly what the people of Hong Kong attempted to do when
Carrie Lam, Hong Kong's Chief Executive Officer, introduced the
now ill-fated Extradition Bill last year at the direction of
China's Communist Party.
The people of Hong Kong attempted to peacefully address
their concerns, but their concerns fell on deaf ears. We now
know why: Chinese communism cannot survive where people have
free thought. Their goal, that is, of the CCP, is to remove any
form of democratic existence near its borders. In essence,
Beijing has broadcast to the world China and the communists are
not to be trusted.
The question is: what are international businesses
operating in Hong Kong going to do? Will they put profit above
international agreements? Will they place the concerns of their
board members over human rights? Will year-end dividends and
stock reports justify their operations' investments in
manufacturing to overlook actions approaching the atrocities of
Nazi--of the Nazi regime inflicted upon millions of Jews,
Czechs, Poles, and others? Let's hope not.
Is China's assault on its province of Hong Kong a prelude
to misguided actions against the sovereign nation of Taiwan?
This fight in Hong Kong is not between China and the United
States, it is a continual sad loop of human endeavors, the
fight of right versus wrong, good versus evil, freedom against
suppression. In the end, freedom will prevail.
My questions to the panel: have any of you seen or heard
personal, personally any actions of the protesters to secede
from China? Or is their concern only to have, of the
protesters, to have rule of law with an independent judiciary
system restored?
Mr. Leung, we will start with you.
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question.
I think in the eyes of the Communist Party everything could
be, like, could be falling under the concept of national
security and secession. Once you go against the State, whether
you speak it publicly, whether you demonstrated, it can be
construed in some way as subversion to a State power.
When you look into the 2019 Anti-Extradition Bill Movement,
the majority, the consensus is really about implementing the
much needed institutional reform and much delayed reform in
Hong Kong.
I grew up in Hong Kong, and have witnessed 23 years where
we have not made substantive democratization progress in our
Legislative Council in which half of the seats are actually not
democratically elected. Not to mention our chief executive, who
is the one to blame for the crisis since 2019, and still
remains in power.
It is staggering to think about a quarter of the population
go against a government and that leader can still remain in
power for many years. It shows that Chief Executive Carrie Lam
now is a total pawn for the CCP to execute agenda rather than
reflecting Hong Kong people's will and interest.
So, again, I think the whole movement until now, the core
consensus is really about initiating the much-needed and much-
belated institutional reform.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your answer. I am out of time. And
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, let me compliment my colleague from New Jersey for
fighting always for human rights all these years and working
with the Speaker on some of these issues for many, many years.
You know, I worry very much about this whole situation for
the people of Hong Kong and for the people of the rest of the
world. I worry that if we do not send a strong response to Hong
Kong there are many people, many leaders in the Western
Hemisphere that is looking at this and saying, well, if the
Chinese did it in Hong Kong I can do it here in Venezuela, I
can do it here in Nicaragua, I can do it here in Cuba. So, a
strong response is very, very important, especially from this
country.
Going through the United Nations is also very important.
But the response to China has to be strong because we cannot
let China set the example that they can do anything and they
are going to get away with it.
So, I worry very much that they play the long game. I worry
that they will say, well, there will be an upheaval in the
world now, but we will get away with this, just like we have
gotten away with this in the past.
I worry about the Administration's approach and the
President's approach through transitional kind of politics that
we are practicing now in this country. And there are many
things that can be said but I think that haven't been said.
So, with that, I ask the panel--does this country now have
the credibility to make strong statements on what is going on
in Hong Kong? Anyone in the panel.
Mr. Lee. Thank you for the question.
I think, I think, of course--Nathan, you want to go?
Mr. Law. You go. Your turn.
Mr. Lee. Yes. You know, on the question about, you know,
credibility, I think it is very important that, you know,
actions always speak more than words. And we want to see the
support, as mentioned, in the United Nations and a lot of the
international community implement and introducing to support
Hong Kong.
And I want in Hong Kong, the other question that has
already been asked is what are we looking for? We are looking
for democracy only. And we have been promised democracy. And
for 23 years we have been disappointed after the handover. And
the disappointment is now, you know, really stifling the
opportunity for Hong Kongers. And we feel very much very
disappointed that over many years the world has pushed against
the power of China.
Mr. Leung. And I would just add--thank you for the
question, first--I would just add Hong Kong people are actually
watching very keenly about what U.S. is doing and has started.
So, I think action and words of U.S. Government from now on
will be closely watched and will be in the deep interests of
Hong Kong people.
I think the first step to using credibility is, as Mr. Lee
has said, is to build action, is to speak up for Hong Kong
whenever there is a critical crisis and implement concrete
policy from now on.
So, I think that credibility will be built.
Mr. Law. Yes, I think the support from the U.S. to Hong
Kong, in particular with our pursuit of freedom, has always
been very strong bipartisan and, well, very vocally since last
year. And for me myself, I studied at Yale University last year
and I felt very encouraged that a lot of my, well, fellow
students they came to me and vocally support for my pursuit and
a lot of actions in Hong Kong.
But it is not only about the government and not only about
the bipartisan support in Congress. But for ordinary Americans
we have felt that they really are giving us enormous support,
no matter on Twitter or some other platforms.
So, I think that kind of noise and vocal support is much
needed. And I think it will encourage a lot of Hong Kong people
when they feel alone and feel helpless when they face this
giant authoritarian regime.
Chairman Engel. OK, thank you.
Mr. Curtis.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yesterday I introduced the bipartisan Hong Kong Safe Harbor
Act, along with my partner Representative Castro, and other
members of this committee, including Representatives Sherman,
Yoho, Kinzinger, Malinowski, and others, and Smith.
I want to pause and take note of the bipartisan nature of
this bill and the strong bipartisan support. And I hope by
doing so, those who are watching this hearing will take notice
that we are committed as a, as a Congress, regardless of party,
to act on this.
This bill would designate Hong Kongers as Priority 2
refugees, streamlining the refugee admission process.
This bill also sets up asylum, an asylum path for those in
Hong Kong who are in immediate danger from the CCP. Front line
activists, journalists harmed while covering the protests,
first-aid responders at the protests, anyone who provided legal
service to those arrested for the protests, and anyone arrested
during the protests since June 9th, 2019.
The legislation also instructs the Secretary of State to
work with like-minded ally countries to accept refugees from
Hong Kong. This bill addressed the immediate humanitarian
crisis. The U.S. must act fast.
This legislation is needed and it is needed immediately.
I would also like to note that more legislation is in
process. And I would like to point out the good work of others
on this committee, Representative Malinowski and others, and
note that we have a lot of work to do. I hope the House will
act quickly on this legislation.
My question to the witnesses is that as I have listened to
the propaganda regarding this bill, I frequently hear that it
is a passive bill, that it will only be used in extreme
circumstances, that it won't be exercised as feared. I would
like your comments on that.
And specifically, since the law went into effect I
understand there have been arrests since then, and are you
seeing any impact already of the bill? And is this passiveness
that was promised simply propaganda?
Mr. Lee. Yes. I, personally, I think it is not at all a
passive bill. When you look at the way they, you know, framed
all the charges and about the issues that they are going to
enforce, the bill is really very scary.
First, they have a National Security body headed by the
Communist Party in China. And then they have a National
Security Agency stationed in Hong Kong in cooperation with the
police, of course, you know, and with police personnel in this
whole mechanism continue to set up.
And then the police will have the power to confiscate your
computer, seize your accounts, confiscate your passport. So,
all these are put into the law. So it is not at all passive.
And they have the whole instance now to create a whole National
Security Agency institution in Hong Kong to enforce the law.
So, it is not at all passive.
And now today, just today, ten people have been arrested--
or 300 people have been arrested. And out of the 300 arrested,
10 of them were arrested for breaking the National Security
Law. And so it is today already they acted in arresting people
in the demonstrations that we have just today.
And to add one more point, when you look at how the police
enforce the law, they have already, as I mentioned in my
written statement, banned already, you know, one of the people
that you mentioned was National Security Law secession and
subversion. So, it is not at all passive. And, sadly, they are
now already starting to take a very active role and will in the
future so that people of Hong Kong will be fearful of standing
up for their rights and will be fearful for fighting for our
freedom.
Mr. Law. Yes. I think the comments of Mr. Lee are not only
about its execution but its cultural impact toward us, that
Hong Kong as a society is immense. The spokesperson of the
Communist Party, as Mr. Lee said that, there are a lot of
incidents with really low threshold that people could be
violating the National Security Law.
Like, you are saying certain slogans, or you are starting,
I think, certain rumors that could kind of, like, create hatred
toward the government in which it is really a fixed term.
And also, in today's record there are cases that
individuals carrying banners or stickers without even
displaying it when the police conduct a stop and search, they
were actually arrested by them in the names of National
Security Law.
So, you could see how poor and how shallow the whole
execution is. And I think it is not only about really getting
you go in jail, but also creating a white terror among the
crowd to remind us that our rights are all being deprived, and
we can only listen to whatever Communist Party says.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. I am out of time. And I appreciate
the witnesses. Mr. Chairman, I yield my time.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much.
Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
panel for being here. And thank you for your bravery to our
Hong Kong friends who are with us today.
I want to talk about two things: leverage and impunity. And
I think, I think the elephant in this room is the fact that the
Trump Administration has unilaterally given up leverage that
would be profoundly helpful in the situation in Hong Kong.
On human rights, the President is almost silent. He misses
every opportunity to talk to foreign leaders about it. And, in
fact, is an enabler. Look at Saudi Arabia, look at Russia.
When it comes to international treaties, our moral high
ground is compromised by our retreat, whether it be the Paris
Climate Accord, whether it be the Iran Nuclear Agreement,
whether it be the INF, or the fact that we still haven't signed
the Law of the Seas, meaning we do not have much leverage in
that body either, which really matters with this country China.
We talk about Mr. Castro's bill, a good bill to try to
provide a relief valve for Hong Kong refugees, but this
Administration has limited the number of refugees. It cut the
number from 110,000 to 20,000. And we are not even going to
come close to that this year. It has made--it is about to lay
off 13,500 people who work for immigration and citizenship
services, making it impossible to naturalize or process asylum
claims.
And then with respect to China, we know from John Bolton
this president pled with President Xi, the man we are trying to
influence to do the right thing, to help him with his
reelection by buying U.S. goods, and agriculture goods
especially.
Mr. Bolton says in the mass protests a year ago in Hong
Kong President Trump's reaction was, I do not want to get
involved. And at one point he even praised President Xi's
handling of it.
Where is our leverage? Where is our moral high ground? We
can say whatever we want here, but actions of this
Administration speak a lot louder than rhetoric.
And then there is impunity, Chinese impunity. Professor
Petersen, you talk a lot about international forums, and human
rights resolutions, and using our influence to try to pressure
the Chinese, but it seems to me the Chinese have decided it
does not matter. They are acting with impunity against the
agreement with the handover of Hong Kong, against international
law, against the international press for human rights.
What is the leverage we have, I ask you, Professor
Petersen? And why do the Chinese operate with such clear
impunity? And, Mr. Law, you may want to comment on that as
well.
Ms. Petersen. Yes. Thank you for that question.
International law is inherently difficult to enforce. That
is right. But I do not agree with you, sir, that China does not
care at all about the human rights laws.
And the reason I disagree is that I see the Chinese
Government investing a great deal of time and resources to
become a more active participant in the U.N. human rights
monitoring bodies and to try to shape the norms into a form
that suits them. So, we do see the Chinese Government trying
to, for example, intimidate treaty monitoring bodies so that
they do not post shadow reports that are critical of the
Chinese Government.
We see the Chinese Government trying to----
Mr. Connolly. Professor, if I could just interrupt you
because I do not have a lot of time.
Ms. Petersen. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. I am not sure that proves your point. I think
all that does is prove that China is using its leverage to
completely dilute the effect of international law.
Look at how it ignored the ruling, which was decisive, on
the Philippines' rights before UNCLOS and the Law of the Seas
and the arbitration panel. They have ignored it. They do not
care. They have shown no interest in caring about that at all
other than to continue to try to dilute rulings of the body and
to isolate those rulings when they do not come in their favor.
Ms. Petersen. I, I accept your point on the case with the
Philippines. But I still do not agree that it is worthless to
invest time in the U.N. The reason they have more leverage in
the U.N. human rights monitoring system is that the United
States has become inactive.
And that is where I do agree with you, we have lost our
leverage because we are not on that stage as much as we should
be. And the truth is the United States has sometimes ignored
rulings as well. I mean, we have not always accepted rulings of
the International Court of Justice, even when they had
jurisdiction in contentious cases.
So, I think no action on the international stage is
perfect, but if we want to help the people of Hong Kong, one
way that we could help, in my opinion, is to be more active in
the U.N. human rights monitoring system.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, could Mr. Law just respond to
the impunity question? I, of course, yield back my time.
Chairman Engel. Certainly.
Mr. Law. Yes, I think, well, for decades the world has been
tuning in for China's violations in terms of trade agreement or
any kinds of international treaty. And so now it is very
difficult to find an international mechanism that could really
hold them accountable from what we have now.
So, I think it is important that we recognize how China has
been manipulating the leeway and treating, like, issues on
China, on Taiwan or Hong Kong, Xinjiang, South China Sea, and
also in India even, with huge disrespect for international
norms.
So, I think this is not only about the current mechanism
that we could use, but also the attitude of the countries
around the world, especially those more liberal ones, how they
could join hands to apply pressure on the ground in these
places in regards to China's expansionist, expansionist nature.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wright.
OK. Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will say for
the record I am going to miss you and your leadership. You have
been a, you have been a great leader of this committee in the
short time I have been here. And I have thoroughly enjoyed it.
And I hope you consider me a friend because I sure consider you
one, brother. And you will be missed.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you.
Chairman Engel. Much appreciated.
Mr. Burchett. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman.
Chinese officials in Beijing and Hong Kong have said this
new security law will target an extremely small number of
people. I do not believe anybody believes these officials. We
cannot assume that the Chinese Communist Party will stay true
to their word. The CCP has shown time and time again they are
not to be trusted and they play by their own set of rules.
A few examples of that,--I am going to take my mask off a
second--attempting to cover up the origins of the COVID-19 by
destroying forensic evidence, silencing doctors that dared to
speak out, and failing to notify the international community
over COVID as a whole. And they continue to bully their
neighbors in the South China Sea with absurd claims of
territorial rights over the Spratly Islands, bloodshed along
the line of the actual control with India. I think based on
recent events we can probably say that China is to blame
completely. They have forced over one million Uyghurs into
prison camps. I have heard the reports go on--they are
shocking--forced abortions, beatings, torture, solitary
confinement and more. It honestly leaves you speechless, Mr.
Chairman.
But I do not know why we should expect any better of a
group of people that are oppressing. They have a history of
doing this to their own people. We need to call them out for
these acts whenever, and whenever and wherever they do it.
Yesterday pro-democracy political group Demo--I am not sure
if I am pronouncing this right--Demosisto and two other
independence groups dissolved with Hong Kong. Is this the point
of no return for Hong Kong's democratic movement?
And I will ask our distinguished group that has gathered.
Mr. Law. Yes, thank you for your question.
I think it is important for us to recognize that any forms
of disagreement with Beijing, or even in their own term,
increase hatred toward them so we can see the violation of the
National Security Law. Basically, none of us could speak freely
because we can never get when they will feel, well, hated.
So, I think this is exactly this case in Hong Kong for all
the local political activists. We are basically chained for
most of the occasion if we do not want to face lifelong
imprisonment.
I think sometimes this is white terror that they created.
And for us, we really have to test how, how that execution will
be, how they will implement that law, and to adjust our way to
continue our activism.
But I do not think this is the end of our movement because,
as you could see, there are three Hong Kong activists sitting
in this panel giving our testimony, and also there were more
than about 100,000 people marching down the street.
There are a lot of brave Hong Kong people who do not afraid
the tyranny, and they feel, well, much better regardless of the
intimidation from them.
So, I think Hong Kong movement is pretty much still alive
and with its tenacity. And I think the international community
should really pressure and admire this group of brave people
that give our fight in these dark times.
Mr. Burchett. Any others?
Mr. Lee. Actually, I am the Chair of the Hong Kong Alliance
in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China that is
founded in 1989. And we have been, you know, fighting for
democracy for China, and of course Hong Kong, over the past 31
years. And every day I was asked by the journalists whether we
will dissolve our organization because of the National Security
Law.
Why they are asking that? Because we have, of course, we
have the platform of, you know, bringing justice to those who
ordered the massacre in Tiananmen Square. We have the platform
of end of one-party rule, and also building a democratic China.
So, people are only asking us whether the end of one-party rule
will be something that will be caught by the National Security
Law as undermining the system of China.
We do not know, to be honest. But we have told all the
journalists, the media, that we will hold on to our principles
and we will not retreat. Though we do not know what lies ahead
of us, but I think it is very important that we believe in
democracy and we practice our beliefs.
And so, we do not know what lies ahead. And we will--and
people also ask me because we have the June 4th Museum where
there are a lot of artifacts inside, whether we will, you know,
sort of, send it out of Hong Kong to somewhere safe. No, we are
not going to do that. We will still stay on and practice what
we have--the only activity we have continued from that in the
past.
But, as you said, you know, we do not know when we can
return victorious to democracy.
Mr. Burchett. Thank you,. I have run over time, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
I hope we continue to support free people everywhere. And I
think if we are finally going to take care of this problem we
have just got to stop buying Chinese junk, and we have got to
stop putting up with their garbage and we have to--and talk is
cheap, and we need to put something behind all this talk.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I appreciate your
friendship, brother.
Chairman Engel. Thank you, Mr. Burchett.
Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First, I would like to thank each of the witnesses for
their testimony as well as their continued bravery, and
advocacy, and support for the people of Hong Kong. We are
grateful to those of you especially who took risks by appearing
here today.
This national security legislation is just one more example
of the political persecution, suppression of human rights, and
pro-democracy groups and civil rights lawyers and religious
groups conducted by the Government of China.
In Tibet we have seen cultural genocide to control the
desire for Tibetan self-determination. We have seen the cruelty
in Xinjiang where Uyghur Muslims are surveilled, their phones
tapped to trace their movements, conversations, and networks
both in and out of the country. They are forced to provide
blood samples, voice prints, facial scans, and other personal
data, all before being thrown into mandatory reeducation camps
designed to suppress the Uyghur language and culture,
transforming Xinjiang into a virtual police State.
Just today, Hong Kong police arrested protesters under the
new law for crimes yet to be divulged.
And we must ask ourselves what is next? Who is next?
The Communist Party in China has grown more ambitious in
ways that are anathema to democratic values and the rule of
law, normalizing and enabling environments for the breakdown of
civil rights and liberties. And in spite of Beijing's
increasing encroachment on freedoms, I stand, we stand with the
people of Hong Kong for their bravery and their courage to
advocate for their freedoms.
When the freedom and democracy of future generations are at
stake, we have no choice but to speak up and to act. But it
cannot come simply from this Congress. There is no doubt that
the Speaker of the House, Speaker Pelosi, who chose to spend
time with us today, is committed to fighting for human rights.
She has been doing it for 30 years. And there is no doubt that
my friend Mr. Smith has likewise been standing up for human
rights everywhere on the globe. And he has been doing it for 30
years.
But the leadership also needs to come at the top. And we
are having this hearing today even as we are struggling to
understand how the President's former National Security Advisor
wrote of the President stressing the importance of farmers in
increased Chinese purchases of soy beans and wheat in the
electoral outcome and ``pleading with Xi to ensure he would
win.''
And then also the former National Security Advisor said
that, at a G-20 meeting in June 2019, Xi had explained to Trump
why he was basically building concentration camps in Xinjiang,
and according to our interpreter, Mr. Bolton said, ``Trump said
that Xi should go ahead with building the camps, which Trump
thought was exactly the right thing to do.''
The National Security Council's top Asia staffer, Matthew
Pottinger, told me that Trump said something very similar
during his November 2017 trip to China. That, also, from the
former National Security Advisor.
And even on Hong Kong the President said, after a quarter
of the population of Hong Kong turned out for weeks of
protests, the President said, ``I think President Xi of China
has acted responsibly, very responsibly. They have been out
there protesting for a long time.''
I hope that President Xi will do the right thing,'' he
said, adding China ``could stop the protests if they wanted.''
I want to commend the State Department for its May 28th
Joint statement with the Governments of Australia, Canada, and
the U.K. loudly opposing Beijing's imposition of the National
Security Law on Hong Kong.
But I am so troubled at the way the President has conducted
the relationship, his relationship with President Xi, and all
of the ways that I just laid out that so clearly contradict the
great bipartisan commitment to standing up for human rights of
the people of China and, today especially, the people of Hong
Kong that we have seen exhibited here in this committee.
Mr. Law, if I can just ask, the United States clearly has
to work with like-minded countries. What more can be done,
should be done with the United States leading the way in a
multilateral effort to respond to this new law, the imposition
of this new law? What can be done?
Mr. Law. Thank you very much, Congressman, for your
question.
I think for now, when a push for multiple bills comes in a
Hong Kong situation, that we indeed need a strong action to
implement them and to see what we can do to hold China
accountable. Because for the past few years we have been
pushing for Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act. And I am
glad that it was passed last year, end of last year. And we
have seen a lot of upcoming bills that are going to be passed
and will be pending have effect on them.
And I think this is an important process to show the world
that even the U.S. or the western world when they are dealing
with China they no longer see trade or business interests as
their priority, but for human rights and for the pursuit of
freedom. So, these like-minded countries, I think, were
accessing their policy, and getting an agenda right is the most
important thing that we could expect. And we would definitely
feel encouraged if these countries are doing it with a very
obvious action.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you very much, Mr. Law.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Engel. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
Mrs. Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. I thank the Chairman and, certainly, our
witnesses for bringing attention to China's attempt to bully
and intimidate Hong Kong into abandoning its rights and
freedoms.
Hong Kong's success as a free and open city exposes the
injustices and hypocrisy of the communist system in China.
Congress stands in unity, in bipartisan unity with Hong Kong
residents as they fight to protect rule of law and respect for
human rights in their city.
Yesterday, the Standing Committee of China's National
People's Congress formally approved the National Security Law
in time for it to go into effect today, on July 1st, the
anniversary of Hong Kong's handover to China. This is a date of
great significance for pro-democracy advocates in Hong Kong.
Ms. Petersen, I think we know how this new law has affected
the annual July 1st protest, sadly, but how should the United
States respond to these violent crackdowns on protesters?
Ms. Petersen. Thank you for that question.
Well, I think, obviously, we should be condemning it. We
should join multilateral groups at the United Nations to
condemn it. We should become more active in the U.N. Human
Rights Council which is being asked to set up an independent
monitoring mechanism.
And I fully agree with everyone who has suggested the Safe
Harbor Act because I think it is very, a very strong and
significant show of support, more than just talk, to tell
people that you will provide safe harbor if they have to flee
an authoritarian machine.
I want to say one brief thing about this, the statements
that this law will only be enforced against a small number
people. I think that was Carrie Lam's hope because she really
hoped that everyone would be so frightened by this law that
everyone would stay at home. And that is one of the reasons the
law was brought into force during the COVID restrictions,
because it makes it easier for the Hong Kong Government to try
to persuade everyone to stay home.
But, clearly, that hasn't been the case. I think that there
will be far more arrests than perhaps Carrie Lam had predicted.
And the big question will be whether the people are tried in
Hong Kong, where I do think the judiciary is still independent,
or whether the mainland will use Article 55 to bring them to
the mainland for trial, which would really be a terrible
violation of----
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you.
Ms. Petersen [continuing]. The Sino-British Joint
Declaration.
Thank you.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Ms. Petersen.
``More than just talk'' I think is the operative word
there.
The Communist Party's move to impose this National Security
Law on Hong Kong seems to be inspired in part by domestic
instability stemming from the party's catastrophic handling, as
you just mentioned, Ms. Petersen, of the coronavirus pandemic.
And I just came from the China Task Force where I presented a
Compensation for Americans Act piece of legislation that I hope
we can move forward.
Mr. Lee, do you expect discontent at home could push an
unstable Beijing to take even more shocking actions against the
people of Hong Kong?
Mr. Lee. Thank you for the question.
We expect the Communist Party of China will, you know, be
high-handed in the way they try to, you know, in the way to
upset the protests. But we are seeing the people come out. I
think you really have, all have to appreciate the courage of
people all marching out, today being July 1st. And they have
actually key, you know, instruments of protection.
One is the National Security Law. Actually they have used
another law that is a draconian law in the British colonial
times, and then they changed it during 1997 to make it more
applicable. It is a public security ordinance. And I personally
was charged for seven charges for four incidents or marches
under the public security ordinance because now they are using
the excuse of organizing and saying that they would ban all
gatherings. And so, when we want to organize, you know, you
witnessed the one million and two million marches in June last
year----
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you.
Mr. Lee [continuing]. Now it is totally impossible to do
that now.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Lee.
Real quickly, China seems to have accelerated the time
lines for passing and implementing the National Security Law in
order to turn the tide against pro-democracy candidates at
September's Hong Kong Legislative Council elections.
I do not know if you have time to answer because my time is
about out, Ms. Petersen, but how do you anticipate the National
Security Law will impact the makeup of Hong Kong's Legislative
Council?
What actions can the international community take to
protect the pro-democracy movement this September?
Ms. Petersen. Thank you for that question.
Well, very briefly, I do anticipate that the Beijing and
appointed Hong Kong Government will try to use this law to
disqualify pro-democracy candidates running for office. I think
the democracy movement is being very careful to try not to
violate the law, or at least to make sure that there are
candidates who can still stand. But it is going to be very
difficult. I think they will try to use it as a pretense for
disqualifying them.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Petersen. My time has expired.
I appreciate the indulgence of the Chair, indulgence of the
Chair.
And I want to thank Chairman Eliot for his leadership on
this committee and here in Congress. It is an honor to serve
with you, sir.
I yield back.
Chairman Engel. Thank you very much, Mrs. Wagner. Very much
appreciate those very kind words. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
our extraordinarily courageous witnesses for being here today
for this really important hearing.
And while it is comforting to know that there is strong
bipartisan support for human rights on the Foreign Affairs
Committee of the Congress of the United States, I think we have
to recognize that the President's policy toward China has
undermined American leadership and called into question,
frankly, decades of strong bipartisan support for Hong Kong.
And the American policy toward Hong Kong should, of course, be
based on advancing the interests of our own country in
supporting autonomy and democratic freedoms for Hong Kong.
But we know, of course, that just a few months ago the
President wanted a trade deal and couldn't offer President Xi
enough praise or deference during those negotiations and
subsequent to them.
We also know now there is new reporting that the President
also sought assistance in his reelection campaign from the
Chinese, and supported the Chinese Government's efforts to
continue to put the Uyghurs in concentration camps, and
actually praised President Xi's handling of earlier protests in
Hong Kong.
So, my first question is, despite strong, clear bipartisan
support for democracy and freedom in Hong Kong, how does the
President's conduct and his failure to speak out in support of
human rights broadly, and then the specific efforts to coddle
the Chinese president and advance his own political interests,
how does that impact what is happening in Hong Kong, how the
Chinese Government responds to protests in Hong Kong?
And any of the witnesses who can provide an answer to that
would be helpful. Mr. Law, maybe you can start.
Mr. Law. Yes. Thank you for the question.
I think it is important that we have a stable and strong
alliance, including the cooperation from the Congress and the
White House, that when there are resolutions passed in the
Congress then we could swiftly implement it.
Second, I think it is important that we need a more--or
less volatile government to really handle these cases. But I
think sometimes it is strategic. And I think most importantly,
the structural direction toward China are more assertive and
more an attitude that holds China accountable has already
established. So, I think for long-term I am not worried that
this kind of consensus between aisles will fade.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Kai-ping, could you speak to how you think the Chinese
Government will use this new law? Again, it is not a security
law, it is a law of repression of dissent, it is a law to
destroy democracy in Hong Kong.
There was, it has already been reported, the first arrest
this morning under this new law for a gentleman holding a Hong
Kong independence flag. And so, what should we expect to see in
terms of the imposition or the use of this new law?
Mr. Leung. I think on two levels you can see the impact
that is immediate on Hong Kong first. I think there is a
pervasive sense of self-censorship, a political party had to in
the past suspend themselves. Magazines online have to self-
censor their content. And protesters no longer will be able to
enjoy specifically freedom to express political beliefs and
hanging up a political flag or slogans.
I think those very pervasive intrusions to civil liberties
that we have enjoyed over many decades is now under great
threat.
And I think the second level is really about the
institutional presence of the CCP in Hong Kong that their
office could now--basically is about the law. The operation is
not bound by Basic Law, nor bound by Hong Kong Government.
There is no way to hold them accountable. They could do
surveillance, they could intercept information, they could do
secretive arrests of protesters and then extradite them to
China.
So, the law is really comprehensive in this sense, and its
presence is pervasive in every corner----
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Leung [continuing]. Of civil society.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you so much.
My final question is, you know, I know that speaking out
and condemning the conduct of the Chinese Government is we all
will do. And the purpose of this hearing is to shine a light on
it. I know many have suggested a moving forward with sanctions
which, of course, is appropriate.
But my final question is are there other things, other
actions we should be taking, both as the United States and
along with partners around the world, our allies, that will
have a meaningful impact on the Chinese Government in terms of
their efforts to destroy the democracy of Hong Kong? And if so,
what are they?
Mr. Law. Well, I think at least for now it, well, the
problems in Hong Kong is not only about Hong Kong, it is about
how China will continue its authoritarian and expansionist
nature. So, I think we could think of something like targeting
its Winter Olympics, upcoming Winter Olympics and also issues
not only happening in Hong Kong but happening elsewhere like
Xinjiang and Taiwan in order to pile up the pressure and to
coordinate the applied pressure and get them to be aligned with
international norms and international ruling.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Leung. And if I may add to that. I think--Do we have
time? Sorry.
Mr. Cicilline. Sure. As long as the chairman will let you
answer?
Chairman Engel. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Leung. If I may add, I think the world now has to
reckon with a risen China that is economically very powerful.
And I think the world has to formulate a very stable, cohesive,
and multilateral policy toward China, especially on terms of
trade and business conducting.
There are still U.S. companies who operate in Xinjiang, the
Uyghur region. And we have to take into account human rights
issues when dealing with China in economic runs. This actually
is the issue of Hong Kong.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Chairman, before I yield back I, too,
want to thank you for your extraordinary leadership of this
committee. You have been a mentor from the day that I arrived
in Congress and I had the privilege of serving on the Foreign
Affairs Committee. I will be forever in your debt. And thank
you for your great friendship and your service to our country.
And I yield back.
Chairman Engel. Thank you so much, Mr. Cicilline. Very much
appreciated. Thank you.
Mr. Watkins.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
panelists for your bravery.
The Chinese Communist Party poses a serious threat not just
to the United States but international interests. This is
Chinese Government, clearly not the Chinese people. The CCP is
problematic. And many Chinese people have immigrated to the
United States. They are welcome, obviously. I am biased because
I married one.
But the CCP for decades has been using meticulous and
multidimensional strategies to degrade and undermine American
hegemony and democracies around the world. Chairman Xi has
accelerated these efforts, most recently and clearly apparent
in CCP's dealings with Hong Kong.
Obviously CCP has violated the promise of One Country, Two
Systems by clamping down on Hong Kong. And they have shown a
blatant disregard for human rights: mass detention of millions
of Uyghurs, forced sterilization presumably of tens of millions
of women over the past 30 years, and not allowing the freedom
of speech.
Chinese citizens who criticize the government are
disappeared. Most recently we have seen that play out during
the coronavirus where now the world has over 10 million cases
and half a million deaths. They didn't share lifesaving
information. They covered up how infectious and dangerous the
disease was. They didn't report human-to-human transmission for
a month. And they censored anyone trying to warn the world.
They let some 5 million people leave Wuhan without
screening. They destroyed samples. They hoarded PPE. And they
blamed the United States' soldiers. So, they have not been a
good actor with regards to coronavirus.
And with regard to national and regional disruption
economically, they have stolen hundreds of millions of dollars
of intellectual property from the United States. They have
forced technology transfer and they interfere with global
supply chains, economics, and international business.
So, countering the CCP's aggression, thankfully we have a
president who will hold the CCP to account. An American
president who, unlike any other in history, will be tough on
China.
Republican leader Kevin McCarthy has established the China
Task Force, spearheaded by this committee's own Ranking Member
Mike McCaul.
It is clear that we must steer the U.S. in a direction that
is less dependent on China economically and in terms of
manufacturing.
And so my question to Mr. Law, who, sir, you understand the
United States very well. You went to Yale University. I
represent Eastern Kansas. What do Kansans need to know about
the situation? What can I take home to tell my constituents?
Mr. Law. Well, I think when we talk about human rights and
also the human rights violations in Hong Kong we have to
understand that we are actually facing a global fight. We have
seen also where, for example, in the general election in the
U.S. a lot of, well, foreign forces getting infiltration and
also manipulating a lot of misinformation campaign. And the
same happens in Hong Kong.
So, actually I think in the U.S. and in Hong Kong we both
share a lot of things that originated from authoritarian powers
like Russia and, like, China. So, I think for me my greatest
hope is to educate more U.S. citizens to understand that we are
actually in a global fight. We should hold hands together and
to suppress these authoritarian expansionists, and to let us
know that fighting for democracy, especially in Hong Kong, in
this foreground, is indeed helping the world to preserve its
democracy and its values.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you.
To either, any of the other panelists, I have been to Hong
Kong. I love Hong Kong. How will the future be different in the
next 5 or 10 years because of the CCP?
Mr. Lee. I do not think anyone can, you know, tell the
future. You know, of course we hope that freedom and democracy
will return to Hong Kong, but I think we are into very
difficult times. And not just us but I think the whole China,
everything will be under CCP who only preaches about
nationalism without really caring about our people. I think we
are into hard times.
But I want to also mention one thing about, you know,
people-to-people exchanges that Nathan had just mentioned,
educating the American public about the situation in Hong Kong.
And one thing that I think the Communist Party also in the
National Security Law also mentioned about foreign NGO's. And I
think they also want to intervene into how these exchanges go
on.
And, but I think we should be very--it is very important
and very encouraging to the people of Hong Kong that these
exchanges continue.
Mr. Leung. If I may just add a last word about how do we
want to speak to American audience. I think we have to
recognize Chinese interest is not only about Hong Kong, it is
also about people around the world. We think let's talk about
Zoom. That has been used in American campus. That explicitly
censors Chinese activists.
We can talk about this information campaign of China on
Twitter, on Facebook, social media platforms that are owned by
China and censor sensitive information such as TikTok which is
widely used by American teenagers.
So, I think we have to recognize the global imprint of
China is actually infiltrating to every corner of the world and
every citizens, even in America will be affected.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, sir, very much. I appreciate the
bravery of the panelists.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Castro [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Watkins. And I will
now recognize myself.
The Chinese Government is not only violating the rights of
Hong Kongers but also violating an international treaty, the
Sino-British Joint Declaration. This again undermines the
credibility of the Chinese Government when it comes to public
pledges and international agreements.
The National Security Law is part of a larger campaign of
increased aggression from China in recent months, from its
clashes with India and Vietnam, to its bullying of Taiwan, and
increased repression of the Uyghurs. I believe China has been
emboldened by the fact that no one is minding the shop at the
White House. President Trump has consistently failed to hold
China accountable on a range of issues and has, in fact,
demonstrated no interest in doing so, specifically on human
rights.
Last summer, President Trump adopted the Chinese
Government's language by calling Hong Kong's peaceful protests
riots. He also promised President Xi from the beginning that he
would not get involved in Hong Kong, in a misguided attempt to
win concessions on China in trade talks. That strategy, like
most of President Trump's failed, it failed and is now costing
the folks in Hong Kong.
I joined Representative Curtis in introducing a bipartisan,
bicameral bill, the Hong Kong Safe Harbor Act, that would
expedite the process for Hong Kongers being persecuted to seek
refugee status in the United States. This is a common sense
policy that will protect the protesters who inspired so many of
us for their dogged commitment to upholding universal human
rights in the face of a very repressive regime.
We also must work with our allies, such as the United
Kingdom and Taiwan, in protecting Hong Kongers who now face
retaliation by mainland Chinese forces.
With that, I have a few questions. And as I mentioned, Mr.
Curtis and myself, along with other members of this committee
introduced a bill yesterday that would give Hong Kongers who
face persecution an easier path to receive refugee status in
the United States.
Can any of the witnesses speak to whom in Hong Kong, or
whom in Hong Kong is most at risk of being targeted by the
Chinese and being persecuted because of the National Security
Law?
Should the United States pay special attention to student
leaders and other specific groups?
And I ask that question of anyone on the panel.
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question.
I think since 2012 I think Hong Kong has seen a wave of
youth-led movements. We have for 2012 we have a group of
student leaders coupled with other seniors in civil society who
led the Umbrella Movement. And now the extradition, Anti-
Extradition Movement in 2019 also substantively involved a lot
of young protesters.
So, I think party leaders, for example Nathan and Joshua,
are under tremendous pressure by the CCP. I think those
political leaders from our generation do need certain
protection but also just other activists who are the first-
aiders, who are the legal consultants, who have been, you know,
just reporting news, they will also be under pressure under the
National Security Law.
Mr. Castro. OK. Anyone else on the panel?
Mr. Lee. And I think about the younger protesters and all
the older protesters that have been arrested over the past
year, there are already 9,000 arrests, and 2,000 of them
prosecuted under the law. And many of them are prosecuted under
the law of--the crime of social crime of riot. And that may end
up in 4 years or 6 years or even more years jail term for them.
Very often what happens is not that they have any action in
the scene, it is just that they have not left it, and then the
police will find that as a scene of riot and then they are
caught by the police. And then they may be sent to jail for 4
years.
So, it is not the National Security Law in the future, what
I wanted to say is also the protest movements in the past,
there already are lots of prosecution through these draconian
laws for the publicity or the show. I think in the future and
the past, you know, these victims of police brutality and
police harassment and prosecution, unfair political prosecution
will be the ones that have to be supported and with these new
bills that are going to be introduced.
Mr. Castro. All right. Thank you. I am going to keep myself
on time here and thank you for your answers.
I am going to go to Ms. Titus of Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Hear me? Oh, there we go.
Well, thank you very much. You know, most of the hearing
has focused on just this particular law and the context of the
COVID virus. But as you just said in these last few speakers,
this really isn't new. It goes back to 2014 with the Umbrella
Movement, with the umbrellas against the tear gas when they
appointed the first special executive. Then last summer I was
in Hong Kong, we saw the early protests against the Extradition
Law. That was withdrawn, but certainly some of the other
demands weren't.
But throughout all of that, Carrie Lam said, well, we still
have the One Country, Two Systems. That seems to now be out the
window. There does not seem to be much pretense that that still
exists.
So, I wish you all would elaborate maybe on how we should
have maybe seen this coming.
And then second question because of my own background, I
wonder what the impact of this is going to be on universities,
students, academics, professors in Hong Kong. Because the way
the law is defined where it says subversion of State power,
terrorist activity, collusion, those are very broad terms that
can be applied just about any way the regime wants to. And that
would certainly target, I would think, professors and students
in the social sciences.
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question. If I may just
address the second part of your question.
I myself is in academia. And a lot of Hong Kong
intellectuals, whether they are young or whether they are more
senior, are extremely worried about the future. They worry
about whether they could conduct independent research, whether
their previous work will be scrutinized and used as evidence
against themselves.
And also, not only about local academics, even scholars in
America, because the law is so pervasive that it also covers
American citizens. Academics who study on China or Hong Kong
are very worried about the future. Will they be able to enter
Hong Kong safely for future conferences or research, not to
mention China. Right?
So, I think academics are under tremendous pressure under
this law. And a lot of self-censorship will happen.
And, last, to go back to the first part of the question,
you rightly point out that is not a new phenomena. If you look
at 2014, Xi Jinping actually issued a white paper on the
formulation of One Country, Two Systems policy. And it is
explicit that the CCP under Xi Jinping's leadership is about
total control, it is about party dominance, it is about what
they call overall jurisdiction.
So, we should take into account the historical trajectory
of CCP changing its formulation of One Country, Two Systems
completely different from the era in Deng Xiaoping, for
example, about Hong Kong people will remain Hong Kong. No. Deng
Xiaoping said it is about the polity ruling Hong Kong. It is
about polity who control every sector of Hong Kong.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Mr. Law. Well, If I might jump into the second part of the
question. Because I think we have witnessed a lot of
suppression and worries from the local community. And a lot of
scholars or students they are really worried whether they have
academic freedom in Hong Kong.
So, actually, a lot of them are seeking opportunities to
study abroad or work, or work overseas.
So, I had the experience of talking to them. And I think
sometimes if we, like for example, in a school if they provide
scholarships they could single out Hong Kong as a region from
China and give them separate courses, then it will facilitate
them to be able to get these funds and to study abroad and
continue their career as a scholar.
And I think this is important because while in the U.S. we
have a lot of, well, speculations about whether there are
covert missions from the ten students, whether they are guided
by their party. And sometimes there are lots of vacancies on
the grants which are supposedly given to them, but for now
stopped it because of political reasons. And these funds could
be transferred to Hong Kong students who are brilliant in other
terms, but being deprived because of their political beliefs.
So, I think this is one thing that we could support them
locally and then to culture them in a free space. And they
could, well, kind of repay back to Hong Kong with their own
terms.
Ms. Titus. Maybe we need to look at that specifically as we
think about sanctions or safe harbors to not forget about that
whole student, academic, faculty, researcher population.
Anybody else?
Mr. Lee. Yes. Just one more point.
You know, the way the Communist Party they are having a
multi-front attack over the civil society, of course, including
universities, academics, and also secondary school teachers. So
they will, because they blame everything on the teachers about
what, the behavior of the youth, when actually, of course, the
youth is leading the movement, not leading academics.
One thing they will do in the future in every aspect of
Hong Kong life is they will put political loyalty above
anything. You know, any profession that you may be very, very,
you know, sharp and outstanding in the profession, but if you
are not politically loyal then they will not, you know, hire
you in the academic field. So, in every aspect of life they
want only one thing: loyalty to the Communist Party.
Mr. Castro. All right, you all.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Ms. Titus.
We are going to go to Mr. Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I unfortunately didn't hear all the questioning here
because I am the ranking member of the House Small Business
Committee, so I just came from a hearing there. So, if I repeat
anything that others have already asked, I apologize in
advance.
But I would open this question up to any of the witnesses
who might like to respond.
I am one of the founding co-chairs of the congressional
Taiwan Caucus. And I am currently co-chair of the caucus as
well. So, I would ask that based on the Chinese Communist
Party's decisions relative to Hong Kong with the National
Security Law, what should we expect China's next move against
Taiwan potentially to be?
And what should Taiwan learn from Hong Kong's experience?
And I would, again, yield to any of the witnesses who might
like to respond.
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question.
Professor Petersen, do you want to jump in?
Ms. Petersen. I would just say very briefly that I think
Taiwan already knows that One Country, Two Systems was not
going to be fulfilled. It was originally developed for Taiwan.
And sometimes people used to say when I first moved to Hong
Kong in 1989, that Taiwan was Hong Kong's insurance policy
because the Chinese Government would want to show Taiwan that
it will keep its promises.
But, clearly, that hasn't happened. And I do not even think
that China is trying to take any sort of soft diplomatic
approach to Taiwan anymore. They are just trying to scare
Taiwan.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
Any of the other witnesses want to weigh in?
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question.
I think in recent years there has been tremendous
interaction and exchange of Hong Kong's Taiwanese civil
society. And Taiwan's activists and comments that I have heard
actually learn tremendous view of how CCP envisions an ideology
about control, you know, how dominant, you know, One Country,
Two Systems can be, you know, once implemented in Hong Kong,.
So, I think I agree with Professor Petersen that it shows
that One Country, Two Systems is a broken promise as that could
not implement in Taiwan.
The last year, Anti-Extradition Bill Movement had helped
tremendously to sway the discussion in Taiwan about how do we
perceive China. And I think China would not give up their
ambitions toward Taiwan or Hong Kong. And I think they will try
to exert that national security concept to Taiwan here, if not
formal legislation, some informal institution and informal
channel of influence.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. Let me go to another
question.
What should the international community, specifically the
United States, do to impose real consequences on the CCP for
suppressing freedom in Hong Kong, while minimizing any
blowback, or any consequences, or any hardships on the people
of Hong Kong itself who we obviously want to help and stand
with? We do not want to make their lives any more challenging
than they already are.
But what is the best way to impose hardship for the bad
behavior of China without harming the people of Hong Kong?
Again, to any witness who might like to take that.
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question.
Again, China has used Hong Kong as a conduit to import
sensitive technology, to finance its companies who are in
tremendous debt, to conduct let's say IPOs or various champions
in Hong Kong. So, China has benefited tremendously from Hong
Kong as a gateway to international finance, a gateway to
international technology, especially from America.
So, those spheres where America can exert tangible
influence on China and without a democratized parliament for
institutions. Actually, Hong Kong have not benefited
tremendously from those economic arrangements, so the consensus
in Hong Kong now is basically we have to hold China accountable
and stop them from abusing our special economic status.
So, I think the support is actually there for U.S. to
implement more tangible sanctions on China.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. And I will get in one last question,
if I can.
One of Hong Kong's principal strengths, obviously, is that
it is such a great place to do business. If any of the, maybe
one of the witnesses could discuss whether this new National
Security Law will have a chilling effect on businesses and
their international employees over and above any political
activity?
Mr. Law. Thank you very much. I know all kinds of
professionals and they are all thinking about leaving Hong
Kong. I talked with some stakeholders, they are also thinking
about stop moving into Hong Kong, stop injecting more funds
until Hong Kong is more stable.
So, I think it is important to realize that we are not the
ones who are harming Hong Kong or creating economic
difficulties for Hong Kong. But the Chinese Communist Party
they are actually destroying Hong Kong as a city that could
embrace different values and different opinions. And it is
really vital for business. So, I think, yes indeed, we are
suffering much from the implementation of National Security
Law.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. Thank you.
I recognize Mr. Malinowski.
Mr. Malinowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank our witnesses for their continued commitment and courage
in speaking out on behalf of the people of Hong Kong.
We are all aware that we are in a contest with the Chinese
Communist Party, a contest of ideas. And, unfortunately for the
people of Hong Kong, they are playing a role similar to the
people of Berlin during the cold war. This is a battleground in
that contest. And we cannot underestimate how important this is
and how difficult it is going to be, given the determination of
Beijing to crush the freedom of the people of Hong Kong.
My focus has been on what can we practically do about it. I
strongly support targeted sanctions. But, to be frank, I do not
think they are going to do much good in terms of deterring the
Chinese Government from these actions.
I think more important as Mr., I think, Leung mentioned, is
to take action to withdraw some of the privileges that
corporations doing business in Hong Kong currently receive.
That is a difficult conversation we are going to have to
continue to have.
We have spoken also a lot here today about the importance
of offering safe haven for people from Hong Kong. And I think
that is incredibly important. And I want to make sure we are
all clear. We have two pieces of legislation that I think are
equally important
Mr. Curtis, Mr. Castro, and others have offered a piece of
legislation that I have co-sponsored to provide expedited
refugee status for activists, for people in Hong Kong who have
a credible fear of persecution. That is a lifeline for the
people who need it the most.
A number of us, including myself, Mr. Curtis as well, Mr.
Phillips, Mr. Kinzinger, Mr. McGovern, have offered an
additional piece of legislation, the Freedom and Choice Act,
which is meant not only as a lifeline but as a warning to
Beijing. Because in that legislation we also offer admission to
the United States to people from Hong Kong with advanced
degrees, business owners, those who have completed
undergraduate degrees in the United States.
The idea here is very simply to say to the Communist Party
of China that if you, indeed, suffocate and crush Hong Kong you
will lose its wealth and talent to the United States, you will
lose its wealth and talent to what you consider to be your
greatest adversary. And, frankly, your loss will be our gain.
The point here is, again, not just to provide a lifeline
but a warning in order to try to deter Beijing from doing its
worst to Hong Kong.
And I wanted to ask the witnesses about this combination of
efforts, and particularly whether they think that that warning
might have some impact on Beijing's calculations because, after
all, they want Hong Kong because of its wealth and talent. And
we know they are very worried about the brain drain to the
United States, to the United Kingdom, to Canada, to Australia.
Mr. Leung, maybe begin with you. Do you believe that this,
this kind of action might be noticed in Beijing and might
actually affect its calculations?
Mr. Leung. Well, definitely I think Beijing is under
pressure and that is why they wanted to implement the National
Security Law in order to try to squash the movement in Hong
Kong. But, in fact, it actually reignites the whole movement.
We have a lot of people come down to the street to protest. And
they are obviously not afraid of the newly implemented National
Security Law.
And I think actually, well, Beijing backfires himself. And
I think for the international community we should have a
multilateral, comprehensive, cohesive strategy dealing with
China issues, not only in Hong Kong but also, for example,
treaty--well, they will have Winter Olympics really soon. And
shall we endorse that? Shall we participate in that? If we do
not, then what message could we deliver in order to hold China
accountable?
And I think this is important that we put this kind of
angle looking at China issue in every respect, in every
perspective, including the human rights violations in Xinjiang,
the intimidation to Taiwan, the cultural genocide in Tibet. So,
I think yes, indeed, China is really pressured. But we have to
push far more than only words, but we need coalition, we need
alliance, and we need multilateral and comprehensive actions to
them.
Mr. Malinowski. Thanks.
Anyone else just quickly want to chime in on whether
offering admission--to the United States?
Mr. Lee. Yes. I just, yes, I want to talk about that this
is logical time to add pressure from the Chinese Communist
Party in suppressing human rights in China or Hong Kong. And
one example I think Kai-ping has mentioned about Zoom.
Actually, I am the victim of being blocked, my account was
being blocked by Zoom. And afterwards, apart from me, two other
activists in America talked about June 4th involvement, and I
will follow them on June 4th, our account was blocked. And then
the explanation is that because the Chinese Government had
asked them to block our account.
And then the answer to our, the theory of the media is
that, OK, in the future they won't block our account but they
will block all Chinese participants. This is the way that the
businessman behavior. The same with the SSCC you know, willing
to sign on to the National Security Law, so business had to be
held also, you know, responsible for human rights violations in
many parts of the world and not to support the regime that
suppressed human rights.
Mr. Leung. If I might just address very quickly about the
industries----
Mr. Castro. You want to, you want to for about 10 seconds.
Mr. Leung. Actually, add substantive pressure on China. For
example, the U.K. recommendation about favorable opening of the
BNO, actually it was met with severe criticism from the foreign
affairs department from Chinese companies--from Chinese
Government.
For example, Hong Kong housing market is sustained by Hong
Kong people. And they are actively substantively owned by a lot
of, like, property developers from China. So, when Hong Kong
people leave from Hong Kong on a substantive scale, actually it
hurt Chinese interests. When, for example, our financial
market, stock market,----
Mr. Castro. Sir.
Mr. Leung [continuing]. Housing market are affected.
Mr. Castro. I am going, I am going to have to--I apologize.
These are all very engaging questions and answers. But I want
to make sure that all of the members have time to engage with
all the witnesses and ask their questions, especially before we
have to go vote in just a bit.
So, with that, thank you, Mr. Malinowski.
I am going to recognize Mr. Phillips now.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to each of our
witnesses, I celebrate your courage and gratitude on behalf of
this entire committee for being with us today.
I woke up to two very troubling headlines in the New York
Times this morning. One, ``China's Software Stalked Uyghurs
Earlier and More Widely, Researchers Learn.``
And, second, ``Arrests in Hong Kong as Security Law Sends
Chill Over the City.'' As we see live reports right now what is
happening in the streets of Hong Kong.
You know, I have to give President Xi some credit. He has
accomplished something that many thoughts was impossible, and
that is unifying Democrats and Republicans right here in the
U.S. Congress, citizens of the United States, all in opposition
to his oppressive and repressive policies.
The foundation of Hong Kong is freedom. And that foundation
has been dealt a terribly damaging blow in the past 24 hours.
With that said, we talked about sanctions. We talked about
condemnations. But I like the notion of invitations, as my
colleague Mr. Malinowski just spoke to. That is why I am a
original co-sponsor of his bill, the Hong Kong People's Freedom
and Choice Act, which will protect Hong Kongers who are facing
persecution.
And I also celebrate Boris Johnson's announcement that the
United Kingdom is going to offer 3 million Hong Kong citizens
with British national status, a path to full citizenship.
And I want to take this opportunity to call on the rest of
the world to consider extending those same invitations to Hong
Kongers who are now being oppressed and repressed.
So, on the notion of invitations versus sanctions, I would
love to hear from our panelists today their perspectives on how
effective such policies might be. If we might start with you,
Mr. Leung.
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question.
Again, I myself and others, many of my close friends, have
to face a very difficult situation of leaving Hong Kong because
of decades of possible imprisonment. So, having a lifeboat,
having a safety valve for people who are in immediate danger,
and in the situation where the court is not independent anymore
because the chief executive would actually hand pick judges, it
is extremely important. So, that is the first.
And I think, second, invitations and sanctions are not
mutually exclusive. And I would reference the ideology of the
movement that has been very popular in Hong Kong which is ``Be
Water!`` I think people in Hong Kong are very flexible in their
tactics: if they have to leave for immediate danger, they will
do so. And they will continue their fight in overseas, for
example in the United States.
So, I think a combination of those strategies by offering
tangible pressure on China, and on the other hand offering a
viable option for Hong Kong people are extremely important and
well balanced.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, sir.
Professor Petersen, if you might share some perspective on
invitations.
Ms. Petersen. Yes. I would fully support the idea of the
Safe Harbor Act and the Freedom of Choice Act.
And I would like to also circle back to a point that one of
the representatives made about academics and students. And I
would just like to suggest that you might look into the
network, there is an international network known as Scholars at
Risk, and it is a network of universities all around the world
that try to support academics and students who are at risk of
having their academic freedom and other freedoms violated.
And often what that needs is some funding to be able to
help bring academics on academic visits where they can escape
persecution and actually do some research. So, I think that
would be very productive.
And then I would just like to reiterate the importance of
the United States being more active in the U.N. human rights
treaty monitoring bodies and ratifying more treaties and
getting reactivated in the U.N. Human Rights Council.
Thank you.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Professor.
Mr. Law.
Mr. Law. Well, I think it is really important for us to
realize that not only people that face oppression and then,
well, some of them are speaking out. But for those working
underground they also need the attention of the world.
Second, these combination of strategies are much needed.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you.
And, Mr. Lee, if you want to share some perspective we have
about 20 seconds left.
Mr. Lee. Yes. Thank you.
I think invitation is one strategy. And I think people in
Hong Kong, those especially who are under immense fear of their
future security and have a safe harbor is very important. But
at the same time, you know, we are in for the long haul. I
think that the system in Hong Kong will be in for a long haul.
And we need a long-term support. And we hope that we can get
it, international community support Hong Kong in the long term,
not just this, just this moment of necessity, but it will go on
for some time
Thank you.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, sir. A good reminder to all of us.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Mr. Phillips.
I recognize now Mr. Reschenthaler of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Reschenthaler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
it.
You know, earlier today I heard the Speaker come in here
and say that she studies Chinese history and politics for an
hour a day. You know, that is nice, but maybe we should
actually take an hour today and actually run the Hong Kong
Autonomy Act. It passed unanimously in the Senate. And this
would actually do something. It would actually sanction the bad
actors that are cracking down on Hong Kong.
So, when I hear about the 1-hour a day it frustrates me,
because I am glad people are studying this, but we can actually
do something to combat CCP aggression in Hong Kong. And every
day, every hour that we delay this we allow the CCP to
consolidate power, we allow the CCP to arrest more freedom
fighters, we allow the CCP to erode and chip away at Hong
Kong's autonomy.
So, how about instead of studying this issue like the
Speaker says she does, how about we actually take an hour each
session day and run bills to hold China accountable?
How about we take an hour next session day and we do
something about the atrocities on the Uyghurs?
How about we take an hour and do something about the theft
of intellectual property?
How about we take an hour out of one session day and talk
about how the Chinese and CCP steal innovation from our
colleges and universities?
How about we take an hour one session day and do something
about the Chinese dumping fentanyl in the United States,
particularly in my district where people are actually dying of
overdoses?
So, I am glad that the Speaker says she takes an hour a day
to study these issues, but how about we actually--how about
instead of studying these issues we actually do something to
hold China accountable?
And with all due respect to the witnesses, they are great
people, they are doing--they are doing a great job testifying
today, but I do not want to single anybody out, but I have
heard about international institutions and how these are the
answers. Well, the Chinese have already excluded our
international institutions. They have completely taken over the
World Health Organization. The WHO has become a--has just
parroted CCB--CCP talking points. The international criminal
courts I hear being talked about do nothing but single out
Americans and Brits and Israelis while doing nothing about
transgressions of the PLA.
So, I hope the air conditioning is nice in your ivory
tower, but how about you get out of it and actually take a
realistic view of foreign policy, and how about you advocate so
the Speaker and my colleagues across the aisle actually run an
act which is going to do something that is better than writing
a strongly worded letter, and actually have sanctions on CCP
members that are overrunning Hong Kong.
So, again, an hour a day could be better spent actually
running bills to hold the CCP accountable.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Allred from Texas.
Mr. Allred. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the witnesses for appearing before us
today, and commend you for your incredible bravery. I, and many
Americans watched in awe as the people of Hong Kong took to the
streets to protest the proposed extradition laws nearly a year
ago in just amazing numbers. And the bravery of the people of
Hong Kong I think is an inspiration to people around the world.
The fight for democracy in Hong Kong is not just a fight
for only Hong Kongers, it is a fight for self-determination,
human rights, and the advancement of freedom around the world.
And as the world's oldest democracy, we must in a bipartisan
way not only stand with the people of Hong Kong, but we must
act.
And I agree with my colleagues statements about the
legislation offered, safer harbor and refugee status to Hong
Kongers, and the need to not only sign some of our bipartisan
legislation but to also issue sanctions against Chinese
officials, while I recognize that that may alone not be enough.
The point raised by Mr. Leung several times today, and by
Professor Petersen, is one that I want to stress. The way to
stand up to China is not through bluster and unilateral trade
restrictions while asking for help with your reelection. The
way to present--the way to stand up to the Chinese is to
present a united front of the international community, and to
engage in the diplomatic mechanisms in the U.N. and elsewhere
to raise and legitimize issues with China.
The United States is the only country that can gather the
world around these issues. And so, we have to lead.
These international treaties and mechanisms are only as
strong as the U.S.'s commitment to them. When we withdraw, they
do not go away, they are just simply used by the Chinese and
others who do not believe in the expansion of democracy, in
human rights, in the right of self-determination.
And as a member of this committee, meeting for the first
time after some pretty big revelations have been issued about
this Administration, I think we have to talk about the elephant
in the room, which is that the President of the United States
has been accused by his former national security advisor, John
Bolton, of offering his support for concentration camps.
Concentration camps. This is such a departure from past U.S.
presidents that I cannot even really overState how harmful this
is to our status as the leader around the world in human
rights.
History books will write about this unspeakable breaking of
the U.S. commitment to human rights.
Now, we have about 2 minutes left in my time. My only
question to the witnesses is to offer you a chance to expound
upon some of the things you have said today so that the people
in my district in Texas and the American people can put a face
here in our democratically elected and empowered forum to what
is happening in Hong Kong; and to ask you how you feel about
this law that has been put in place, this repressive law; and
how you feel about what you are seeing and not seeing from the
United States.
And you can go in any order that you want.
Mr. Lee. Yes. Thank you, sir. I will comment first,
Chairman.
I think everyone in Hong Kong when they wake up every day
they have to make decisions now after the law was being passed.
What kind of message they could put on Facebook? Should they
come out to march or gather? Will they be arrested? Should I
teach my children critical thinking because, you know, the
Communist Party want to brainwash my children?
You know, these are the things that everyday life of the
people of Hong Kong are now being pressured, and they are now
living in fear of, you know, crossing the line too far. And for
me personally, therefore, as a political activist, you know, we
are also putting ourselves on the line.
But I think the people of Hong Kong, as mentioned, we are,
you know, we are ``Be Water!`` We will try to be innovative in
our struggle, and we will continue our fight.
Mr. Leung. Thank you for the question.
When I know the fact that I have to be forced to exile, and
leave my home places and come to America, you know, to resume
my graduate study, I have met incredible colleagues who share
their story about their Iranian family who fled from their
country in the Seventies, or European countries who were under
Nazi rule. So, it comfort me in the sense to know that U.S.
story is actually composed of many people like me and other
freedom fighters who actually have been forced to leave their
country
So, I hope the U.S. story will continue to inspire people.
And I hope that more Hong Kong people will be able to continue
their struggle in this place or other countries.
Mr. Castro. OK, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Allred.
I will now go to Mr. Levin.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman.
You know, it feels to me like this is the most troubling
time for human rights in China since 1989. And I was in Hong
Kong in late May 1989 in what was the biggest demonstration
then in the history of Hong Kong, certainly the biggest I had
ever seen.
And I was in Chengdu on June 4th, 1989, and witnessed the
killing of demonstrators there in numbers that have never
really been recorded properly by history. Today, an estimated 1
million Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, Hui, and other ethnic Muslim
minorities are interned in Xinjiang, as Mr. Allred said, in
concentration camps.
The Tibetan people are denied basic human rights and the
very existence of their culture is threatened.
And now the freedom of Hong Kongers hangs in the balance.
I wish I could say that the United States has been a
champion for the rights of these peoples but, as many of my
colleagues have made clear here today, this Administration has
sent exactly the wrong signals and taken exactly the wrong
steps in the case of Xinjiang, and Hong Kong, and others.
Professor Petersen, do you believe that the failure of the
United States to be more forceful in its defense of human
rights earlier about Hong Kong, certainly about Xinjiang, has
emboldened Xi Jinping?
Ms. Petersen. Thank you for the question.
Yes, I do. I think that even though the naming and shaming
process may not be a very coercive enforcement process, it is
one process that can be effective, particularly if all of the
world leaders get together and really name abuses of human
rights publicly when they see them.
And if one very influential country, like the United
States, does not participate actively in the international
human rights monitoring system, then we weaken it.
So, yes, I agree with that. Thank you.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
You know, last month the Washington Post published a piece
by a Cornell professor named Allen Carlson titled ``What's in
store for Hong Kong? Look at Tibet.`` Carlson writes, ``Just as
China has imposed more, rather than less, assimilationist
policies each time Tibetans protested Chinese misrule, Beijing
has now set the table to adopt a much tougher response to Hong
Kong's ongoing protest movement.`` And I will say, add brave
protest movement.
Professor Petersen, to what extent do you believe the cases
of Tibet and Hong Kong are similar in this way?
Ms. Petersen. I think that there are some very important
differences. And one of the differences is that Hong Kong did
have a very independent legal system and a lot of advantages to
begin with. And I think that is one of the reasons that many
scholars of autonomy and the model of autonomy in international
law thought that it could work in Hong Kong because Hong Kong
had the tradition of an independent legal profession, an
independent judiciary, a free press, and had all the advantages
of being an international financial city.
Mr. Levin. Right.
Ms. Petersen. The fact that it hasn't worked shows how it
makes it all the more disappointing. I think it shows that the
repression of the Chinese Government is even more extreme than
we thought; the fact that they could do this and get away with
it so far, even in Hong Kong.
Mr. Levin. Yes. Well, let me--that seems so right, but let
me ask all of you. I mean, I feel like a thread, I participated
in this whole hearing and a thread throughout it is that the
human rights of people anywhere are threatened when the human
rights of people elsewhere are undermined. The Chinese
Government has used advance surveillance systems in Tibet, in
Xinjiang, and now really everywhere to undermine people's human
rights.
I feel like it is really a question of all the countries in
the world coming together to make a renewed commitment to human
rights. And without U.S. leadership it is hard to see that
happening.
Thoughts from any of you.
Mr. Lee. I think we need to put values above profit. I
think when Xi Jinping goes about around the world, you know,
people may talk to him about human rights and then find
agreement on, you know, trade, and then Xi Jinping go away very
happy with the profit, the money that he is gaining. But where
is the human rights? You know, he knows his hypocrisy. And we
need the world to really stick to values and not just looking
for the money.
I think that is very important.
Mr. Levin. Thank you. I guess my time is expired, Mr.
Chairman, so I will yield back.
Thanks to our tremendous witnesses.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. I am going to recognize Ms.
Spanberger. You need a second?
Ms. Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Congress has consistently demonstrated bipartisan support
for the people of Hong Kong. And I am fortunate enough to have
been able to do a lot of work over in Hong Kong and in Asia in
general. We have supported Hong Kong, the Uyghurs, the
Tibetans, and we have been consistently interested in making
sure Chinese officials who are responsible for human rights
violations are punished against these populations.
Despite this and many of the authorities in Congress have
provided to the Trump Administration to hold the Chinese
individuals accountable, President Trump has failed to
meaningfully act in support of human rights in China or really
anywhere else.
John Bolton wrote in his memoir that President Trump did
not want to get involved when millions in Hong Kong were taking
to the streets last year. President Trump even praised Xi
Jinping's handling of the situation.
President Trump also reportedly held off on imposing
sanctions against Chinese officials involved with the mass
detention camps because, in doing so, he would have interfered
with his trade deal with Beijing.
My question to you all is what message does this send to
the people of Hong Kong, to the Uyghurs, to the Tibetans, to
those, frankly, fighting for democracy and rights everywhere?
My second question is, given Trump's transactional approach
toward foreign policy, how can we ensure that Hong Kong does
not become a pawn in the broader U.S.-China strategic
competition?
And I will turn my question over to either of the
witnesses.
Ms. Petersen. Thank you. Well, I will take a stab at that.
It is a very difficult question. And I do not think the
people of Hong Kong deserve to be a political football or a
strategic chip to be played. And so, while I very much support
any measure that will offer safe harbor to the people of Hong
Kong and help to name and shame human rights violations
anywhere, I do think it is important that we have a stable
foreign policy and that it will be based on multilateral
actions and multilateral institutions.
Thank you.
Ms. Houlahan. Do you all have anything else to add to that?
Mr. Lee. On the second question I think, you know, we have
faith in democracy. And I think any government that are not
really sticking to the principles, you know, will be, there
will be a check and balance on the part of the legislature and
also the people movement.
So, I think it is very important that the message of
supporting Hong Kong, human rights, and freedom and democracy
should not stay on just the level of the politicians, but
really go to the everyday life of the people of the United
States and linking up union with union. You know, I talked to
JCR yesterday night on the situation in Hong Kong, linking
university to university, student unions to student unions.
So, we need really a people-to-people solidarity in order
to make sure that all democracy in the world will listen to the
people and be on the side of the freedom and democracy.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I very much appreciate your time
and your testimony. And I yield the balance of my time.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
Ms. Spanberger.
Mr. Spanberger. I would like to begin by thanking every one
of our witnesses today for speaking with us, particularly given
the risks associated with publicly discussing these very
sensitive matters. I stand with the people of Hong Kong in
their calls for human rights, democracy, and autonomous rule.
During my time as a CIA case officer I saw the impacts of
tools that I consider to be part of the dictator's playbook.
For example, it is common for authoritarian leaders to use the
guise of national security and the flexibility of vague laws to
repress opposition and deter democratic progress.
Ms. Petersen, how do you expect the Chinese Communist Party
to take advantage of the lack of specificity in the new
National Security Law for Hong Kong to curb freedom of
expression and consolidate power?
Ms. Petersen. Thank you. Well, that goes back to one of the
points that I didn't quite get to in my testimony, which is
that there are a number of vague provisions in the new National
Security Law. However, one of the provisions also says that the
ICCPR, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, shall continue to be respected and protected in Hong
Kong. And that potentially should serve as a guide to
interpreting vague clauses.
Mr. Spanberger. Uh-huh.
Ms. Petersen. There is a direct contradiction, a vague
clause should be interpreted so as to comply with the ICCPR.
And the U.N. Human Rights Committee has repeatedly held that
national security cannot be used as a basis to quash peaceful
advocacy for multi-party democracy, constitutional change, et
cetera.
But we do not know whether the Hong Kong courts will be
able to interpret the law because the law is silent on that
fact. And we also know that the NPC Standing Committee in any
event has the overriding power of interpretation.
So, it is going to be difficult to know until we see actual
cases that there is real danger that the Chinese Government
will use these overly broad definitions to capture peaceful
advocacy and to prosecute people for peaceful advocacy.
Thank you.
Mr. Spanberger. And in followup to the comments or the
answer that you just gave, so then is it your assessment that
it will be the Hong Kong officials who will have the power to
interpret and implement the newly released National Security
Law about how these authorities will actually affect Hong
Kong's autonomy?
Ms. Petersen. It really depends, first of all, on where the
cases are tried. Carrie Lam, the chief executive, has said, and
the law does say, that the general rule should be that the Hong
Kong SAR has jurisdiction.
Mr. Spanberger. Uh-huh.
Ms. Petersen. That means tried in Hong Kong courts.
And I have to say that Hong Kong judges, I believe, are by
and large very independent. And, in general, they have done a
good job of enforcing the ICCPR and holding both the Hong Kong
Government and legislation accountable to that. So that if
there is a vague clause, they try to interpret it to comply
with the ICCPR.
Now, the problem however is, is that the law says the power
of interpretation of this law rests with the NPC Standing
Committee, which will issue legislative interpretations. It is
silent on whether the courts also get to interpret it.
I know my colleagues and I have discussed this, and we
believe that the power of interpretation is inherent in Hong
Kong judiciary's power of final adjudication, their inherent
power of statutory interpretation.
So, I am hopeful that the courts of Hong Kong will be able
to interpret the law in the course of trying cases. But I
cannot predict with any certainty because if the NPC Standing
Committee decides it does not want that to happen, it can issue
an overriding interpretation which the Hong Kong courts will
have to follow. So, I cannot give you a definite answer. I am
sorry.
Mr. Spanberger. No, I appreciate it. That is very helpful.
While I am concerned, as are some of my colleagues, that
the Trump Administration has not been consistently firm in
communicating and executing its policy toward China, I do
commend the State Department for its very strong May 28th joint
statement with the governments of Australia, Canada, and the
United Kingdom, in our clear opposition to Beijing imposing a
National Security Law on Hong Kong.
Ms. Petersen, one more question for you. Can you speak a
little bit about how the United States can demonstrate
continued leadership in multilateral settings that you believe
would actually set a strong message, send a strong message to
Beijing and encourage the Chinese Government to comply with its
international obligations?
Ms. Petersen. Yes, I can. Thank you for that question.
First, I think the United States should ratify more
multilateral human rights treaties. We have actually ratified
fewer than China. That does not mean we have a worse human
rights record, but it means we are not as active in the treaty
monitoring bodies, so we are not as influential.
Second, we need to become active again in the U.N. Human
Rights Counsel rather than turning away from it because we
might not like everything it does. We should become more active
in that council.
So, I think participating in these multilateral efforts is
very, very important and can give the United States more
influence and more solidarity with other like-minded countries.
Thank you.
Mr. Spanberger. Thank you very much. And to all the
witnesses who may be experiencing time differences to be with
us here this morning, thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Ms. Spanberger.
All right. Well, that concludes questions from members. And
I will move to closing remarks now.
I want to thank our witnesses for their insight and
expertise. And I want to take a moment to acknowledge the Hong
Kong American community here in the United States. And although
he is not at the witness stand today, I wanted to extend
special thanks to Samuel Chu and the Hong Kong Democracy
Council for their tireless advocacy, help, and support for Hong
Kong.
To my colleagues, thank you for joining this important
conversation. I am glad that we can convene, in this case
across many time zones through videoconferencing, to continue
our committee's work in these challenging times.
And with that, our hearing is adjourned today.
[Whereupon, at 12:55 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM CHAIRMAN ENGEL
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD FROM REPRESENTATIVE CONNOLLY
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
