- CHINA'S MARITIME AMBITIONS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHINA'S MARITIME AMBITIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC AND NONPROLIFERATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

JUNE 30, 2020
__________

Serial No. 116-123
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

41-197PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York               Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey      CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia      STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
KAREN BASS, California      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      TED S. YOHO, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California      LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas      JIM SENSENBRENNER, Wisconsin
DINA TITUS, Nevada      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York      BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California      FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania      BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota      JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota      KEN BUCK, Colorado
COLIN ALLRED, Texas      RON WRIGHT, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan      GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      GREG PENCE, Indiana
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
DAVID TRONE, Maryland      MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and Nonproliferation

BRAD SHERMAN, California, Chairman,

DINA TITUS, Nevada                   TED YOHO, Florida, Ranking Member
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
GERALD CONNOLLY, Virginia      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
AMI BERA, California      BRIAN MAST, Florida
ANDY LEVIN. Michigan      JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia

Don MacDonald, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Poling, Mr. Gregory B., Senior Fellow for Southeast Asia,
Director, Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, Center for
Strategic and International Studies............................     7
Mastro, Dr. Oriana Skylar, Resident Scholar, American Enterprise
Institute, Assistant Professor of Security Studies, Georgetown
University.....................................................    19
Erickson, Dr. Andrew S., Professor of Strategy, China Maritime
Studies Institute, Naval War College Visiting Scholar, Fairbank
Center for Chinese Studies, Harvard University.................    33

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    59
Hearing Minutes..................................................    60
Hearing Attendance...............................................    61

OPENING STATEMENT

Opening statement submitted for the record from Chairman Bera....    62

ADDITONAL STATEMENT SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Statement submitted for the record from Representative Connolly..    65

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Responses to questions submitted for the record from
Representative Wagner..........................................    67

CHINA'S MARITIME AMBITIONS

Tuesday, June 30, 2020

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and
Nonproliferation
Committee on Foreign Affairs
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ami Bera
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Bera. The Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, and
Nonproliferation will come to order. Without objection, the
chair is authorized to declare a recess of the committee at any
point and all members will have 5 days to submit statements,
extraneous material, and questions for the record subject to
the length and limitation in the rules. To insert something
into the record, please have your staff email the previously
mentioned address or contact full committee staff.
As a reminder to members, please keep your video function
on at all times even when you are not recognized by the chair.
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves, and
please remember to mute yourself after you finish speaking.
Consistent with the H.Res.965 and the accompanying regulations,
staff will only mute members and witnesses as appropriate, when
they are not under recognition, to eliminate background noise.
I see that we have a quorum and will now recognize myself
for opening remarks. Before I start my opening remarks, let me
welcome back the members on the subcommittee._I know we miss
being here together, but we have in the interim, had a robust
agenda in terms of looking at a number of issues that are
pertinent to the region as well as non-proliferation.
And with that, let me give myself 5 minutes for opening
remarks. I want to thank the ranking member and the members of
the subcommittee, our witnesses, and members of the public for
joining us at today's hearing. Over the past several months, we
have seen how COVID-19's race around the world has sparked
remarkable upheaval and disruptions in the global economy and
international stability. This subcommittee held the first
hearing on the novel coronavirus in early February, and
subsequently had additional hearings. And I, as a doctor,
continue to remain concerned about the both global pandemic and
the disruptions around the global pandemic, but also the
economic challenge.
China is central to what is happening. We know the novel
coronavirus initiated in China. We saw the disruptions in
supply chains with this pandemic. We saw the lack of
transparency around the coronavirus. And those are all issues
that are important for us to take a look at, and we will. We
have also seen China's economic coercion and predatory lending
practices around the world, what is happening in Hong Kong, and
multiple issues, but today we are here to focus on China's
maritime ambitions.
I was first elected to Congress and sworn in, in 2013, and
through the years that I have been on this subcommittee, I have
viewed China's action in the maritime domain with deep
concern._We watched with alarm when China built up and
militarized features in the Spratly Islands and other areas in
the region. In recent months, we have seen China has continued
its coercive actions and aggressive actions. Chinese fishing
boats have swarmed Indonesian waters near the Natuna Islands in
December and China sank a Vietnamese fishing boat in April.
We have seen the same story in the East China Sea and the
Indian Ocean. In May, Chinese coast guard ships pursued a
Japanese fishing boat in Japanese waters. I also continue to
have concerns about China's influence in the Indian Ocean like
at the Hambantota port, and the implications for the United
States and other countries in the region.
These actions pose serious threats to regional stability
and this is not what you see out of a responsible global
leader._And China has to make that decision._Does it want to be
a responsible global leader or will it be a nation that sits
apart? And China's actions in these areas are vitally important
to the world's economy.
We know the large number of goods and services that moves
through the South China Sea and are vital as we look at
economic recovery. Shared values and principles like freedom of
navigation matter, but China ignored an international court
ruling that declared they had violated the U.N. Convention for
the Law of the Sea in 2016. A convention, by the way, that the
United States should have ratified a long time ago.
Now, as we move forward, we have our friends in the region
and I talked to many of them such as our Quad Coalition, our
like-minded colleagues in Japan, India, Australia. If you talk
to the other nations in the region such as Vietnam, the
Philippines, et cetera, and they all express concern at China's
aggressive behavior in the maritime space.
As we think about this and as we move forward, again China
can be an isolated nation or it can choose to work in a
collaborative, cooperative way with the rest of the world's
leaders and the rest of the world's global economy. Going
forward, we will be looking at a number of these issues and it
is our hope, over time, that China understands that it can
better accomplish its goals by having a cooperative
relationship. Certainly they will be a competitor, but we hope
for a cooperative relationship built on values of free market,
values of freedom. Unfortunately, we have seen in recent years
China going in the opposite direction.
I look forward to the testimony of the witnesses, and I now
yield to my friend from Florida, our ranking member,
Representative Yoho for any opening comments you may have.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it, and I
look forward to our expert panel today. And I do thank you for
your leadership, because I remember February 5th when we had
that first hearing on coronavirus and one approximately 2 weeks
later. You were definitely on the cutting edge of that exposing
the origin of that. I look forward to hearing, as I said, from
our expert witnesses.
And I think what we need to do is define what China is
trying to do, you know, what are they doing, what is their
ultimate goal, and then how do we counter what they are doing.
You know, when you look at what China has done, they have
encroached on so many nations of the ASEAN block of nations,
whether it is the Philippines, the Vietnamese, Brunei, you
know, the list goes on, Malaysia, Indonesia. Not just on their
sovereignty of their land, but their EEZ zones where they do
their commercial fishing, explore for minerals off the coast
that belong to those nations, China has encroached upon those.
In addition, China has ignored international laws. When the
Philippines sued them over the rights of their EEZ, the Chinese
lost that court. They did not honor the ruling of that, said it
does not apply to them yet they apply a nine-dash line that is
anything but accurate. It is fallacy. It is their wish list.
And for them to claim a nine-dash line that is sovereign
territory of China would be as ridiculous as the United States
claiming all of the moon because we put a flag on it first.
And I think these things need to be brought into
perspective, because again it goes back to what is China trying
to accomplish? They are building a five--or a blue-water navy.
They are expanding in areas that are not theirs. They have lied
to not just us and to President Obama in the previous
administration about militarizing those dredged land masses in
the South China Sea and the East Sea, they have militarized
those even though they said they were not.
And so when one looks at what they are doing, their
expansion of what they are doing, it looks like they are
looking to claim and take over landmasses that do not belong to
them, and I think these all need to be pointed out. And again,
I think we need to look at what is China's ultimate goal and
then we need to call them out on this.
And the way that we can do that is you can do it in one of
three ways. You can have a conflict which nobody wants and
nobody is advocating. You can have economic pressure put on
China. And then there will be the humiliation action, and I
think humiliation regardless of what China does is going to
come to them. But I think the best way to deal with this is
through economic actions and it should not be the United States
alone. It should be all nations affected by this because all
nations are going to be affected by China's aggression in that
area. And if we do these things, we can have peaceful
resolutions, which is the ultimate goal of all of us, and open
and free trade.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back and I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Ranking Member Yoho.
I will now introduce our witnesses. Our witnesses for
today's hearing are Mr. Gregory Poling, Dr. Oriana Skylar
Mastro, and Dr. Andrew Erickson. I would like to thank all of
our witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Gregory Poling is Senior Fellow for Southeast Asia and
Director of the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative at CSIS.
Dr. Oriana Skylar Mastro is an Assistant Professor of Security
Studies at the Edmond A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at
Georgetown University and a Resident Scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute. And Dr. Andrew Erickson is a Professor of
Strategy at the U.S. Naval War College's China Maritime Studies
Institute.
I will now recognize each witness for 5 minutes and,
without objection, your prepared written statements will be
made a part of the record. I will first call on Mr. Poling for
his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. GREGORY POLING, SENIOR FELLOW FOR SOUTHEAST
ASIA, DIRECTOR, ASIA MARITIME TRANSPARENCY INITIATIVE, CENTER
FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Poling. Chairman Bera, Ranking Member Yoho, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today.
U.S. policy in the South China Sea has been remarkably
consistent for decades and that is because administrations of
both parties have recognized that we have the same consistent
set of interests here. The first, which is not limited to the
South China Sea at all, is defense of freedom of the seas as
defined by the international law of the day. Second, the U.S.
has been committed to uphold its security commitments to our
allies and partners in Southeast Asia without being drawn into
the sovereignty disputes over the islands themselves. And the
third, the U.S. has been committed to ensure American military
access to this important international waterway.
Time and again, U.S. policy has been drawn back to that
same set of interests. But unlike the consistency of U.S.
policy, Chinese interests and Chinese claims have expanded
considerably over the decades. Prior to the 1990's, the South
China Sea featured a dispute over islands and then Beijing
decided to declare straight baselines in internal waters around
the Paracels and, more worryingly, historic rights throughout
the entirety of the South China Sea, claiming in some form all
waters, all airspace, all seabed, in contravention of
international law.
Over the last decade, Beijing has become far more
aggressive in pursuing that illegal claim. At the end of 2013,
China embarked on an unprecedented campaign of artificial
island building and militarization, which today allows China to
deploy a 24/7 presence of naval, coast guard, and paramilitary
forces throughout every inch of the nine dash line, slowly
pushing its neighbors away from their legal rights, out of the
waters guaranteed to them by international law.
And if Beijing's current strategy continues, it will
undermine or severely diminish all of those U.S. interests that
have been defended by subsequent administrations dating back
for the better part of a century. First, China will set a
precedent that will undermine key components of freedom of the
seas and international law including the equality of all
nations, big and small.
Second, U.S. partners and allies in the region will rightly
begin to wonder what benefit they get from supporting a
forward-deployed U.S. presence in the region if it cannot help
the defend their interests against an aggressive neighbor.
And third, as a result, the United States will find its
ability to operate, not just in the South China Sea but in the
region more broadly, severely diminished. This crisis has been
a long time coming. And in defense of previous administrations,
they did not sit on their hands, they increased capacity
building support for regional partners. They stepped up the
presence of the U.S. Navy in the region. They strengthened
deterrents.
But there is no military solution to the South China Sea
dispute. It is not entirely a military problem. What the
Pentagon has done is to buy time and continue to buy time. Time
for a coalition of international parties led, but not solely
including the United States, to bring diplomatic and economic
pressure to bear on China, hopefully to bend Beijing toward a
compromise that would be equitable and more acceptable to the
international community.
Now to do that will take years. But as a start I would
suggest three areas that the United States needs to pursue
immediately. The first is U.S. officials need to put the South
China Sea back on the top of the diplomatic agenda in the way
it was in 2016 in the run-up to the Philippines arbitration
award which the chairman mentioned.
Now at that point you had the majority of States in Europe
as well as a number of States in North America and Asia
supporting the ruling when it came out. Almost none of those
States continue to do so today and that is because neither
Washington nor Manila has been asking them to. This issue must
be put, front and center, in the United Nations, in ASEAN
meetings, in the G-7, in order for Beijing to bear the kind of
reputational cost that would convince it that it cannot be both
a global leader and a bully in the South China Sea at the same
time.
Second, the United States should treat China's militias,
the vanguard of its activities in the South China Sea, the same
way it does similar illegal actors in North Korea or Russia.
INDOPACOM should undertake the same kind of surveillance
operations to publicly name and shame illegal Chinese
paramilitaries in the South China Sea that it currently does in
the East China Sea and the Yellow Sea to identify North Korea
and sanction the violations.
It should also identify the networks of government and
business elites in China that support the militia. Target them
for sanctions, try to ban them from access to international
financial markets the same way the United States treated Russia
for its support for paramilitaries in the Ukraine.
And, finally, U.S. officials need to prioritize rebuilding
an alliance with the Philippines that is both credible and
effective. That does not mean giving the Duterte government a
pass on human rights violations, but it does mean recognizing
that the alliance is bigger than any one leader. The United
States must have rotational forces deployed along the so-called
first island chain that rings China, and there is no place
south of Japan that that can happen other than the Philippines.
Admiral Davidson has recognized this. The United States
might not be able to do that under Duterte, but we must prevent
further erosion of the alliance and we must prepare a plan for
a post-2022, post-Duterte Philippines that will allow us to re-
engage. That concludes my testimony. Thank you again for the
opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Poling follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you.
I will now call on Dr. Mastro.

STATEMENT OF DR. ORIANA SKYLAR MASTRO, RESIDENT SCHOLAR,
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF SECURITY
STUDIES, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY

Dr. Mastro. Chairman Bera, Ranking Member Yoho, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to share my
views on China's maritime ambitions today. China wants to
become a maritime great power. This is a term that Chinese
President Xi Jinping uses as part of his national rejuvenation
rhetoric. And to this end, China wants to build a blue-water
navy that can control its near seas, fight and win regional
wars, and protect its vital sea lanes and its many political
and economic interests beyond East Asia.
In this testimony I am going to cover China's approach to
the near seas, and so this is the South China Sea and East
China Sea in particular, and touch upon its intentions in the
Indian Ocean. China's ambitions in the near seas pose the
greatest threat to the interests and security of the United
States and its allies. China considers the East China Sea and
the majority of the South China Sea to be a part of its
territory.
China does not accept or respect Japan's sovereignty claims
in the former case, or Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Taiwan, or Vietnamese claims in the latter case.
In China's ideal world, Beijing would enjoy sovereignty, which
means absolute control and a monopoly over the use of force in
these waters, and this would entail the exclusion of the United
States military from these waters.
In the short term, China realizes that these goals are
unrealistic, and so I think it is best to characterize their
current ambitions as establishing sovereignty over the disputed
islands and gaining the power to dictate the rules and regulate
all activities in the surrounding waters. This means that
countries would have to obtain Chinese permission to operate
there.
Chinese maritime ambitions in the East China Sea and South
China Sea are detrimental to U.S. and allied interests mostly
because of these ultimate objectives of control. China has
rarely relied on use of force directly from military coercion
to achieve its goals, instead it prefers to employ positive
inducements and nonmilitary tools like economic, legal, or
political tools as well as gray-zone activities, which are
activities that allow a country to stay below the threshold of
overt military action to secure gains without provoking a
military response. In other words, even if we convinced China
to change their behavior in how they are pursuing their
ambitions, this is still a threat because of the ultimate
nature of what they are trying to achieve.
In the Indian Ocean, China has different ambitions. Under
Xi Jinping, their maritime ambitions have extended beyond the
near seas. For the first time, in 2019, the Defense White Paper
called for the transformation of the Chinese navy from a near
seas defense navy to a far seas protection navy. And China also
designated maritime interests as the same level of importance
as territorial integrity.
I think China currently aims to be able to operate in the
Indian Ocean and beyond, but it does not aspire to prevent
others from doing so as it does in the near seas. In these
waters, China's ambitions are currently driven primarily by the
desire to protect strategic lines of communication and its
economic and political interests. For example, just last year,
more than 166 million Chinese ventured abroad for tourism.
We also know that 80 percent of China's oil passes through
the Malacca Strait, and with One Belt, One Road China has more
and more commercial and economic interests to protect. China is
more flexible in the Indian Ocean because it is not engaged in
territorial disputes there. They do not have specific
adversaries that they are in constant campaigns against, so
they are a bit more flexible than they are in the near seas.
But this does not mean that their presence in the Indian
Ocean is not without its challenges or risks. Because they are
increasingly focused on far seas protection, they are
outfitting their fleet with longer-range air defenses, aircraft
carriers, and larger ships that allow greater endurance away
from home ports. This creates a latent capability that could be
used in the future to coerce smaller countries.
China could also use its greater access to collect
intelligence on the United States that could support operations
and regional contingencies like Taiwan. In the future, they
might also be able to develop the ability to meaningfully hold
at risk U.S. assets in these waters in the event of a wider
conflict.
But currently one of the biggest issues is how they are
trying to gain influence and access because they will need
ports for logistical support and resupply and maintenance
throughout the Indian Ocean region. And as was already
mentioned, China's attempt to gain such access are undermining
stability, democratic norms, and sound economic development as
they rely a lot on bribery and debt-trap diplomacy.
In my testimony I come to main conclusions, therefore. The
first is that China's ambitions in the South China Sea and East
China Sea are different than they are in the Indian Ocean and
beyond. For the near seas it is mainly about sovereignty and
regional hegemony. In the far seas, China is concerned with
protecting the sources of the Party's domestic legitimacy like
economic growth, protection of Chinese nationals, and guarding
against external pressure.
Two, China's ambitions in the East China Sea and South
China Sea are detrimental to U.S. interests even if its methods
are mainly problematic because they are effective and difficult
to counter. In contrast, in the Indian Ocean and beyond, there
are aspects of China's current objectives that are legitimate
that do not necessarily threaten U.S. interests but its methods
are currently undermining democratic principles and sustainable
growth and there is a risk that China could change its strategy
to disrupt freedom of navigation as its capabilities evolve.
While China's maritime ambitions are problematic in both
the near and the far seas, U.S. policy needs to consider these
differences in both the degree of threat and risk. First, we
need to prioritize countering Chinese ambitions in the South
China Sea and East China Sea and this includes taking a
hardline, risk-acceptant approach to countering China in the
near seas.
But we need to devise more of a hedging strategy in the
Indian Ocean, and this could include elements of cooperation
with China to address nontraditional security threats while
also preparing to respond strongly in case their ambitions
there do evolve and change and they start employing their
newfound capabilities for coercive purposes. In my written
testimony I lay out more specifics about how we can pursue both
policies in the near seas and the far seas. Either way, success
will require bipartisan consensus and an agreement that
maintaining a free and open Indo-Pacific is genuinely critical
to U.S. interests.
The United States has made some progress in this area, but
given the extent of Chinese maritime ambitions, it is not yet
enough. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Mastro follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you for your testimony.
And, finally, Dr. Erickson.

STATEMENT OF DR. ANDREW ERICKSON, PROFESSOR OF STRATEGY, CHINA
MARITIME STUDIES INSTITUTE, NAVAL WAR COLLEGE VISITING SCHOLAR,
FAIRBANK CENTER FOR CHINESE STUDIES, HARVARD UNIVERSITY

Dr. Erickson. Yes. Thank you, Chairman Bera, Ranking Member
Yoho, members of the subcommittee. I appreciate this
opportunity to share my personal analysis and recommendations.
Greg and Oriana have done a great job addressing a number
of important issues. My written statement contains additional
specifics and recommendations. Rather than duplicating their
efforts, let me underscore several larger themes and key
dynamics that I think can help inform our discussion today as
well as the way forward.
China under Xi Jinping has what, to me, is clearly the most
assertive and ambitious national strategy of any great power
today. This includes the unification of claimed territory and
commanding respect and deference at home and abroad. A major
problem with this forceful and ambitious approach is that these
goals run rough-shod over the rights and well-being of millions
as well as the freedom of non-Chinese societies. They have
great potential to jeopardize the peace of China's region and
also the rules and functions of the international system on
which all of us depend.
Today in many ways, Hong Kong is ground zero of this
struggle. There are additional tensions and challenges in the
near seas as my colleagues on the panel described. However,
even worse, if the United States and its allies and partners do
not counter China's coercive envelopment of formerly free
peoples and places, there will be much worse to come.
This coercive envelopment has a strong geographic pattern
to it. Since the Chinese Communist Party took Beijing in 1949,
it systematically extended a cordon of control and coercion in
concentric circles radiating from the capital across China's
heartland and now at present the major focus is remaining
unresolved disputed claims in the near seas. That is why that
is rightly a major focus of our discussion today.
Here, there is a similar process of envelopment, coercive
envelopment, albeit at sea rather than on land as in the case
with the tragedy occurring in Hong Kong right now. At sea, as
my colleagues have mentioned, China uses three sea forces. I
must emphasize each of these are a component of China's armed
forces--the People's Liberation Army Navy, the China Coast
Guard, and the People's Armed Forces Maritime Militia. Each is
the largest such force in the world in terms of numbers of
ships.
Now we could have a long discussion about exact comparisons
and qualities and capabilities of ships and in some cases, you
could argue, vis-a-vis the U.S. Navy gold standard, it is an
apples-to-mandarin oranges discussion. Nevertheless, in these
vital contested sea spaces, presence matters. The ability to be
present matters. The ability to be there to decide whether or
not to engage in various options matters.
And here is where China's overwhelming and still rapidly
growing numbers are posing very significant challenges for our
efforts to keep the peace and the stability in the region. In
the naval dimension, for example, while many advocate a U.S.
Navy of 355-plus ships, both manned and unmanned, China already
has its own fully manned navy of 360 warships according to data
recently released by the Office of Naval Intelligence. And the
projections get more disparate over time, out to 2030.
China has the world's largest coast guard by a very large
margin. So when it comes to efforts at coercive envelopment in
the near seas, these numbers are one of the many factors that
we are going to have to address. I would be very happy to
elaborate on all these issues, but I want to close by
underscoring the challenge of Chinese efforts at a coercive
envelopment in prioritized areas for sovereignty projection and
assertion. That is really one of the greatest challenges of our
time. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Erickson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you for your testimony.
I will now recognize members for 5 minutes each, and
pursuant to House rules all time yielded is for the purposes of
questioning our witnesses. Because of the hybrid format of this
hearing, I will recognize members by committee seniority
alternating between Democrats and Republicans. If you miss your
turn, please let our staff know and we will circle back to you.
If you seek recognition, you must unmute your microphone and
address the chair verbally. I will start by recognizing myself
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Poling, you mentioned that we need to place this issue
at the top of our agenda. I think that the ranking member and
myself, for purposes of this subcommittee, do place this issue
close to the top of our agenda and recognize the urgency of
addressing it now as opposed to several years from now because
of the possibility of a kinetic conflict.
If we think about the U.S. approach to this region in the
post-World War II era, I think we can be very proud of what we
did in helping rebuild Japan, creating an economic powerhouse
in a competitor and defending the Korean Peninsula, but also
seeing the Korean miracle, an economic competitor.
Watching the tremendous growth of Singapore, Australia and
New Zealand and others in the region are now watching the
subcontinent of India develop. All of these are democracies
that share free market principles, share the freedom and
principles of democracy, and, in fact, we can take credit for
helping China develop its economic prowess. But we have not
seen China move in that direction of values-based individual
liberties, free markets, et cetera.
Maybe this is a question for Mr. Poling. I have always
characterized China as if you give them an inch and do not stop
them, they are going to take a foot. If you do not stop them at
a foot, they are going to try to take a yard. If you do not
stop them at a yard, well--and that is why I was so concerned
about their initial building of islands in the South China Sea.
Now we have a bigger problem today because we did not stop them
on the front end.
You talked about the importance of creating this coalition
of nations. And as I talk to our European allies, as I talk to
the countries in the region, they understand they are going to
have to live with China as a global power in the region, but
they are also very leery in a way that today that I did not see
previously.
If we were to directly confront some of the Chinese
paramilitary actions, to stop them today at a time where
hopefully we could de-escalate things, what steps do you think
China would take, if there was a direct confrontation with one
of these paramilitaries?
Mr. Poling, if you want to take that.
Mr. Poling. Well, thank you, Chairman. I think that most of
the value of the maritime militia for China lies in the veneer
of deniability, the veneer of civilian activity that it has. So
in most cases what Beijing wants to use the militia for is to
play chicken either with the U.S. Navy or with neighbors and
then back off if things get hot.
If the U.S. started really unmasking the militia in the
ways that I have suggested or that Dr. Erickson has suggested,
among others, I think what you would see, first, is Beijing
reacting in kind of the horizontal ways we have come to learn,
lashing out with economic sanction against not just the U.S.,
but especially smaller parties who might support us--Vietnam,
the Philippines, et cetera.
You might see Beijing undertake a number of the
administrative decisions in South China Sea that I think it
already has it in its back pocket, things like declaring
straight baselines around some of the Spratlys or an air
defense identification zone. I mean there is any--I think there
is a long list of non-kinetic, nonconfrontational ways that
Beijing would seek to escalate, and this will be a long-term
game of whack-a-mole, all right.
The U.S. will have to continually respond and push back and
convince Beijing that we will not, neither us nor our partners,
will retreat and, ultimately, if Beijing wants to be a global
leader it will have to come to the table for compromise. I
entirely agree with you that if you give an inch, China will
take it as weakness and seek a mile.
Mr. Bera. You know, so I agree with you that if it is just
the United States versus China defending everyone in the
region, I believe we will be less effective than if we can
create a multinational coalition of like-minded nations that
see the same threats that China poses to freedom of navigation
and maritime security in the region. And I do sense in this
time of COVID that countries are a bit more willing to join a
multinational coalition. I assume that is the right approach.
In the last few seconds that I have, if any of the
witnesses want to talk about the possibility of creating that
coalition.
Dr. Mastro. Chairman, if I can just add that I think the
important thing is to start with diplomacy. You know, if we do
not have active diplomacy, if we do not rank this as high as
like the Middle East peace process, then we are not showing
countries that it is really important so why should they take
the risk to FONOPS or other military activities with us if we
are not even willing to sit down and have a big summit with
Southeast Asian countries to do it.
So I do think we do have to start with the diplomatic
aspects of this.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you so----
Dr. Erickson. Mr. Chairman, I would also advocate a whole-
of-government approach that includes in securing our own supply
chains more effectively, also seeking to involve willing allies
and partners by helping to also enhance their supply chain
security reducing Beijing's ability to coerce them. We can then
increase the chances that they will feel willing and able to
join us in some of these important maritime endeavors.
So that is another dimension I would like to call for
cooperation and I think there is a strong interest in building
on that.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
I notice I am out of time. Let me recognize the ranking
member, Mr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate all the
expert testimoneys, very enlightening.
Mr. Poling, you brought up a statement that you said the
previous administrations, not to point fingers at anybody, did
not really drop the ball or they kept doing things, but is it
not true that we stopped freedom of navigation operations and
then they got started again under President Trump?
Mr. Poling. So we--it is true that the Trump Administration
has increased the frequency and routine nature of freedom of
navigation operations. They were never stopped. The problem was
in 2015, following testimony in the Senate Armed Services
Committee, the question of freedom of navigation became much
more public and that led to, I think, a lot more self-
flagellation and concern within the Obama Administration about
when they should be done and how they should be done. Prior to
that they happened quite regularly.
And so I think the Trump Administration----
Mr. Yoho. Excuse me. It was my understanding that we went
to peaceful navigational purposes versus freedom of navigation
with our military ships doing the war games. I remember it
pretty clearly because we wrote a bill that got incorporated
into the NDAA. I just wanted to point that out because I think
if we show just a pullback of any that vacuum gets created and
it gets filled by somebody else.
Let me move on to something else and I appreciate again
your expertise. Why the expansion of the Chinese navy? If you
guys--I think it was Dr., is it--Mastro? You were saying that
China is doing that to protect their interests, but what
interests have changed that have not been there for the last 70
years? The land borders have not changed. The only thing that I
have seen change is China's claim to land borders, erroneously.
What is your thought on that?
Dr. Mastro. Thank you for the question. The first thing on
the expansion of the Chinese navy is that that is primarily for
regional contingencies. We do talk about the East China Sea and
the South China Sea as both being near seas, but the South
China Sea is actually quite large, you know, bigger than half
the continent of the United States.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Dr. Mastro. And so if you look at their ability to project
power down there they do, they have some challenges, and so I
think mainly their focus is on Taiwan contingencies first, East
China Sea, South China Sea second. But they are also interested
as I have mentioned in expanding beyond into the Indian Ocean.
And I mention the economic and political interests because
those actually did not exist previously.
So the number of Chinese nationals oversees, for example,
is a relatively new phenomenon. I wrote a paper about it maybe
about 8 years ago. And you have tens of thousands Chinese
companies operating now in the Indian Ocean region that were
not there before that we have seen an uptick because of One
Belt, One Road as well. And also China used to not be so
reliant on oil and energy from outside, and now they are one of
the top importers and they rely on the Malacca Straits for
that.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Dr. Mastro. So they do have increased interests and
vulnerabilities that they need to----
Mr. Yoho. I understand it. But I do not see any country
challenging China as a Nation, you know, nobody is trying to
attack them. And, you know, what I see is an overreaction--not
overreaction, but an overaggressiveness of China and it gives
pause to think why are they doing that. And it is because of
the--what I see, it is because of the aggression that they are
doing and the false claims that they are laying the land.
To call those landmasses islands, I think, gives them an
air of legitimacy. They are not islands. They are landmasses
that they have taken.
A rhetorical question I want to ask, do any of the ASEAN
bloc of countries have the capacity to stand up to China? Does
anybody want to weigh in on that?
I will hear a no.
Dr. Erickson. I would be happy to weigh in for this.
Mr. Yoho. I told you it was rhetorical, so I will answer
it. No, they do not.
I have talked to the ASEAN bloc of nations to stand up as a
bloc, and I understand their compact says we do not interfere
with the politics of another nation, but that was 50 years ago.
The conditions have changed. China is becoming very strong,
very aggressive, and if we do not stand up together as a bloc,
and I have said this to Prime Minister Li, the incoming chair
from Vietnam. If you do not stand up today as a bloc, is it
going to be possible 3 years from now? And understand, it is
not just ASEAN standing up, it would be the U.S., Canada, Great
Britain, Germany, the French, Australia, Japan, South Korea,
and India. If we do not stand up to China today, it will not be
possible.
And I think the other thing we need to do besides standing
up collectively is they can do what they are doing in China
because they have the economic resources. We need to implement
the manufacturing, the ABC method, which is to manufacture
anywhere but China, because we are paying them and they are
creating the money that we are fighting against. And I think it
is time the world wakes up and I am glad to see they are doing
it.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Let me recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. A lot of foreign policy is playing to the
domestic crowd. The Chinese Government has a crisis of
credibility because they cannot answer the question, why are
these guys running the country? They cannot claim to be a
democracy. The divine right of kings is not selling very well.
And they got power by claiming to be the vanguard of the
proletariat, but I cannot say that without laughing. So unless
they can continue to provide incredible economic growth, they
are going to have to hide behind hypernationalism as their
reason to continue in power.
We in the United States have some of the same issues. The
Pentagon has always had a terrible time when we fight an
asymmetrical foe from the Philippine insurrection through
Vietnam and then Syria. The Pentagon has covered itself in
glory every time we have faced a symmetrical foe. The greatest
glory of all, beating the Soviet Union without having to have a
major war.
So there is every reason for China to try to exaggerate the
importance of this and have a conflict with America as long as
it does not get too out of hand. There is every reason for the
Pentagon to say we need to spend hundreds of billions of
dollars building a naval presence that can beat China in the
South China Sea.
And yes, this is a priority, but remember we have some
other--is it a more important priority than the fact that the
Ukraine is occupied, or parts of it? Is it more important than
the independence of the Baltic States? Is it more important
than the attack on the Ladakh region of India by China
recently? Is it more important than the Uyghurs being held in,
a million of them being held in camps? We have got a lot of
priorities.
And to put this in context, I have often heard it argued
that these islands are critical because there is trillions of
dollars of trade that goes through them. That is all trade in
and out of Chinese ports and a few oil tankers that could stay
out of the region if they chose to by detouring just a few
miles.
So these islands--this maritime issue is of great
importance, but we have many things of great importance. And
one thing I do not want to see is to see this maritime dispute
be used to justify a huge increase in our military budget or
anything that would bring us close to war with China on their
home ground.
Now one of the things that is of concern is the law of the
sea and China is violating it. We, however, have not ratified
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; China has.
And while the law of the sea is very important to us, there are
literally scores of maritime disputes around the world in which
one country or another is unwilling to follow the law of the
sea. Cyprus is suffering from that based on what Turkey is
doing.
So the question I have here is, do we need a huge buildup
in the American Navy if we are going to be effective, or can we
limit China's avarice for the oceans off its shores through
just diplomatic efforts and perhaps some economic sanctions? I
do not know which of the witnesses would like to address that.
Dr. Mastro. I can go first, sir, if that works.
So I do not think--I think you are absolutely correct that
a buildup of the American Navy would not be enough, because as
I mentioned in my written testimony, China is relying extremely
heavily on legal, economic, and political means to get what
they need. And so ratifying, you know, the U.N. Convention on
the Law of the Sea, trying to get other countries in the region
to----
Mr. Sherman. If I can interrupt, would that be in our
interest to ratify that treaty?
Dr. Mastro. I think it would be. There are, of course,
downsides. But in terms of the leverage that it gives to us to
convince countries in the region that we are serious about
freedom of navigation and international norms and principles, I
think it would go a long way. And I think we should get those
countries together to agree, maybe not on the sovereignty of
the islands, but on the maritime rights that those islands give
whoever owns them because China is alone in thinking that,
because you have a right to this small island you control the
whole South China Sea.
So the Navy, of course, is not enough, but it is a key
component because I do believe that U.S. deterrence against
China has been successful in the past couple of decades and our
deterrent has been weakened. And so if we are pushed to operate
farther and farther out and we cannot operate in the South
China Sea, I am afraid that then we can no longer really deter
China and we will see increased aggression there.
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Dr. Mastro. So I do think we need to maybe not sort of just
build more expensive stuff that might be part of it, but really
rethink our force posture in the region more generally.
Mr. Sherman. And I do want to comment on Turkey. There are
a number of disputes involving Turkey and I do not want the
record to think that I think Turkey is on the wrong side of
every one of those. I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Let me recognize the gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am deeply
concerned that domestic discontent and international
distraction resulting from the coronavirus pandemic is pushing
Beijing to behave erratically and aggressively abroad,
particularly in the maritime domain where China is already
seeking to erode and replace U.S. influence. The United States
must stand by its partners in the Indo-Pacific as we protect
the rule of law and freedom of navigation.
As cofounder of the ASEAN Caucus, I am greatly concerned
that China is looking to ramp up militarization of the South
China Sea while the rest of the world, frankly, grapples with
the pandemic response. In April, China rammed and sank a
Vietnamese fishing vessel and announced new administrative
districts covering as we said its illegal installation in the
Paracel and Spratly Islands. These actions have pushed ASEAN
leaders to issue a strong statement in opposition to China's
claims. Kind of highly unusual for the consensus-based
organization.
Mr. Poling, do you believe that Chinese aggression will
push ASEAN countries to adopt a more assertive posture against
China?
Mr. Poling. Ma'am, I, unfortunately, think it unlikely. I
think individual countries especially Vietnam are fed up, and
some like the Philippines and Indonesia may be getting there,
but ASEAN as an organization is ill-equipped to deal with the
South China Sea. ASEAN is an important organization, but this
is not an issue that you can get through consensus-based
decisionmaking that requires Cambodia's approval on anything.
So I think the statement we saw this weekend which was a
very modest strengthening of previous ASEAN statements is about
the most the organization is capable of doing.
Mrs. Wagner. Dr. Erickson, I understand that China is
building a series of military and commercial facilities known
as the string of pearls connecting its South China Sea
installations to the Strait of Hormuz. These installations seem
to serve the dual purposes of boxing in India, a potential
rival, and boosting China's presence near strategically
important maritime choke points. How capable is the Chinese
navy of projecting power in the Indian Ocean and what are its
ambitions?
Dr. Erickson. Well, thank you for those important points.
China is working to go further afield in projecting influence
and ability to secure its interests in selected cases and this
is very much an ambitious work in progress. We see concretely
already a naval base in Djibouti, and as you rightly pointed
out, there are a series of other ports where sometimes it is
unclear what the ultimate purpose is, but clearly there is
extensive Chinese involvement and ample potential for
upgrading.
I think we need to keep a very close eye on this. I think
our regional diplomacy with the countries concerned will be
essential. But I do think it is important to note as Dr. Mastro
did that this is a different type of effort on China's part
from the hard-edged sovereignty advancement efforts in the East
China Sea and the South China Sea, so it is a different type of
dynamic. It is a question of longer-term influence over a
broader geographic area and that gives us more opportunities
for diplomacy and economic engagement with the host nations
involved.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, Okay, let's----
Dr. Erickson. I should also say this is one of many ways in
which Hong Kong matters and in which various policies we may
consider toward Hong Kong will influence China's operations in
the Indian Ocean region. There are various Chinese commercial
conglomerates engaged in the construction and operation of
these ports that may seek favorable treatment for their
business interests in Hong Kong courts. That is something to
keep an eye on and that might be a place of important
information-gathering and leverage.
Mrs. Wagner. I am running out of time. I agree with you. I
also think that we have some opportunities, Dr. Erickson, to
work closely with India.
Dr. Erickson. Yes.
Mrs. Wagner. And to make sure that we improve our U.S.-
Indian maritime cooperation and deepen our ties between perhaps
our navies.
So I am out of time. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bera. Let me recognize the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. Thank you to the chair.
And I want to followup with Dr. Erickson. I was hoping that
you might be able, sir, to discuss the Chinese coast guard
specifically in their activities in the South China Sea to see
if you could enlighten or shed some light on whether or not
these new and increased operations are a threat to the U.S.
interests and to our security.
Dr. Erickson. Thank you for the excellent question. China's
coast guard really in many ways is almost like a second navy.
It is by far the largest in the world in terms of numbers of
ships. And while many of them are capable of far-ranging
operations, the vast majority of China's more than one thousand
coast guard ships are deployed generally near to China.
Unlike coast guards such as the U.S. Coast Guard, China's
coast guard has a very important sovereignty advancement
mission, and China's coast guard by organizational, recent
organizational changes is now formally one of China's, part of
one of China's armed forces, as I mentioned before. So there is
a hard-edged sovereignty advancement mission that it has that
is very different from how the U.S. Coast Guard pursues its
operations.
Combine that with the sheer numbers and the increasing
capabilities of this force as well as some of the capabilities,
limitations in capabilities of China's neighbors in ASEAN, as
has been discussed extensively here, and this is a real problem
for regional security, stability, and the rules and norms that
would be optimal in making this region peaceful and prosperous.
This is a significant problem. It is one that we can
ameliorate through improved partner capacity-building and
cooperation with our allies and partners in the region. Japan
is also making good contributions here. We can work to do more
with Japan and support Japan's own efforts. And maintaining the
maritime presence that we can in the region will likewise be
important to not allow a vacuum that China can exploit.
Finally, I am in favor of the U.S. Coast Guard's increasing
presence in the Western Pacific and including in the East China
Sea and the South China Sea. While the numbers are on that will
not be huge, it does involve a set of unique capabilities and
cooperative efforts that I think will be very useful to the
larger set of things we need to do here. Thank you.
Ms. Houlahan. I really very much appreciate that answer, a
really very complete answer.
For Dr. Mastro in the minute and a half or so that I have,
I was wondering what are the current U.S. and Chinese
diplomatic initiatives to reduce the risk of military
escalation in the South China Sea. How are our current
established agreements being maintained and being strengthened
and what are the diplomatic gaps that you might see that could
use further attention and dialog between those two countries,
our two countries?
Dr. Mastro. Thank you, ma'am, for the question. I think
most of our focus when you talk about diplomacy has been on the
military diplomacy side. We do have a series of operational
agreements. For example, CUES that talks about how militaries
should interact with each other if there is an incident at sea.
One of the big issues is if the United States was going to have
a direct line of communication with China in case there is an
incident to avoid escalation.
And while we have, periodically, had hotlines, the Chinese
do not answer the phone when we call them and I think this is
for a number of reasons. Some say they want to get their act
together before they talk to us. I think that there is a
strategic benefit to being silent because it increases the risk
to the other side and maybe makes the United States capitulate.
But a lot of our diplomatic initiatives are mainly about
trying to deal with crises, crisis management, which is
important, but I do think we need more on this broader
strategic side to show China that we want to have a diplomatic
resolution to the South China Sea issue and to push back on
their interpretation of sovereignty in the diplomatic realm as
well.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I really appreciate your time. I
am nearly out and I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Let me recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I think this is
a fascinating hearing. Thank you for holding it and thank you
to our panel.
In listening to sort of the litany of Chinese assertiveness
if not aggression, one comes to the conclusion that under
President Xi we are seeing a real transformation in China's
posture. Under Deng Xiaoping it was sort of hide your strength
and do not necessarily assert yourself too boldly. Under
President Xi, after all of that buildup in strength, let's
assert it.
It seems to me in the South China Sea, the only power that
can counter Chinese influence is us. ASEAN is not a military
organization, and even if you looked at its collective military
might, it is anemic. It has no capacity to counter the Chinese
juggernaut. India, which just suffered a first major set of
casualties in an armed conflict or military conflict with
China, clearly is not anywhere near capable of deterring a
Chinese military threat even today, neither on the seas nor on
land. That leaves us. And meanwhile, China is--the title of
this hearing is Maritime Ambitions. It is not just in the South
China Sea.
The fact that the Chinese built and now are operating the
Hambantota port facility, which could easily become a military
base because of the indebtedness of the Sri Lankan government
and its inability to finance and serve the debt on that
finance, has given China a strategic location through which
passes, I am told, about, you know, 30 percent of all the
world's shipping. And it is a real nice reminder to India that
now China has that strategic location.
We mentioned Djibouti, another key chokehold in terms of
international shipping lanes. And to make it all perfect, China
has asserted on its own that it is an associate Arctic power
even though it has no land that is literal in the Arctic, and
it has indicated that it wants to create bases, including in
Greenland, to bolster that assertion. So it seems to me we are
dealing with a very aggressive and assertive China in key
maritime locations all around the world.
And it also occurs to me that, frankly, what we are dealing
with in the South China Sea, potentially, is a direct threat to
us and to international shipping because the assertion being
made is this is a Chinese lake. This is our hegemon and you
need permission and consent and, if necessary, we will lay
claim to other sovereign territory, the Paracel and Spratly
Islands, to wit. We will even build artificial islands so we
can extend our territorial waters under international law even
if it encroaches on others such as the Philippines, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Vietnam, and of course Taiwan.
Mr. Poling, would that be a fair summary of what we kind of
know about and conclude from Chinese intentions and behavior?
Mr. Poling. I think it would, yes. China wants the South
China Sea to be a Chinese lake. And as you indicated, President
Xi has put this issue among a few others at the heart of his
China dream. It underpins his claim to legitimacy. So,
certainly, we are going to continue to see China push and push
and push the envelope here because Xi has linked his political
future to it.
Mr. Connolly. Can I just followup on one other issue with
you, Mr. Poling, that Mr. Sherman was starting to pursue with
Dr. Mastro.
It seems to me that the United States has shot itself in
the foot by not becoming a signatory to the law of the seas, so
we do not have--we are not at the council's, or the table of
council in UNCLOS, the Chinese are and that means they can
burrow down into committee work where we are not present and
their influence gets spread. Their point of view gets advocated
for and argued, ours does not.
Have we made a strategic error in retreating from
institutions like UNCLOS that could very much serve U.S.
interests at a time like this?
Mr. Poling. Absolutely. It is the only issue on which you
can get every chief of naval operations, members of the
environmental lobby, you know, U.S. shippers, all at a table
and they all agree on something. And the fact that we have not
ratified UNCLOS is an enormous strategic own-goal for the
United States.
Mr. Connolly. And I would argue on my own that the decision
by the Trump Administration to pull out of the Trans-Pacific
Partnership I also think was an enormous strategic blunder that
created a vacuum for China and I would be surprised if China
was not still uncorking champagne in Beijing to celebrate that
self-inflicted wound by the United States. I yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
I will take the chair's prerogative to ask an additional
question and I know the ranking member also has additional
questions. And I appreciate the witnesses for sticking around
to continue to answer questions.
I think it was last year, this committee had a hearing on
the second island chain and the freely associated States. And I
know we have not talked about China's maritime strategy in the
second island chain, but I'd like if each of the witnesses
potentially could touch on that from their perspectives.
We have seen economic coercion there to try to isolate
Taiwan, et cetera, in some of the freely associated States, but
I do have deep concern if China does start to grow their ties
with the second island chain, just the mass of territory in
terms of maritime territory that would be covered would be
quite large. So, perhaps, starting with Mr. Poling, then Dr.
Mastro, if you could comment on that.
Mr. Poling. I would be happy to. I think that we should be
concerned about Chinese inroads, economic or political, within
Micronesia in particular. This is the U.S. strategic backyard.
It has been since World War II. It is a place where the U.S.
has insurmountable advantages unless we give them up ourselves.
So again, it would be an enormous U.S., you know, failure if we
allowed our primacy in the second island chain to slip away.
What is needed is vigilance and so far we have been
vigilant in responding to Chinese inroads. I just worry that
our interest in the Pacific islands is always so episodic that
there is always the risk that we look away. And Beijing is
waiting to take advantage if we do.
Mr. Bera. Great.
Dr. Mastro.
Dr. Mastro. I think there are two main things to be
concerned about that are somewhat separate. The first is the
issue of coercion. And as I mentioned in my testimony, China is
very good at keeping things below the threshold of conflict so
it is very difficult for the United States to respond. So they
do have more military capability is, you know, in the second
island chain, I would expect them to also have these more
military coercive tools that they would use in such a way that
it would make it hard for the United States to respond and so
they would have more influence.
The other issue is operational. If China does control the
first island chain, the second island chain will become much
more contested. This is just a matter of range of systems. You
know, until there were South China Sea islands, China couldn't
target U.S. bases in the Philippines and Australia very
effectively. And now because they can take off, you know, their
aircraft can take off from those islands with, you know, air
launch cruise missiles, now all of a sudden those are at risk.
So once the second island chain is contested as their
military is able to operate more freely in the first island
chain, then it becomes more difficult to defend, you know,
Japan, for example. And so this is why--I am not sure we have
convinced the committee, but this I think this is why at least
I am trying to argue that this is the priority.
This is the most important issue, more important than the
other issues, I think, that Mr. Sherman mentioned because Asia
is the most dynamic and prosperous part of the world. The
United States needs to maintain its position there. And even
though Russia is also a threat, Russia spends $65 billion on
its military while China spends a hundred billion and meanwhile
our NATO allies spend almost three times as much as our Asian
allies do. So to a previous point made, they absolutely need
the United States military to be there to defend them or else
China is just, you know, going to run amok over everybody.
Mr. Bera. Dr. Erickson.
Dr. Erickson. Yes. Chairman Bera, I want to further
underscore the importance of your emphasis on this. It is a
strategic area for the United States. One of the many unique or
important aspects is the Kwajalein Atoll missile testing
facility, some things that would be hard to replicate
elsewhere.
And one reason we need to keep being vigilant, as Greg
Poling has rightly pointed out, is because China has a sort of
checkbook diplomacy and influence approach. That is one of its
preferred approaches that it has advantages in pursuing, and in
the Pacific islands there are some areas of limited-size
population and economy where a targeted Chinese investment
could have a significant impact.
So I just want to agree with all that has been said here
and hopefully we can redouble our efforts to shore up this
critical area and not let China subvert it. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
And let me recognize the ranking member, Mr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And I appreciate all of
our witnesses. You guys have brought just a great insight. You
know, as we talk about that second chain of islands and if we
look at the landmass through the Pacific island nations, it is
more landmass than I think a good portion of the world, you
know, when you look at that area it just covers such a broad
area and we cannot afford to secede that to anybody or lose
that to anybody.
And I want to go back and talk about UNCLOS again, because
Mr. Sherman brought this up and I do believe if we are at the
table we can negotiate better. But I look at--I think there is
167 or 169 countries that have signed that, China being one of
them, yet China does not follow the mandate of that
organization.
You know, if you look at the Philippines' claim, China lost
that lawsuit. If you look at China's claim as a near-Arctic
country and they are laying claim to that, I wonder what good
it is to sign it if these other nations are not going to
enforce it. You know, and I do not want to get into too much
politics, but, you know, we pulled out of TPP, and Hillary
Clinton as candidate said she would have pulled out of that.
I look at the Paris Climate Accord that we were in. It was
not signed or ratified. President Trump pulled out of it, yet
the United States is the only country that has reduced their
net greenhouse gases and I think leadership comes from the
actions that you do whether you sign a deal or not. And for the
countries that have signed the United Nations Law of the Sea
Convention, they need to act up collectively. And I think Mr.
Connolly brought up very well that nobody in the ASEAN bloc of
nations has the capability of standing up.
The point is, if they were to stand up as a bloc that
represents 653 million people, roughly three trillion dollars
in trade, they would not be standing alone. It would be these
other nations. And until we as, I guess, civilized nations
challenge China, China is going to continue to do what they are
doing. I think we all need to be concerned of why China is
doing what they are doing.
I think it has been pointed out very well in the Michael
Pillsbury book, The Hundred-Year Marathon. Their ultimate goal
is, and Xi Jinping has said this at the, I believe it was at
the 19th Communist Party Congress in 2017, when he said the era
of China has arrived. No longer will they be made to swallow
their interests around the world; it is time for China to take
the world stage.
I think it is very evident of what they are doing with Hong
Kong, the South China Sea, controlling both ends of the Panama
Canal, and their expansion in their chain of pearls through
their Belt and Road Initiative, it is very clear and evident.
It is time the world wakes up. And we do not want a conflict,
we just want people to be accountable and play by the rules of
the game. And I would like to hear any final thoughts that you
guys may have and I want to thank the chairman for having a
great meeting and I really do appreciate it.
Dr. Mastro, do you want to start?
Dr. Mastro. Sure. Thank you, sir, for those thoughts. I
would just say that, while I understand the frustration with a
lot of international institutions, I do believe that our
approach needs to be to try to change them from within or
establish new institutions that are more effective.
Mr. Yoho. I agree.
Dr. Mastro. One of the things that I always look at is, you
know, the only reason we have a U.N. command on the Korean
Peninsula is because the Soviets did not show up to veto it.
And so in some cases, China is able to get away with what they
are doing because we actually do not have the consensus we
think that we do. Twenty-seven nations agree with China's
position that EEZs you have the right to regulate military
activity.
So this is something that we need to be more proactive at
making sure that China is diplomatically isolated. In some
cases we wish they were, but actually they are not. And so I do
think that that ratification would help for us to be there, not
for the sake of, you know, the institution itself, but because
there is political power associated with it would be useful,
but we have to think about it, go in with our eyes open and say
if we are not getting what we need from this institution maybe
it is time to start a new, different one that actually helps us
accomplish our goals.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Mr. Poling.
Mr. Poling. I would just agree wholeheartedly with that. I
mean the U.S. wins this competition by being a leader and the
best way to lead is to be open and honest about the faults and
weaknesses of current national institutions, but not to turn
our backs on them. And UNCLOS is something that we negotiated
that we should be holding China to. We should not be using
China's malfeasance as an excuse not to ratify.
Mr. Yoho. Dr. Erickson.
Dr. Erickson. Yes. Thank you, Ranking Member Yoho, and I
understand the concerns. I think we need to redouble our
messaging efforts to make it clear that China often signs
agreements or makes pledges but does not honor them in
practice. So when it comes, for example, to the U.N. Convention
on the Law of the Sea, I personally strongly support U.S.
ratification of that. I think it would have many, many
benefits.
But I think what the U.S. needs to state more clearly in
the present context is we have not ratified UNCLOS but we
adhere to its actual provisions much more faithfully than China
which has ratified it. It is an example of one of many very
important disparities that I do not think are sufficiently
recognized.
I agree there are sometimes agreements, treaties that have
not stood the test of time or are against our interests. I
personally have gone on record as saying good riddance to the
INF Treaty, because if Russia would not comply and China would
not join, we should not have our hands tied on successfully
deterring Chinese aggression and adventurism in the Western
Pacific.
Moving forward, I think there are some things that we can
build off additionally. As has been mentioned before, Xi
Jinping is antagonizing and being aggressive toward so many
different neighbors at once, I think that is going to give us
opportunities to build better cooperation and coalitions
against Xi Jinping's aggression. It is a marked departure from
previous Chinese Communist Party leadership and I think it
represents an overextension that we can use in the long run to
subdue this negative approach that Xi Jinping is taking. Thank
you.
Mr. Yoho. I agree with you wholeheartedly, and you
justified my point about UNCLOS. And thank you and I appreciate
everybody and, Mr. Chairman, as always, thank you for your
graciousness.
Mr. Bera. You are welcome. And I want to give a thank you
to our witnesses for their answers to our questions and their
comments. Member questions are now concluded. I will now move
to make a closing remark.
I do think this is a top issue. Clearly, in the 21st
century, the Indo-Pacific region and its maritime security, and
freedom of navigation, will be increasingly important and
should be at the top of our foreign policy concerns. I also
think in the midst of this global pandemic, this economic
challenge that we face at a global level does give us a silver
lining and an opportunity to rethink what the multinational
approaches look like in the 21st century.
The United States can be very proud of what we accomplished
in the post-World War II era, rebuilding Europe helping rebuild
large parts of Asia, creating stable, free-market democracies
and allies, friends, with shared values, and creating a
relative era of peace. We as a planet have not faced a
challenge like this global pandemic-that affects all of us, not
just one State or one country, but the entire world
simultaneously_while also facing the challenge of rebuilding
coming out of this pandemic. And it will give opportunities, I
hope, to create the multinational coalitions of like-minded
countries to move us into the 21st century to address these
challenges.
Now I do not anticipate that China will rise to the
occasion and join with like-valued countries like the United
States, our European allies, our Asian allies, and others
around the world, but I would hope that they do. And we will
always compete economically. That is fine. It is a fair playing
field. But we can continue an era of prosperity and peace if we
were to build on the values that ourselves and other countries
hold so dear, in terms of democracy, human rights, and free
markets.
And also this was our first hybrid type of hearing in this
new era of a pandemic and I really want to tip my hat to the
Foreign Affairs staff, Camilla and Samantha, for the work that
you did. I think it came off without a hitch and hopefully this
gives us an opportunity as we continue to convene to continue
to have more of these hearings because they are extremely
important.
And with that let me recognize the ranking member, if he
has any closing remarks.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Chairman, I would just say I agree with
everything you said, especially with the staff.
And I just want to add that China's actions are not those
of a responsible, wanna-be superpower. China will not alter its
course or actions in the East Sea, the South China Sea, Arctic,
or elsewhere until it meets sufficient resistance to change its
behavior. And we can do that together as nations that pull
together to just get them to be responsible players. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Ranking Member Yoho. I want to thank
our witnesses and the members who participated in this very
important and interesting hybrid hearing, and with that the
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

BERA OPENING STATEMENT

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS FOR THE RECORD CONNOLLY

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD REP. WAGNER

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
